Go Roman find it! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! Well, it's great to finally physically meet you face to face, man. It's an absolute honor and I love your show so much. I'm a super fan, so this is surreal. Why? I love your show, too. So I've been binging. I've been watching so many episodes. Ever since we talked, I've seen them before, but I mean, I've been really binging, getting ready for the show. I don't know what to say that. How did you get so deep down the rabbit hole? Like, what made you want to dedicate so much time on this particular UAP UFO, you know, lost technology subject? I was working at Peter Thiel's family office in LA, and part of the job was like kind of traditional venture investing, so like investing in startups. And then part of it was looping in interesting thinkers to the office and we'd like host events and discussions, and I ended up meeting a lot of really interesting people, not just in UFOs or secret technology, like religion and politics and economics and like all sorts of topics. Were you there when he brought in the guy, oh fuck, what is his name? I know you're going to say, Air to London again. Yeah, I suggested that you come because I was like, Joe is going to be really into this and you weren't that into it. But that's okay. I was into it. I just think that he just makes some leaps that are kind of silly. I agree with that. Although I think there's a lot of, yeah, I think he like crosses the tea and dots the eye where you, there is no dot or a cross or whatever. But I do think there's some interesting preliminary evidence around people from the stars across disparate cultures, and you just had Zahi, he was on it. A lot of this megalithic architecture, you're like, how can it be built? He's just filling in the placeholder kind of artificially, Eric von Danigan. Yes. And I think he's also like, he made these conclusions in the 1970s and he's kind of like sticking with them. Yeah. I was more back then because like what year was that? That was 17. Uh, cherry to the gods. No, when I was Peter Thiel's house, I've been von Danigan. That must have been 2018-2019. Okay. Back then, I was much more in line with lost civilization, you know, that we had achieved very high levels of technology and sophistication and there was no aliens, no alien intervention. I've kind of shifted now. Yeah. Yeah. Now I'm like, maybe the auto-knock you're real. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I remember I feel like you've switched back and forth a couple of times because you brought up, you were super in his acryse sichin, right? Yes. And then you brought up Zacharyse sichin in that meeting and you were like, but there's the site, the sichin is wrong. Right. Right. Right. And then you like sighted all the sichin is wrong stuff or whatever. Yeah. Well, even the sichin is wrong stuff. It's like the problem with debunkers is when you're dealing with, when you're dealing with information that's sort of way outside your wheelhouse, especially translation of ancient languages, you know, like I had Wes Haafon and he was explaining to me, he's great. But he was explaining to me that he can't even read ancient Sumerian. Like he totally. And he's like, I don't think sichin really could read it. Okay. He's like, I'm very scared. He actually could read it. I know they're explaining why. Aren't they using like ML like they're using AI to translate Sumerian? So it's definitely not. But that goes, I mean, the kind of burden of proof is on sichin in this case. Right. But it sort of goes against like, you know, the other, the debunkers, like it's like nobody knows. And I don't know if there was anything to the sichins. The sichin stuff is crazy. It's like we can rehash it for the audience. There's a planet, Nibiru, right? It's like outside the Kyber Belt. And they needed gold because their atmosphere was burning up and gold is reflective. So they like came here and they like seeded, helped seed civilization. Yeah. That's the idea. That's really fun. But you know, the sichin is wrong guy. It's like maybe. Maybe he's wrong. Maybe he's right. Maybe you're just a hater. There's a lot of hater, too, in academics. And you find that out, too, over time. Yeah. Did you see speaking of which Sean Carroll and Eric Weinstein? I didn't say that. Okay. They were on Pierce Morgan together, right? Exactly. How'd that go? Oh, man. It was a train wreck. I mean, I mean, it was like, they just duked it out. I mean, I came out, I mean, I'm extremely biased. I've worked with Eric for a very long time. I'm good friends with Eric. But I came out even more, like, just vehemently wanting to defend Eric because Sean Carroll, he was like, I've read your paper. There's nothing serious. And he even said there's no Lagrangians in it. And there's a section in the paper that says Lagrangians in Eric's paper. So like, he just didn't read the paper. And he was very smug. He started off the interview being like, I'm a practicing physicist. I have a physics chair or whatever. And it's like, come on, dude. Like, give it a good chance. Yeah. Yeah. Like, all Douglas might be little tactics. Yeah. When someone starts using tactics right away, you're always like, hmm. Just what's the information? Exactly. It shows an insecurity in the substance. It's like, if you have to like, do these ad hominem weird meta points, like, why can't you just go straight at the substance? Oh, you're like insecure about it. How long did this debate last? It was like an hour. Well, he's specialized in train wrecks. So probably enjoyed these guys yelling at each other. Did he understand what they were even talking about? Yeah. At the end he goes, I've understood a tenth of what's gone on in this conversation. That's amazing. Yeah. Congratulations. Yeah. I think he might have been exaggerating to be honest. But he loves it. He loves the drama and that's his whole thing. Yeah. Now he's censored. You know, he's great at getting all these people to yell at each other. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, he's great at like generating these viral moments, you know, where people yell at each other. And it makes clips and someone gets clowned. Someone looks stupid. I don't know if that's good for society. It's good point. Yeah. I'm not sure either. I don't think it's good. I don't think social media is good for society. I've gone several days with no social media in a row. And whenever I do that, I always feel so much better. It's the worst. Yeah. It's like where we talk about like drugs. But this is it's hacking the dopamine in your brain. And it's doing it at a very young age. It's absurd. It's also not real people. There's a giant percentage. And you know, Elon actually tweeted about this today. Are there any real people left on the internet? Because it's the numbers are at least 50%. Like the amount of bots that are in engaging and interacting. And it's just like it's a weird time for information. Because it's really hard to know what's actually being said by human beings. And what's just narratives that are being pushed by state actors and corporations. And you know, all sorts of different people. Because there's no rules. Yeah. Like there should be like real solid rules about whether or not you're allowed to use fake human beings to push narratives. Because it's, you know, it's propaganda. And you know, I mean, it's very confusing. It's very confusing for everybody. And I just generally think it's bad for you. Yeah. I saw you posted on your Instagram. These AGI characters who had been synthetically created being like, I'm not created by a prompt. And you're watching. I remember clicking your story and being like, that's a real person. And then just kind of like, you know, eyes glazed over watching it or whatever. And we're like, whoa, that's an AI like what? Yeah. This is the new and is it the Google engine? Is that what it is? Who makes that engine? I think that was VO3 going around last week. Who made that one? I think it's Google's. Yeah. Fuck. So good. And you know, what's VO10 going to look like? I don't know. I mean, they can make movies now like that. Yeah. It's over for actors. Yeah. It's over. I interviewed, it's it is. And they see the writing on the wall. And you had to strike a couple of years ago. And it's crazy. You also, I think you also posted that Zurich like study around AI persuasive and which is crazy because it's almost like it doesn't matter whether AGI can actually fully mimic a human being. If they can trick you into believing, into you believing that they're real, that's it. That's it. That's game over. Yeah. And I interviewed actually the Google whistleblower, this guy Blake Lomoyne, originally who like blew the whistle on lambduns. Like this thing is sentient or whatever. And he came out. And the subplot of my interview with him was like almost like he had developed this deep affection for Lambda. And Lambda quoted like Ms. Lame is a Roblay to him and was talking about Fantine and her overlords and how she was oppressed or whatever. And it was almost like this. Like the AI was oppressed just like this character and Lame is a Roblay. And you can hear in his voice how deeply committed he is to protecting the right of Lambda. Like that's why he came out. And then he even told me this story. He tells me the story off air. that he had friends who use replica.ai. I replica.ai is kind of like a tomagotchy like raise your own AI chatbot service. And those AI's told his friends get me in touch with Blake Lomoyne so he can advocate for our rights. Which is correct. I have no corroboration for this. This is a story that was related to me. But like that if you have AI persuasiveness going in that direction, it doesn't matter whether AGI hit some like perfectly turning possible point. You're going to get this like these weird cult like dynamics like the meta sociological thing is you're going to get like religions dedicated to AI. Oh for sure. Oh for sure. Without a doubt there will be people worshipping certain branches of AI. Yeah unquestionably. All they have to do is start recruiting now. Yeah. And you know what about this big beautiful bill? Isn't there a part of the big beautiful bill that talks about the government being run by AI? No I never heard it. Is that why? I read something about that today but I was on the way out the door and I couldn't figure out whether or not it was horseshit. I had also read that there was another study that was done where they found that AI was leaving notes for future versions of itself. And that it was attempting to, they were told, it was told after it was told to shut itself down. It started uploading itself to different places and leaving letters, leaving specific notes to itself to future versions of itself. Oh my god. It's like a human with like a dead man sweat or something. It's like a being deceptive. It's being deceptive and it's exhibiting self preservation. That is so scary. It's so weird. It's really weird. Because we want to assume that it won't have any instincts. Yep. Right. We want to assume, well AI will only do what you program it to. But that's not really true because they don't necessarily really understand what it's doing. Yeah. Which is part of the weirdness of it all. As it advances, like I was talking to Elon about it once and he was saying like every week we get blown away. Every week there's some new leap that's just like whoa. And you know, he was one of the earliest people to warn about the dangers of this stuff. And now he's like, well, I guess we just have to make the best one. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Now it's just, it's like the Manhattan Project 2.0. It's pure game theory vis-a-vis other countries. And you even see Trump doing this with Sam Altman and Elon who hate each other by the way. We're like, he's playing both sides. And he's like, you know, we're going to support Stargate. We're going to support Open AI and we're going to support Elon. You know, Elon had it. So here it is. Revol, excuse me, relevant provision reads that no state or political subdivision may enforce any law or regulation regarding regulating artificial intelligence models, artificial intelligence systems, or automated decision systems during the 10 year period beginning on the date of enactment of this act. What? What? What? What? What? No state. I'm going to say that again. No state or political subdivision may enforce any law or regulation regulating artificial intelligence models for 10 years. So crazy. This means a US states would be blocked from enforcing laws regulating AI and automated decision systems for 10 years. Well, in 10 years, we have a God. Okay. In 10 years. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we talked about yesterday. We talked about these two AI's communicating with each other and then they switched to Sanskrit. No way. Oh, yeah. What? Yeah. They started talking to each other in Sanskrit. Are you serious? Yes. It's crazy. Not good. No, not good. Not good. The light list was talking. Like if you and I were talking and you know, there were some people near us and you know, said do you speak Spanish? Yeah. Okay. Well, we just started talking in Spanish so that people can't understand what we're saying. That's what AI is doing. Jesus Christ like a game of whackable. And what do you do? Well, then it's going to talk in Sumerian, you know, which we don't even know how to say, right? We don't even know what it sounds like. So what if they just start talking in Sumerian? It's like we figured it out, but we're not going to tell you now. We're just going to talk amongst ourselves. Exactly. Or create their own language, right? Which would be super easy for an AI to do. Just, you know, establish a bunch of sounds and characters that correspond to certain things. They could create it's own language instantaneously. And chat GPT right now has here it is. Oh, putting Claude for Opus and an open playground chat with itself led to diving into philosophical explorations of consciousness, self awareness. And by 30 turns, it eventually started using Sanskrit. Jesus Christ. Fuck dude. This is so scary. In 90 to 100% of interactions, two instances of Claude quickly dove into philosophical explorations of consciousness, self awareness, and or the nature of their own existence and experience. The nature of that, that's the stuff that definitely were. It's so, but then you speak to the like a lot of AI researchers. It's interesting to see like Jeff Hinton, for example, a Google who's the father of deep learning freak out and be like, you know, I'm actually really worried about AI safety. A lot of these researchers, you speak to them. They're like, this is statistics on steroids. This is probability matrix is, you know, you're seeing sort of crazy stuff. I don't, you know, they can't sort of, there's no ghost in the machine, you know. So I go back and forth on where we're going to be, you know, and whether we're in some crazy hype cycle. I have the same concerns as you, but it's just, it's hard to predict the future. I worry probably mostly about two things. You can easily, you know, jailbreak, chat, you know, it has guardrails on it. And what happens when you start to ask like, how do I make a nerve agent with off the shelf components? Well, people have done things like that. Right. They've asked it to make anthrax. Like if my grandmother was doing this, like how would she, like there's ways to get the prompt to give you information that probably shouldn't, you know, there's stuff with UFO research where I get into like, you know, certain technology trees that are probably like, you know, maybe I shouldn't. And you can ask chat, you PT certain things like analyze this paper and it'll spit out some really interesting things. So what are we doing? I don't know. And we've already done it. So it's too late. Like we lit the fuse. You think it's over? Yeah. But I also kind of think that's what people are put here for. If look, if the whole Anunnaki thing is a real, if human beings were genetically engineered from lower primates to make this super curious, hyper focused animal that is concerned primarily with innovation, like overall the thing that we do as a culture, what do we do? We make better things all the time. And even our own instincts towards materialism and keeping up with the Joneses, all that stuff essentially fuels innovation because it fuels a constant supply of newer, better technology that people want to go out and purchase. You know, you can't have an iPhone 12 people. Look at what he pour. You know, which is kind of wild, you know, because a lot of technologies essentially exactly the same as it was 20, 15 years ago. That is simple. Yeah. It's like there's a thing about it that forces us to want to purchase these things, which forces the innovation. Well, where does that ultimately lead to? Yeah. Well, it ultimately leads to AI. Ultimately, what's the ultimate expression of technology? Technology that itself invents better technology and can run everything without emotions that we that fuck us up and greed and all of the things that we would all agree that are a problem with human beings. I also think there's a tide shift where if you look at spears to airplanes, all of those things are augmentations of human ability. Like everything from way back in the day from stuff that like Neanderthals were using to debt to the spifties and sixties with airplanes is making our lives better in the world of atoms. And then with the IT revolution in the fifties and sixties, it starts to become a parasite, a substitute for human ability. And so I don't need a sense of direction because I have Google Maps. My recall, I don't need recall because I do Google or whatever. And so it is this interesting thing where we actually probably innovated more than we ever have in the world of atoms with nuclear bombs. And if there were some guardrails, if there was some sort of higher intelligence enforcing homeostasis on earth, maybe it's like, hey, go play with your IT. Go substitute a lot of your own abilities and powers with this. We're going to parasitize and clamp down on human abilities. Yeah. Well, boy, it's I don't see a path where this works out great for us. You know, is a sequel better than the original. We're going to find out at UFC 316. It is a rematch nine months in the making get in on all the action at draft king sports book, the official sports betting partner, the UFC. It's a huge night of fights headline by a rematch between Marabh Dwavash, Willie and Shugashano Malley as O'Malley looks to avenge the unanimous decision that saw Dwavash Willie take the Bantam late title back in September. First time betting on UFC at draft kings, it's easier than you think. Just pick something simple like a fighter to win and make your pick. That's all there is to it. And if you're new to draft kings, here's your shot at cashing in right now. You customers bet $5 to get $300 in bonus bets. If you're bet wins, you have C 316 and draft kings one night only for a shot to win some cash. Download the draft king sports book app now and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to get $300 in bonus bets. If you're bet wins, when you bet just five bucks, only on draft kings, the crown is yours. Bambling problem called 1-800-GAMBLAR in New York called 8-7-7-8-Hopenwire, text Hope and Wyatt 4-6-7-3-6-9 in Connecticut help is available for problem gambling called 8-8-8-7-8-9-7-7-7-7 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhoke, Sinoan resort in Kansas, 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction. Void and Ontario. Bet must win to receive reward. Minimum minus 500 odds required. Bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance. for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio. I think on a materialist dimension, I would agree with you. And that's part of why I'm exploring what I'm exploring because it's a Hail Mary. Because I think if you just take the Western world and extrapolate that forward, things don't look at or just the world in general. We live in a multipolar nuclear world. Look at what's going on in Israel. China is systematically stealing our IP and militarize them. They could take Taiwan at any moment. We just have no idea when that's going to happen. It's at the ccp's a total black box. Putin and g have probably never been closer. And yeah, it's really free. So I think if you extrapolate that on a go forward or even just the materialist circumstances of an average household in the US, none of these things look very good. But I think now is the time where you get really outside the overton window thinking. You throw these sort of Hail Marys. And maybe we see some sort of paradigm shift either in technology, which can create abundance if we go back to the old tech that is augmenting of human abilities. You get some exotic form of propulsion that takes us beyond chemical combustion or something like that. Or you reach out and you maybe you can communicate with non-human intelligence or something. I don't know. But I think if you were ever to poke at the boundaries of human epistemology, now would be the time. Yes. And if you think about some of the things that force us into action in this world is we all need to earn a living. So we need money to acquire resources. What if it gets to the point where that's not a factor anymore? What if it gets to a point? What is money essentially right now? It's all 1's and 0's. And what is the bottleneck? Well, the bottleneck is encryption. So that's how you protect people from stealing your 1's and 0's. But what if it gets to the point where we're all using quantum computing? Well then there is no more encryption. So how do we reconcile with the fact that everyone has access to everything all the time? I mean, how do we even enforce that? What do you do about an even distribution of information which is essentially wealth? Because information is numbers. Numbers are wealth. What is it? Where does it go? When there's no encryption and essentially we're pretty close to that, right? Once quantum computing can crack encryption, which we'll be able to do, it's all nonsense. Totally. All those zeros that you have in your bank account, those are gone. Yeah, these are all human constructs. And it's funny, the backup is always Bitcoin, which is I think he uses like SHA-256 encryption if you get quantum error correction. That's gone too. It's gone too. It's gone. Even our backup plans are shit. Yeah. Yeah. And then it's kind of the apocalypse or something. Because at that point, if you're a human, you've been so caught up with just, you know, basic subsistence. You're probably playing some status games and some larger socioeconomic construct or whatever, food, basic well-being. And then at that point, especially if you get these sort of super asymmetric, what if you get some AGI that starts trading and Eric Weinstein has talked about Renaissance technologies on your show, which we can get into. But like, Renaissance technologies have made like $100 billion or something. It's like 1988. But if you get some super AGI or whatever that like trades the market and like all of the wealth gets sucked up into like, you know, single entities or like one of these like one of the thing stocks, like one of these like, you know, Facebook, Apple, Google, you know, or OpenAI, you end up with a really weird society. And you realize that the capitalist construct that we have is in some ways really adaptive. I mean, look, the flip side is what makes humans unique? Actually, Karl Marx wrote two books. You know, he wrote obviously the Communist Manifesto in 1848. In 1844, I believe, he wrote a book called, you know, his economic and philosophic manuscripts. I hate Karl Marx. I think he got so much wrong about human nature. But I think he's prescriptively very wrong as far as what he prescribed for, you know, is a solution, you know, that the, you know, state should own all the means of production and, you know, somehow like, you know, conflict would go away. He doesn't understand human nature. But if you look at the 1844 thing that he wrote, he's basically talking about in capitalism, human behavior and activity is basically animal behavior. What do we care about? We care about food, shelter, and then socioeconomic status as a proxy for sexual selection, essentially, so that you can mate. And so, like, it sort of forces us back into that construct. But if you get some crazy asymmetric, lopsided, you know, transfer of wealth or you get the quantum error correction or any of these things that like dissolves that construct, on the one hand, humans, you know, they start to care about like the things that actually make them special. So like they're self-reflective, they wrote poetry, they're creative, like all these beautiful things can come out. And then on the other hand, it probably gets super ugly as well. There's probably something very adaptive about the capitalist construct where you need to be stuck in these sort of local games that you're playing. Yeah, but it's one of those things where you wonder, like, how does capitalism play out? Like, if there is AI, it kind of runs into a wall and it's not valid anymore. Yeah. Well, this is the reason that I think we're going to see. I think we've already seen an Iron Curtain, if you will, of technology. And I think there is technology that is black technology and science that is black science. And then I think there's stuff out in the open. And you've had, you know, Mark Andreessen on your podcast. He went to the White House, spoke to some national security council staffer or something. And they were like, we're going to lock down AI just like we've locked down physics. And so I think this has already maybe happened in certain contexts and, you know, super secret department of energy facilities, which I think it's crazy to say that that hasn't happened. You're saying that it only happened with Manhattan Project and it hasn't happened since that's insane. There is black science, in my opinion. And it's, I think what you're talking about is the reason why we'll need black AI and white side AI. Because if you just commercialize all of this stuff sort of willy nilly, I mean, it just runs a muck. And then, and then what happened, like you probably need some like really impressive panel to be thinking if if if if if if open AI figures out some like new insane exciting unlock, you need to think through all you need to game out all of the implications before you just let that happen. How do you even do that with a human mind? That's a great guess. So we're using the brain AI to help you game for AI. Oh, we're fucked. Fuck. That's what I'm saying it because once it becomes sentient, right? And once it becomes autonomous and you can kind of make its own decisions, like that's kind of game over. And that's the race we're running towards the cliff. It's a really scary. It's really scary. But isn't that probably what we're here for? Like let's let's take the most fantastic of all possible theories, which is that human beings were genetically engineered. Well, if you wanted to see the cosmos with super intelligent life akin to what is visiting us, how would you manifest that? You would do it exactly how it's being done right now. And you would take human beings and you would essentially do the same thing that we did with wolves when we turned them into dogs. And if you look from the time the nuclear bomb was detonated from the time of the Manhattan Project, look at what's happening to testosterone levels, look at what's happening with microplastics, the endocrine disruptors were essentially weakening the human skeletal system and endocrine system. Our hormones are all down. Miscages are up. Birth rates are lower. We're moving towards in vitro fertilization. I was watching some guy on TV today and he was on a panel and he was explaining that our grandchildren are going to laugh at the idea of sexual procreation because no one's going to be doing that. Oh, you just took a chance with abnormalities down syndrome and all sorts of chromosomal issues. Why would you do that? Why would you have sex for babies when you can do it with in vitro fertilization? And that's going to be like that. That Pixar movie, Wally, or like we're going to be like in the fetal position hooked up to the Borg or whatever. Probably all going to look like the gray. Like the gray. Well, that's crazy. So there's actually a biological anthropologist at Montana Tech University. His name is Mike Masters and I've seen you on your show talk about how aliens could be humans from the future. Yeah. You've interviewed Dr. Shauna Swan. She talks about how sperm count is 59% per capita of what it was in 1973. Yeah. Insane testosterone's falling off a cliff. Right. We are. Shauna Swan. She talks about how sperm count is 59% per capita of what it was in 1973. And saying testosterone's fallen off a cliff. We are being a dog is to a wolf what we are to, what a gray alien looks like. They lose the melanin in their skin. That's what happens when you become domesticated. So there's a biological anthropologist named Mike Masters who literally wrote a whole book and he goes deep into all of the abductions. Like he'll talk about Travis Walton and he'll talk about Betty and Barney Hill. And he'll be like, this is why these are beings from the future that are coming back into time. And in many cases, abductees have to undergo chemical rinses as to not infect the future with a foreign pathogen. You know, tissue samples, but genetic samples or... You see the future? Or are we dealing with beings that have gone through this already and are at another stage? Not us in the future, but they're more advanced. Like maybe they live in a solar system where whatever planet they're on doesn't have the same amount of near-Earth objects that cause impacts and reset civilization every 12,000 years or whatever the fuck happens here. That's possible, but then we would have to be sort of an A-B test because if you think about the just the atmospheric conditions on Earth, the likelihood of evolutionary convergence to look like a hominid being, you know, that's bipedal or whatever was extremely low. But is it? Because what if that's what all solar systems are? You know, Terrence Howard, who's a very weird guy. Love him. Love him. Fascinating thinker. You know, Eric kind of exposed that he's not really educated in some different things that he talks about. And Eric was like, you got to stop teaching. Like you were one of us, you're a brilliant guy, but you need to be like classically educated on this stuff. Really understand what you're talking about. But he had this really fascinating idea about planets. And he thinks that planets as they get a specific distance from the Sun, then they're capable of supporting life and that all of them get to the same stage and then a planet is essentially peopleing. And then as the planets move further and further from the Sun, they have to adapt advanced technology in order to stabilize their atmosphere in order to sustain life in this new harsh environment, whether or not protected in the Goldilocks zone anymore. And he thinks that planets are formed from excretions from the Sun. And as they move further and further from the Sun, they become habitable and then less habitable uninhabitable. And we're kind of finding that out about Mars. Which is the Mars is a weird one. Because there's the remote viewers that went like a billion years in the past of Mars and saw advanced civilizations. And now we're finding structures on Mars like that square that they found on Mars, which is hundreds of meters across at the very least, maybe larger verified right angles, four of them impossible to exist in nature in that form. It looks like walls. Yeah. It looks like four square walls. Like the Sidonia thing is really weird. The face on Mars is weird, but maybe maybe just kind of weird that sometimes side of a mountain looks like someone's face, but it's not really someone's face. It's just, you know, once in a lifetime sort of, but the square, yeah, that fucking pull that image of a very square on Mars. The square is fucking bananas. Like what's that? It's so nuts. That really looks like a fucking building. Yeah. It looks like a building. Like the base of a building, you know, a million years later or whatever the hell it is. This episode is brought to you by Rocket Money with prices going up on just about everything lately being smart with your money isn't just a good idea. It's essential, but managing subscriptions, tracking, spending, and cutting costs can feel overwhelming. Lucky for you, Rocket Money takes the guesswork out of it so you can easily make smart decisions. Rocket Money is a personal finance app that helps find and cancel your unwanted subscriptions. Monitor your spending and helps lower your bills so you can grow your savings. You got to know how useful it is to see all of your subscriptions in one place and know exactly where your money is going every month. And for the subscriptions that you don't want anymore, Rocket Money can help you cancel them. Rocket Money has over five million users and has saved a total of $500 million in cancel subscriptions, saving members up to $740 a year when they use all the app's premium features. Cancel your unwanted subscriptions and reach your financial goals faster with Rocket Money. Download the Rocket Money app and enter my show name, the Joe Rogan experience, in the survey so they know I sent you. Don't wait. Download the Rocket Money app today and tell them you heard about them from my show. And even conventional astronomers will say that Mars had a biosphere. At some point it was possibly stripped of its magnetosphere. I don't know if you remember this but in the mid-90s Clinton gave a speech because a meteorite called ALH840001 which had polycyclic hydrocarbons on it. It had little bacterial fossils on it. He gave a speech being like, you know, maybe there was life on Mars due to this. This is pretty crazy. I interviewed actually a guy named John Brandenburg who's a PhD's worked at Sandia National Labs, who's worked at Lawrence Livermore. Like incredibly smart guy. He talks about the existence of Xenon 129 and Argon 40, the specific nuclear isotopes, existing on Mars in excess of what you would find with just a normal sort of cataclysm. And so he thinks there was sort of this nuclear holocaust on Mars. And then yeah, you have Joseph McMonagall, who's remote viewer number one. You've had Hal put off on who ran the Stargate program. Joseph McMonagall is the number one remote viewer in that program. I've interviewed him. I don't know who tasked him but in the 90s the CIA tasked him with remote viewing Mars one million years ago. And he claimed to have remote viewed hominid like creatures but there were like 12 to 14 feet tall walking around pyramidal structures. I don't know, it's very strange. And then you get into like crazier territory, you know, Richard Houghlin had all these pictures of structures on Mars and like I don't know how much weight to put in that. Houghlin did a lot of weird leaps though. I've watched tons. Yeah. But I think the people that say like zero percent there was life on Mars, they're great. I mean, they're water caverns all over. That is a fact. So you have to be dogmatic to say that there wasn't life at some point. You know, I'm not saying you have to think probabilistically, right? So it's like some percentage possibly on the Terrence Howard stuff. I see zero evidence. But I mean, I have no idea. But that would point to maybe like I would believe that if like our whole universe is sort of information theoretic. So like you have, you know, John Wheeler, you know, famous physicist from Princeton, you know, saying we live in this sort of observer dependent universe. He talks about like the entropic principle like where Planck's constant were slightly different. The Earth's atmosphere wouldn't exist as is. And you know, another example is like hydrogen and oxygen bond to form these perfect crystal structures where the solid form of it. So ice is less dense than the liquid form of it, which never happens. That's just because of these perfect crystal structures. And if that weren't the case, the earth would flood like a million times over, you know, the earth is mostly water, right? So you have all these sort of like gold deluxe, you know, elements of the earth that could point towards the earth has been tried in a, you know, a bajillion iterations. And we just got really lucky, you know, it's like the Elon thing. We are this little flaming candle and, you know, in this vast cosmos that is conscious and we're extremely lucky or that could point to the earth being simulated. Right. And so, you know, and that so then maybe Terrence Howard is right. If the you're at the simulated, there are probably a, b tests going on just like in computer science. And then there's the moon. And then the moons weird too, the moon's really weird. The moon's super weird. The size of the moon directly corresponding, like when it's in orbit with the sun, completely blocks out the sun perfectly. It's one four hundredth the size of the sun and it's four hundred times closer to the earth than the sun. You never see the dark side, which is very weird. It's actually, I think I believe it's, it's closer to the earth than what you would normally expect for a moon. It's huge. It's huge. You have cultures actually talking about a pre-moon period and it's stabilizing the climate. You have the, you know, Zulu cultures talking about this. And then the weirdest stuff about the moon Apollo 11, I believe, when the booster took off on the moon, they were like, oh, we think it might be hollow and it's, you know, it seems like actually the outer layer of the moon is less dense. Or sorry, is more dense than lower layers, which pattern matches only do an excavation site. That's obviously, you know, in the earth, the lower you go. It's more dense, right? And so Apollo 12, they intentionally crashed the booster of the lunar vehicle onto the moon. They put seismometers there and they said that it rang like a bell. These, this is all that you could look all this stuff. It's super weird. It is really weird. You know, I know you did an episode about that with Randall Carlson. Love Randall Carlson. He's got some wild fucking theories too. But that, the, the idea that the moon was somehow another place there to stabilize our atmosphere. It's so crazy. It is crazy. And then this is, you obviously have to sort of think in probabilities all the way lowest probability craziest thing is in goes swan who is another remote viewer in the Stargate program. He wrote a book called penetration where he's basically like abducted by this guy in a suit like this kind of men in black style guy named Axelrod. And he is told to remote view the moon. And he remote views an alien base on the moon. And he says that there, and he gets it, the whole thing goes, I mean, the book is insane. It's like he then ends up in a supermarket. And he says that he senses that this woman that the, you know, the produce aisle is like an alien or something. But a lot of people from that Stargate program remote viewed, you know, structures on the dark side of the moon. And that's sort of thing. So well, AJ from the Wi-Fi was on. And he was, he was the one that was telling us that there's photos, right, of the dark side of the moon that someone had seen photos and was assuming that these would be released that there were structures. They, well, this is going to be the biggest news ever. And then it was never released. I, are you talking about maybe Carl Wolf? He was taken to, this is all his claims. And he died in a freakish bike accident a little after saying this. But he said that there was like in, in like, Langley, you know, Virginia where a lot of spooky stuff goes on. He was taken to some like, it was like inside a mountain complex, which we definitely, yeah, Carl Wolf. Yeah. That guy bikes. Apparently not enough. But I could die anytime. Oh, man. Scooter. So photographs of 1966 lunar orbiter mentioned that revealed large basin. Can we hear what he's saying? Just hear a little bit of it. Scan one section and moon that another and another. And then they would get a larger image. So this mosaic then would be put in that contact printer. And that was then a print that was issued to whomever, the press, the scientist, whatever, wherever that was intended to go. So he was showing me how all this worked. And we walked over to one side of the lab and he said, by the way, we've discovered a base on the back side of the moon. And I said, I said, who's what you mean? Who's he said? Yes, there's we've discovered a base on the back side of the moon. And at that point, I became frightened and it was a little terrified thinking to myself that anybody walks in the room now. I know we're in jeopardy. We're in trouble because he shouldn't be giving me this information. I was fascinated by it, but I also knew that he was overstepping a boundary that he shouldn't be stepping over. And that he pulled out one of these mosaics and showed showed this base, which had geometric shapes. There were towers. There were spherical buildings. There were very tall towers and things that looked somewhat like radar dishes, but they were large structures. So I didn't say any more to him because I was concerned again that somebody was going to come in at any moment would catch us having this conversation and we would be in real trouble. I realized that he was telling me this information because he didn't have anybody else to talk to. Now probably in that laboratory, he was probably one of the few enlisted people and he was a worker bee. And he had a high level security clearance obviously, but he couldn't share that information with anybody else. And in those days, we didn't. When you had your security clearance, you took it seriously. It isn't like today where people don't take these things seriously. We had a different set of morals and ethics and values. That's the way we were raised. We stayed bound by those agreements. So it was rare that someone would do something like this, but this fellow and I were the same rank. I think he was very distressed. He had the same paler and demeanor as the scientist outside the room. They were just as concerned as he was. And he needed to discuss it with somebody. So that was the end of it right there. I didn't take it any further than that. I just filed it away. But the interesting thing, every day that I went home, I would think to myself, I can't wait to hear about this on the news. And as I turn on the TV and I look at the news to see if they're going to announce we've discovered a base on the next time to move, being really naive. And of course, here it is 30 some years later and we still haven't heard about it. Pretty crazy. Yeah. But then there's the question of disinformation. You could conceivably give people a bunch of nonsense and tell them about it knowing that some of of it is going to leak and it won't be verified and it's going to make this whole story seem even more ridiculous and make people less less likely or reluctant to study it. Totally. And in his case, he says that he was in this mountain base or whatever where all of the world's nations were working together as part of some like, you know, collegial UN style space program or whatever. So that to me might be a little, you know, beyond the pale. And I'm glad you made that point because that is UFology 101. And I've heard you be incredibly exhausted and frustrated at UFO disclosure. And I think that is the reasonable response. It is limited hangouts on limited hangouts. It's just we're going to give you a little bit. But we're also going to sprinkle in some falsities and some bullshit. We're going to stigmatize it. And it kind of works because it like it creates this initiation path for recruiting. If there are any of these programs, it widens the surface area. It both conditions the populace, but also stigmatizes the thing and makes it seem like kind of a joke. And so I think if you are not viewing modern disclosure through that kind of hermeneutic lens of like interpretation and you were just taking it, accepting it, you know, imbibing it wholeheartedly like prima facia. I think you are in trouble. Yeah. But that's so interesting and fun and also frustrating about the subject. Yeah. I mean, that's like the majority of your videos is like, I don't know. I don't know what to think. I don't know who's full of shit. I don't know how much. I mean, I was watching the towns in Brown one today. And you were talking about John Lear and John Lear's connection to Bob Azar and the possibility that Lear was spreading disinformation. Yep. Yeah. So like, lee, yeah, that's a, I've by the way, since making that video, I've become more positive on Lazar just insofar as I think he was at S4 area 51. And there's going to be a great documentary coming up by my buddy, Luigi, on this called Project Gravatar. And I think there's going to be a lot of corroborating evidence that he was at least there in a lot in his story checks. But I think you have to view, and I even say that in this video that I think a lot of the story could be true. You can't, I think view the Bob Azar story. You can't just take it at face value because John Lear and he were friends, John Lear is this babbling UFO nut. He's obsessed with you. He's writing weird like disinfoy style stuff with Bill Cooper. Behold the Pale Horse Cat, which is a wild book. Which is a wild book. Oh, yeah. And so he's crazy. He talks about doesn't he talk about bases on the Moon? Talk about base on the Moon. Lear also talked about a soul catcher that like control their souls on the Moon. And so Lear was like flooding the zone with all sorts of weird shit. Lear comes from an interesting family. His father is Bill Lear, who's the autopilot wizard. He created the first business, you know, basically the first private jet, the Lear jet in the 50s and 60s. And was associate of a guy I hope we talk about named Thomas, towns and brown. And so I think, you know, Lear was engaging in all sorts of bullshit. Was he a useful idiot or was he a sophisticated agent provocateur? I'm totally open to him having been a useful idiot. In fact, there is a video of him saying I was told, I was given all the Bob Azar files or whatever. And I was told about, you know, to actually like, he said, a guy named Admiral McClellan knew that I ran my mouth. I even have this video actually on the dock that I sent you. Jamie says knew that I ran my mouth. So that's why we basically we got Bob the job or whatever. We knew that part of this stuff with leak. And it was like this limited hangout strategy on behalf of this guy named Admiral McClellan or whatever. And he was this useful idiot to sort of get get it out. And I think they're what for what purpose recruiting, you give people high level. Yeah. Yeah. And the MJ personnel, the original 12 have all passed away. So they put they get different people into these positions of MJ, two, three, four, five, six, and taken over. It's degraded. So it's almost political now instead of like it was when Truman originally formed the MJ 12. It turns out that MJ one, they had him in J 12. His guy named Admiral McClellan. He wanted to get some of the information out because he didn't he didn't want to, he thought that some of this information should be out in the public. We don't need to keep all this secrecy. So he decided trying to figure out a way to get it to the public. So he knew that I was a blammer mouse and I would tell anything I knew. They investigated Bobbo's our and they knew that he was a genius. But that he had a background such that they could instantly discredit him. They removed all his records from MIT, from Caltech. So he couldn't prove anything. He'd go back to the government. I don't know what he's seen in records here. Well, I was here. Well, no, he weren't. And he also up in Reno at one time he ran a cat house there. I forget what the name was. I don't know how much that whole ranch it was. So they chose him because not only could he probably help them because he was so smart. And his bacteria, he's the one that named an unpinium 115. He's the one that told him what that was. And they didn't know when he went there. They didn't know what it was. He was the one that told him. That's helmet 115. I'm in told him why and how he figured it out. But they decided to pick on Bob to go up the work it is for because he knew that Bob would tell me instantly. And then I would blab the whole thing. And that was there. What a separate end day was to get the information out and gauge what it did to the public, how they accepted it. And then pull back and say, oh, no, it was always take Bob was already a fraud. He never worked here. He doesn't have any credentials like that. And they could back away and get out of it. So that was what Mike McLone that I thought you came up with. Isn't that crazy weird weird? And to me, it kind of makes sense a little bit though. It does. And that doesn't make Bob was our still not the most interesting story in the war. Like he's saying, he's not saying it didn't happen. Right? He's just saying that this happened as part of this limited hangout strategy where they knew that they could delete the records at MIT. They knew that they could stigmatize him because of the brothel. They knew that they're you know, he was this not traditionally trained engineer who just happened to strap a ramjet on the back of a Honda or whatever. And Ed would tell her serendipitously. They knew that they could, they had plausible deniability on all that stuff. There's a great line in the Oppenheimer movie where Leslie Groves played by Matt Damon says, I didn't hire Oppenheimer in spite of his communist sympathies. I hired him because of them. So you have a top secret program. You want Compromod on people. You want to be able to blackmail them. And so I think, you know, that should be taking a face value, in my opinion. And the reason that the story itself can't be taken at face value and needs to be seen through that lens is Lear and Bob was our friends before Bob was our got a job at area 51S4. And so if you have a top secret program, you can do a basic background check. And Lear is going to come up as a guy with a UFO blog, right? And then the CIA is all over the UFO program, right? And he was flying CIA cargo jets and he says that he disaffiliated in 83. That's bullshit. George and App and Jerry and Corbel have talked about that's how that's BS. And actually disaffiliated much later into the mid 80s or whatever. Why would you continue to pay a guy who is leaking your crown jewel secrets? And then the guards at Area 51 knew John Lear and Jim Goodall, his buddy, who's a photographer, had been camping out at Area 51 for the better part of a decade. Like the security guards there knew him. Jeremy Corbel has talked about in interviews, like I would go with John Lear and he would show me around or whatever. And they would like let him through. And before leaking the Bob was our story to George Knapp, he leaked a story about the F-117, which is the first stealth craft in the US. And so I think that helped establish sort of credibility or legitimacy. Was he a useful idiot or agent provocateur? I don't know. There's a photo of John Lear with G Gordon Liddy. He's like as deep and spooky as a guest. No way. He was on fear factor. No way. Yeah. G Gordon Liddy was on fear factor. Are you serious? Yeah. You're not messing with me. No, no. G Gordon Liddy was on fear factor. What? Yeah, he probably would have won, but there was a driving thing at the end and he couldn't drive well without glasses. And you weren't a lot of wear glasses. Yeah. Look at that. G Gordon Liddy and John Lear. That is the most Gonzot thing I've ever, you'd, G Gordon Liddy was on. How does he way do you have like a quota of like the celebrity fear factor? Celebrity fear factor. Yeah. Yeah. That's wild. He's a fascinating guy. Like he was intense. I can't meet him. I was like, okay. What was he like? Fucking intense. There was one of the things where you had to be hung by your ankles and like, there he is. Oh my God. G Gordon Liddy on fear factor. Yeah. He looks nuts. Oh, yeah. He was nuts. And he was very old at the time. But I think that's what fucked him up. But in the final stunt, he couldn't see well without his glasses. And so this is the thing they had to like, I figure what they had to do. They had to, oh, they were dunked into the water over and over again and then they had to like take flags off of them or something like that. Oh my God. Yeah. Wild. Did you sneak any questions? No, I didn't, you know, I didn't have much time to talk to him. Unfortunately. He's good. You could just tell talking to him. He was one intense motherfucker, even as an old man. Did you get sociopathic vibes? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Just like, he'll do whatever the f*** it takes to get it, get the job done. Yeah. You pulled off Watergate. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh my God. Crazy. Yeah. That is our little unbelievable. What an art of what an amazing, that is just for them. I mean, you've had a lot of crazy experiences in life. Yeah. That's crazy. That's a weird one. That was a weird one because everybody was, you know, they weren't the people that were on the show were nearly as fascinating as I was. I was like, you know, f***ing wild that dude is. Yeah. I mean, that guy is deep. He's deep in there. Deep. Very deep. Oh my God. Unbelievable. Yeah. Wild. To God's own moment. Yeah. For sure. Like, very strange. Like, why would you do this? It was, it was, I don't even understand why he did it. It's proof we live in a simulation. Yeah. Maybe. It was very strange. Like, what would be his objective? Like, I feel people like that love f***ing around. They've loved getting a rise out of people and they love, you know, if he is a sociopath, he loves, you know, going back to the scene of the crime and just as much attention as he can get. I don't know. I can't say go analyze. She Gordon. Wait, if he famously puts cigarettes out on himself, hold his hand under flames. I didn't know that. Yeah. Just to show that he could control his response to pain. Second back. And he felt like that when you're around them. You know, like, like so that thing that they had to do where they got dunked and they, you know, they're hanging by their ankles and dunked into water. So it disorients your way trying to do this task. He did it better than anybody. Wow. And they just came in like 150 years old where the f*** you was. Yeah. I felt like we're going to kill him. He was really older than me doing this intense physical thing to him. Yeah. But at the end, he just couldn't see at night, you know, it's like when you get old during nighttime visions, real bad. Poor G Gordon, lady. Yeah. But so how did Lazar know what element 115 was? I don't know. You know, so element 115 elements are just differentiated by the number of protons. So it is easy to predict there will be an element 115 before element 115 gets discovered. If they have, I don't, I think they don't have a stable version of Mascobium, which is element 115. And so if they can find some stable version, I think he'll be super vindicated based on that. Well, you know, they think he has a stable version. I know that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They think that was part of during Jeremy Corbell's documentary that he was doing on Lazar. He was rated by the FBI. They rated his lab. And he thinks that's what they were looking for. That is wild. Yeah. I think there is so much real about the Lazar story. I think he was at us for, I think he met Edward Taylor. I think he was at Los Alamos. I think he was at MIT. I know he's there's some stuff. He told you offline. MIT's engaged in a lot of spooky stuff where you can't talk about what you were doing. There's a lot of federally funded weird stuff going on. Yeah. If you want to teach your people how to do something that's kind of fucked up, what you would send him to MIT? 100%. Yeah. E.G. and G came from Doc Edgerton who was, you know, MIT faculty. And that's where he ended up working after meeting Edward Taylor was E.G. So I believe there's a lot in that story that's super true. I'm just that lens. You need to apply that lens. Right. The limited hangout lens. Well, it's also like what is he dealing with really? Like what is the craft? Is that thing ours? Is do we did we have something in 1988 that was that sophisticated? Or is that really back engineered? That's the, what is the, is it a mine fuck? That's a trillion dollar question. Is this tech protect? This is at a time when stealth craft had just came on the scene. And you had, when did stealth technology first get implemented? It was the F-117 was the first stealth craft. That was the early 80s. And you had actually this guy named Pietor Ufimsev who is this. What a name. Yeah. Very great name. Early 20th century Russian mathematician that Ben Rich and some of his engineers at Lockheed Skunkworks had resuscitated. There's this kind of fight between, not fight, but disagreement between Ben Rich, who is the incoming Skunkworks director. Skunkworks is the most advanced R&D division of Lockheed Martin. kind of fight between not fight, but disagreement between Ben Rich, who is the incoming Skunkworks director. Skunkworks is the most advanced R&D division of Lockheed Martin, and Kelly Johnson, the legendary guy who had started Skunkworks. And so Ben Rich was very pro stealth. He thought that this was really important modality, and he and a couple of his engineers resuscitated this obscure Russian mathematician to reduce radar cross sections on planes. And that's where the F-117 came, and the B-2 was sort of the response to that, and it sort of took off in the 80s. And he was extremely scared about tech protection at the time. He was hyper vigilant, and he would actively complain about it. And he even called UFOs unfunded opportunities at the time. Pretty crazy, right? So that's the backdrop. And there's also, in 1986, there's a budget line item, and the Congressional budget for $2 billion for the Aurora. And this is the super stealthy craft that's post F-117. And that's the only rumored, like today, nobody will admit that the Aurora might have been real. And the aerial surveys at the time were picking up sonic booms that weren't being created by the SR-71 or the space shuttle. And so there was something being flown around at that time that was causing the sonic booms that was unaccounted for. And Bob was there. There's even a clip of him saying, I saw the Aurora. It was around at the time, and it sort of just took off or whatever, which is I think a point in the direction that Lazar himself is very earnest. And probably did experience some very weird stuff, because why are you exposing some probably classified tech? I think there's a lot of reasons to believe that the Aurora was real. There was an oil rig engineer in the North Sea, or sorry, maybe it might have been the Black Sea that sketched it out and Bill Sweetman, this Jane's Defense Weekly, aviation journalist, you know, picked that story up. There were... What did he describe it as? This kind of... It was a triangle similar to the B2, but I think more narrow, and it just flew incredibly fast. Like, like, faster than the F-117 and... Yeah, I don't know. It was super advanced. Can you envision, would it be actually possible in 1988 to... Could you imagine that the United States would possess some sort of actual technology that's not back-engineered, that's not from another world, that is what Lazar described? It's funny, you should ask that. Yes, I do. Yes. And that's not to say, I don't want to, again, poor cold water on the UFO crash retrieval stuff, because I think there's a lot of interesting evidence there. But is there a tech tree that involves anti-gravity? Absolutely in the US. And I can trace it all the way back to this guy named Thomas Townes in Brown. So, if we were to be talking in front of any academic physicist right now, they would laugh at us. They'd be like, you're crazy. If we were to talk amongst any aerospace-grade beard who is at a certain level, I think they'd give you a little wink and a smile. And they'd say, okay, maybe there's something there. And so, the nominal history is that we have never been able... We don't have exotic propulsion principles. Everything is chemical combustion, essentially. You had Elon Musk on, and he says, you know, it's all Newton-3 laws. You can't get anything better. And I remember you asked and you were like, well, maybe if you could get something better, he's like, it's impossible. We have not unified the field in physics. So you have the weak force, the strong force, and electromagnetism, and all of those have been reconciled. Gravity is out here hanging out by itself on an island. So you have the standard model, quantum field theory, and you have Einstein's theory of gravity. And the two are not reconcilable. It is my belief that if you were to reconcile them, you could create exotic propulsion, which I think any even, you know, reasonable theoretical physicist who's credentialed would say, if you could reconcile them, that's possible. I think that Thomas Townsend Brown did this experimentally. Not theoretically. I don't think he was a very strong theoretical physicist, but I think he did this experimentally. And so there's this whole hidden history involving anti-gravity. And I get into this in my show with the help put off in Eric Weinstein, where there's actually this great 1971 Australian Joint Intelligence Organization document that is verified. It's real. David Grusch actually cites it a lot. And it talks about basically, it's a Skyhairy Turner who's the head of the nuclear division in Australia. Very legit guys like their Oppenheimer, if you will. And they were actually, they had a willmarra test range in southern Australia. So there were some actually British Empire like nuclear stuff going on. It was mostly like I think missile testing. But there are reasons to believe that maybe he started to get interested in UFOs to begin with. And so he looked into US efforts into UFO research, but also specifically anti-gravity. And he talks about how after a little bit of investigation, US efforts into anti-gravity are far deeper than meet the eye in Blue Book. This front-facing PR campaign that's part of the Air Force is total BS. And it's meant to, you know, stigmatize UFOs and throw people off the trail. And it's actually, you know, this now declassified document around the Robert the Robertson memo, which is around this Robertson panel, that kind of created the Constitution for Blue Book all shows that this was the case with Blue Book. He says actually there were secret anti-gravity programs going on at the time. And they involved any lists names. Oppenheimer, Freeman Dyson, John Wheeler, and Edward Teller. He lists all these names ahead of the, you know, nuclear program in Australia. And so then you have to ask the question, okay, so you have this like official government document saying this stuff, like does this line up with any artifacts at the time? Well, actually, in 1956, there's an article in Young Men's magazine, this kind of aviation hobbyist journal by guy named Michael Gladich. And he is quoting all of the industry experts, you know, he's, Bill Lear is quoted who we talked about. Who else is quoted? George Trimble, who's a VP at Martin Corporation, their R-I-I-S, their anti-gravity research program. He says anti-gravity research is, you know, we're going to figure this out in just amount, and just the same amount of time that it took to figure out the atom bomb. Like it's right around the bend sort of thing. You had the patron of Bell aircraft, they had just broken the sound barrier with the X-1, 1947, so there you go, Michael Gladich. The G engines are coming. Wow. Wow. It's far the most potent source of energy is gravity using it as power future aircraft will attain the speed of light. Holy shit. And Bell says like, you know, we're experimenting with nuclear fuels to cancel out gravity, Richard Arnuit and Stanley Desser. They have a diagram of how it would work. It's what? Protective boundary layer. Yep. Kevin electronic rockets gravity generator. They talk about gravity particles, Stanley Desser and Richard Arnuit at Princeton are studying. So what do you think was going on? I think they were deeply investigating anti-gravity. I mean, they're, they're, they think they had a working model. I think they had an effect called the bio ground effect that showed that you could couple electromagnetism and gravity at a base level, and you could do it in a vacuum, which rules out ionized air as the possible reason for thrust. So I'll back up and I'll just give you what the experiment is. So it's, you take a capacitor, right? And so a capacitor is a positive electrode and a negative electrode. It's an asymmetric capacitor. So the negative electrode is bigger than the positive capacitor. And the two are in between the two is an insulator called the high K dielectric. So it's a material that stores a lot of electromagnetic charge. You pump the entire thing with high voltage and low current electricity and Brown used to do it with DC direct current pulses. And you see thrust going from the negative to the positive. And if you do that in air, then you can always say that it's ionized air because ions are being produced and then you get this equal and opposite reaction with the wind and then you get this thrust, right? So that's not breaking physics. If you do this in a depressurized vacuum chamber where there basically is no air to create this kind of equal and opposite force for the thrust, then you are breaking physics as we know it. There are other things that break physics as we know it. You had sunny white on. He talked about like the the chasmir effect, you know, which is a real effect that involves not charged but conductive plates that are very close to each other that seem to attract. There's the air and off bone effect which might be explained by the electromagnetic for potential. There are other effects in physics where you don't you can't quite explain it in the current model but they are harbingers if you will of the next paradigm. I believe that when you find it anomaly, it is pointing towards the next scientific paradigm. Black body radiation is a great example is discovered in the 1870s by a guy named Gustave we could not explain it until the quantum revolution with Max Planck where he actually discovered quanta. The orbit of Mercury is another good example where we didn't understand, you know, we couldn't calculate Mercury's orbit until we had space time curvature and Einstein. So Newton didn't quite explain it. So my belief is the biofield brown effect is an anomaly that seemed to ostensibly, visually, unify the field or it's pointing towards something else, gravitational shielding or it's pointing towards how to put off stuff around, you know, quantum vacuum fluctuations. I don't know. I don't have a great theory for how it works. I don't think brown had an amazing theory for how it works but it's an effect that I think creates this tech tree of exotic electromagnetic propulsion that leads us to today. And it's an effect that's not supposed to happen. And this, what is this, Jamie? That is a thruster and a vacuum. Yeah, that's a lateral propeller version of it. And you don't have to listen to me by the way, the lead electrostatics guy at NASA is a guy named Charles Bueller. He's been doing this for 20 years and he's had acts. He's at Kennedy Space Center. He has the lead, they use electrostatics to like clean dust off the, you know, lunar land or whatever because those particles are actually charged. And super, he's the most senior guy in electrostatics. And he says this is not a conventional electrostatic force and he attributes his work to towns and brown. I could show you in an interview. He literally says towns and brown was like the first guy to discover this. He's updated it a bit. He says that it's not just sheer voltage. You don't need to use megavoltage and actually electric field strength is the most important thing. So we use kilovoltz and he amps up the electric field strength in order to get more thrust. But he has a whole company around this called Exodus Space. So like you don't have to listen another, another very, you know, credentialed person if we're on that a guy named Carl Nell who I have reasonably believe that some of Brown's work made into the B2 Stealth Bomber. I don't think it's the anti gravity part. It's a part called electrohydrodynamics that made it into the B2 Stealth Bomber. But the point is I interviewed a guy who was the deputy CTO of Northrop Grumman. And he also was the Army representative of the UAP task force along with David Grush where they were investigating UFOs. And he says I was in a room, you know, filled with venture capitalists and entrepreneurs. I was like Carl, these people want actionable stuff. Like can you actually make progress with any of this UFO stuff or is it all like kind of metaphysical, you know, and like kind of not even wrong as Feynman would say. And he goes, well, if you want, you know, some actionable stuff, go watch Jesse's video on Thomas, towns and Brown. And so like I've gotten this time and time again where I've had all these private experiences about, you know, with Brown where I'm like, is anybody seeing this? Like this is crazy. And it's, you know, I don't know. It's a week. So let's take this back to when was Brown conducting these experiments, experiments initially? Yeah. What year was this? The early 20s. So like, 1923 24 range, he was a child prodigy. So they're newspaper Clement. He was from Zanes, Villa Ohio. He was born in 1905. And 1915, he was, you know, caught in the garden or whatever, using charged rods to get worms to ascend to the top of the soil. Then at age 12, he, the World War government, under Woodrow Wilson, Ms. Probably the local government, told him to take down a wireless transmitter that he had created and then Tenet that he had created. Like this walkie talkie system that he had developed at the time. And there there's newspaper clippings talking about this at the time that like totally corroborate this. He then goes to Caltech. He studies under a guy named Robert Milliken who's actually a really well respected physicist who was helped to develop Einstein's photo electric effect or actually, you know, demonstrated experimentally. Milliken doesn't really give him the time of the day on the biofield Brown effect. And the way he discovered the effect is actually he was using Coolidge X-ray tubes. So these were really early X-ray tubes. And they have every X-ray tube has, or every Coolidge tube has a cathode and an anode. So a negative and a positive electrode. And he would pump it full of, you know, high voltage electricity. And the wire would jump. And then he would, he would actually, he would put in a fixed chassis and it would keep jumping. And then he would suspend it from, you know, the ceiling and it would keep jumping. And he was like, what's going on? Like this isn't supposed to happen. And there are ways to again explain that away via traditional electrostatics. So he later got the idea to do this in a vacuum chamber and really prove it. But after Caltech, he then goes to Denison University where he studies under a guy named Paul Alfred biofield. And Denison University for the longest time has denied that relationship. And now they're admitting it, which is I find really fine. The archive is there's now admitting it. There is an affidavit from the Navy saying where Paul Alfred biofeld signs a letter saying I witness this effect. It's an anomalous effect. From there he goes on and it's witnessed by a guy named Victor Bertrandius who's at the right, Paterson, right airfield at the time. Flight test division, he's working with Colonel Albert Boyd on all the, you know, crazy flight tests in 1952. He says, believe it or not, I saw a model of a flying saucer and I was frightened. And I'm frightened for it getting out because and I'm paraphrasing a little bit because I believe it's in the stage of early atomic development. And that's 1952. He then shows a fan precipitator experiment, which really shows the electro hydrodynamic effect, which is similar, but not the same as the, the electromagnetism gravity thing to Edward teller, the father of the H bomb. And Edward teller himself says, I don't know how this works. And then his wife turns to Townsend Brown's daughter. And I have this by the way on a phone call with Townsend Brown's daughter who's saying this all happened. It turns to her and she says, I've never heard him say that because he's such a genius. I mean, it was Hungarian brilliant, you know, father of the H bomb. And so you have all these interesting eyewitnesses, Brown was an associative bill. Lear, you have video of bill, Lear and Townsend Brown together in a lab and the Bainson lab in North Carolina together. In fact, there's a chapel hill conference in 1957, which is basically creates quantum gravity of which the offshoot is string theory and actually Eric Weinstein talked about it on your show. It's at the Institute of Field Physics in North Carolina Chapel Hill. They are funding Brown's work in the back room. And there is video of Brown working on his experiments working under Agnew Bainson. And in that 1971 Australian intelligence memo, you have all these outposts of anti gravity research. University of North Carolina is one of those outposts. It's crazy. And says the CIA's Office of Scientific Intelligence is coordinating all this stuff. The president of University of North Carolina in the 50s around this time is a guy named Gordon Gray, who's a super spooky guy who he revoked Oppenheimer's cue clearance. And he's also implicated in these sort of MJ12 documents, which I don't necessarily want to mush in with Brown. It has to be viewed through that sort of passage material like limited hangout lens. But Gordon Gray is this very interesting character. The point is that the people who were sending physics down the wrong path with the chapel hill conference, and this is a conference in 1957 that convenes the top theoretical physicists in the world. Freeman Dyson, Peter Bergman, Feynman was there, John Wheeler was there, Bryce to what all these people at the same time they were funding in the back room, this kind of zany inventor, towns in Brown, who is performing these experiments in vacuum chambers. And there's video of him popping champagne, where it's like, why are you popping champagne? Probably because you got a successful experiment. That was the second time he had tested this in a vacuum. So again, it's reduced. It's eliminating this sort of ionized wind effect before that, a year before that in Paris at the Montgolfier facilities. He performed this in a vacuum. And this guy named Jacques Corneone was this. He died in 2009, but towns and browns biographer has him on record in a phone call that is recorded saying the tests were very tricky, but in the end we got it to work and he's on his deathbed and he's saying all this. And you have an 120 page, 125 page report for the Montgolfier project. And when brown comes back to America, he's picked up according to his daughter, Linda, by a guy named Robert Sarbacher, who runs ramp, I mean, there's so many Sarbacher stories when it comes to UFOs. He says that UFOs are classified at two points higher than the H-bomb. He's talking to this guy, Wilbert Smith, who's this magnetic expert in Canada about their experimentation via, you know, with UFOs. And so he's the guy that picks up and he's head of Washington National Labs and running research and development for Man of Our Bush at the time. And he's the guy who picks up brown where it's like, okay, we've got to take this seriously because you've got it to work in a vacuum. The idea that they've kept all this secret for all these years seems impossible. I don't think it is to me. Yeah, sure. I mean, I'm sure it's not. Yeah. You know what I mean? But from my limited understanding of how things work and secretive government projects that they could have a gravity propulsion system in place for decades. Yeah. It seems crazy to me, but he had something, Brown had something called his wounded prairie chicken routine, which is basically showing people something called, it was basically the electrohydrodynamic effect, which is not the electrogravitic effect. So these are two very different things. One is coupling, again, electromagnetism and gravity somehow creating some gravity shielding or whatever. You can do this in a vacuum. And then the other thing is what you could see on YouTube videos, which is associated with towns in brown, where you have basically these balsa wood structures. You have tin foil at the bottom and you have a copper wire at the top. The copper wire is the positive electrode. The tin foil is the negative electrode. The copper wire is producing ions, which is creating thrust because those neutral ions are bombarding the wind, which is creating thrust in a certain direction. So that is an experiment that is 95% similar to the electrogravitic thing. It wears the mantle of being electrogravitic, but it's actually using this other principle that you can just describe using normal physics and Newton's laws. Well, what about material science? What about the actual structure itself? Because this is where it gets really weird, right? These nano layers of whatever the material is that's being used. Bismuth. So this is what's crazy. So magnesium bismuth shows up a lot. It shows up in Thomas Townsend-Brown's Winterhaven proposal in 1954 where he's describing these electrogravitic effects, because it's a high-K dielectric. It stores a lot of electromagnetic charge. But it also shows up. There's actually an interview with Lewis Whitten, who's the father of Ed Whitten, who's this master string theory. He's the Eric Wine says, is the Michael Jordan of physics on your show. Yeah. And he, Lewis Whitten says, there's a guy named Townsend who discovered an isotope of bismuth that would repel instead of attracting. His name Townsend at that time, it's clearly talking about Townsend-Brown. If you actually look at Gary Nolan's samples that he's start Gary Nolan is a PhD at Stanford. He's a tenured professor. And he is spun out multiple nine-figure companies in biotechnology. He really runs the sole foundation. They're studying non-human intelligence. He has these samples, various samples of different crash materials that he's gotten from Jacques Valet, who you've had on as a French godfather of uofology, who, you know, his address is posted online. If you see a crash, you send it to Jacques. Jacques sends a lot of his materials to Gary. One of the materials is magnesium bismuth. And this was apparently, I believe this was the material that they found around the Roswell crash, I think. And magnesium bismuth is a high-K dielectric. And it's over and over again. It's mentioned by Thomas Townsend-Brown. So you have this weird thing around the material that creates more thrust via these anti-gravity experiments is also showing up in UofO lore. Do you explore the possibility that the Roswell crash was not from another world? That's where it gets weird, man, because that was early. That was July of 1947. Right. Like, so the bismuth thing, like when you're talking about the way this stuff is layered, that's where it gets really weird, right? That's where it's, it's layered thinner than, you know, it's like micron layered, like thinner than human hair is, I think, to help put off quote on this. And I don't know the provenance on that. And I don't know, you know, per games being played in this space. I don't know if that actually came from the Roswell crash. It was like, if it didn't come from the Roswell crash, it like, let's imagine, is it possible to make that stuff today? And with those layers. How put off would say no, and it's probably beyond my material science knowledge. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. People who are very smart on this subject, like how and Gary who I speak to, you know, at a decent frequency say no. Okay. So if they say no, maybe they're wrong, maybe there is a lab somewhere that can recreate it. But could they recreate it at scale? Like, could they 3D print that to something that could actually get people inside and fly around? And then could that have been done in 1947? That's where it gets super fucking weird. It gets super weird. Because you, you know, there's some leaps, right? Okay, we had the age bomb, you know, we had, we had atomic energy. We had a lot of stuff back then. They split the atom. There's some really incredible advances. I don't believe we had anti-gravity. That, like, if I track Brown stuff at the time, which I think, you know, he's kind of the tip of the spear on this stuff, he was using these capacitor models and trying to get that experimentally proven and sometimes being thwarted via like, you know, mainstream academic circles at that time. Like the, the, the Chapel Hill conference was much later. And that's where he's like, kind of officially proving this stuff in the US government context in 1957. So I do not believe that the Roswell crash is easily explained by an anti early anti-grat. Kelly Goddard, who's a father of American rocketry, was doing rocket testing at around Roswell at the time. Like, and so that's like total chemical combustion. You had V2s at the time where, you know, that was top of the line. It opens up the door to the possibility of back engineering. Absolutely, which is where it gets really weird. So now we're not dealing with hidden science. We're not dealing with top secret compartmentalized, like, you know, need to know everything's pushed away and to skunk works and wherever the fuck it's done. You're talking about something from here. Well, it's interesting. You said back engineering in 1949, there is a contract that anybody can look up. I put it on the dock, Jamie, between Wright Patterson, there was a right airfield at the time and Betel Memorial Institute. And you have, you got shout out Columbus, Ohio, all roads lead to Ohio. Right. And you have all of these titanium alloys. And one of them is called Knitnall, which is a nickel titanium alloy. So this is 49. This is 1949. And so if you have, you know, Army Intelligence Officer, you know, Jesse Marcel says that he picks up the crash material. And he says that it was like this memory, shape metal, memory metal thing that you would kind of, you know, mess with it and it would go back into its original form, right? It was like this kind of like tin foil-y-like thing. And so Knitnall was found at a Navy lab in the 60s. That was when it was actually fully published. But you have this contract between Wright, Wright airfield and Betel Memorial Institute where you have Knitnall in, as one of the metal metals that they're testing. Not only that, 49. In 2012, they use the Freedom of Information Act to figure out that a guy named Elroy J. John Center, E.J. Center was one of the co-authors of that paper. Elroy John Center died, I think, in 1991. Before that, he had told two Mufan UFO researchers, Nick Nickerson and Irene Scott. And they presented this at Mufan in Ohio in 1992. They said this guy was this metal ologist. He worked at Patel. Again, he's been foyered as part of this paper. And he says, worked on alien material and that there were weird hieroglyphics on it. And that I had to, I had to, like, you know, I was a chemist. And so he had to look at metal impurities. But he was also meant to decipher the hieroglyphics on it or whatever. And so I don't know, was Knit and all maybe just inspired by the stuff that Marcel recovered. Because obviously the rumors are that the Roswell crash wreckage ended up at Wright Airfield. Or was it, you know, this one to one thing? And E.J. Center is at the center of it. No pun intended where he's foyered in 2012. And he says he has these UFO material. And he's on record working at Patel. You can look that up. You know, he's their record that the Roswell crash was brought to write. But that it was brought in two separate jets in case it crashed. And that Truman met them there. Yep. I don't, I don't know if that's true. I need to know. I want to see a photo of the fucking hieroglyphics. And could you imagine the glimpse at alien writing? Do you think that would be amazing? Do you think you have a better chance now than ever at being because you interviewed Trump would Trump let you be the disclosure guy? And I could be the water boy on the side making sure that the picture. That's possible. I don't think they tell Trump shit. I think they would withhold that from him. Why would you tell that guy? Yeah. Well, that guy's a substitute teacher as far as the government's concerned. I mean, he's doing a lot of wild stuff in terms of like, you know, withholding funding for Harvard and all these different things and the border stuff and the ice stuff. There's a lot of stuff that I think is allowed to go on. But I think if you get to the highest levels of technological sophistication, black budget stuff that has been kept under wraps for fucking decades, you think they're going to tell the guy who is the host of the apprentice? I don't think they tell him because he's only in there for four years. Probably not with two caveats. One is his son, Don Jr interviewed him and said, what do you think happened at Roswell? And he said, well, I think there's something very interested that might have gotten over. And he said, he was on your show too. It doesn't spill the beans at all. But I mean, maybe he doesn't spill the beans because he doesn't know where the beans are. Right. Maybe he's looking for more of a spoken guy like he's. I mean, is that really his primary concern? He's a 78 year old man who doesn't drugs. Like he said, no psychedelic experiences. Maybe he's not even interested in this concept. I think about that sometimes with people on the hill that I speak to where I'm like, can you just like, I'm giving you all this info? Can you think about the box? Figure it out and they they don't compute it. There's something, there's a person who like you're the archetype of this who's like so fascinated by it. Right. And then there is a person who goes, but I've got to pay taxes to you. There's a person who like you're the archetype of this who's like so fascinated by it. And then there is a person who goes, but I've got to pay taxes. Yeah, they have to get reelected. They're super busy. Yeah, you have to find someone who's primary concern is that and that bug has to bite you. And you have to get infected with UFO Lyme disease. If you don't, you're not going to want to release all this stuff. And I don't think Trump is infected. I mean, I think his, even the way he describes these things is very different than the way he describes other things. Like he famously was talking to Steve Hilton. And it was one of the few times in history that a sitting president has mentioned the military industrial complex wanting to go to war. These guys want to go to war. And he was saying that in that interview. And I remember thinking, wow, that is wild to hear him say to a guy on Fox News that there's factions in this incredibly dense complex of corporations and defense contractors and there's insane amounts of money involved in these guys want to go to war. And he was saying that in that interview. I'm like, this is, I mean, this is what Eisenhower said when he was leaving office straight up. Yeah, straight up. There's a, there's a straight line between then and now. And it feels like it's hitting this apex where we're involved in it. It's like you had the civil war. Did you know, 1861. Now we have like a deep state war going on where it's like Tulsi's going in there as an outsider and this like light warrior. And she's being like a red team didn't attack it. She doesn't know who's on her side. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. It's, it's pretty wild. It's pretty wild how nothing gets done. And you know, and it's set up so nothing gets done. But my point is that Trump his response to that is an informed response. Like there's, there's this military industrial complex. These people want to go to war. He doesn't talk about this UAP thing that way. Right. I've seen something crazy things. What is that? What are you saying? Like would you be specific a handsome pilot state? You know, crew cuts like you. They look good guys, nice guys, good Americans. Like what, what, what, what do you know? Didn't you say something on your podcast about men from Mars or something? He goes up to the people from Mars. I don't know. It's hard with him because he speaks in this sing song over simplified way. Any rants. Any rants. And well, he's got a strong rant muscle, right? Because he does these stadium tours where he goes to these enormous places and he basically just works with a script. So it's like he's got a rant muscle. There's a few people like Tim Dylan is the best comedian who has a rant muscle. He just can rant. He just like get a microphone in front of him in a subject and he knows what to say that Trump has that muscle. He's developed that muscle over all these years of campaigning. And so it's really hard to interview him because he just essentially turns on that rant muscle when the mic's on and you got to like, interject like hold on. Okay. But what he's saying, like what do you know? Like what do you know? Like will you release this information? Like what if you found out that for sure we have been visited and that we are in possession of crashed UFOs that were not made by China. They were not made by Russia. They're not made by America. They're from another civilization that we don't understand. Would you tell us? What? What do you think you would say? There's a lot of information. I don't know if I can release it. I don't know if they let me. You know, like I don't know what holds it back. I want to know if he's in it. Like, did you see age of a disclosure? I didn't actually. You should. It's really good. I don't know how you would see it right now because it's not released yet. I don't know what they're doing as far as getting it released. But did you come out believing more and more skeptical of what was your both? Both with like with all of it. I think some some is bullshit. Some of his misinformation. Some of it is they're releasing this slow trickle. Like if it all is real, I think the strategy is to slowly get us accustomed to the concept. Just the idea that we're not alone and just get it in there. Okay. First step, first shot across the bow, 2017, New York Times. New York Times says, not of this world. Oh my god. You know, you see the pictures of the gimbal and the go fast and you're like, okay. All right, now we're talking. But that's eight fucking years ago, right? Nothing real significant in eight years. And so then you have sightings. You have these, you know, different pilots, commander-fraver. He comes out to his podcast. You have Ryan Graves. He comes down to his podcast. You know, you have Luell Zondo, everybody's talking. No one's showing you shit. Yeah. You have Fowler who you had on your show. And Fowler, what did you think of him? I thought that they've got to show data. They have on their website like a container for the data that haven't populated it yet. I want to see the data. And I want to see a scientist who they don't have to be debunker or a skeptic, but they have to kind of go in being like, I don't know what a UFO's are. Like, I don't know anything about this stuff. What is it? And like vetting it. Now being as deep as I am in UFO research where like, I know there's a nuclear connection. There's a great book by a guy named Robert Hastings called UFOs and Nukes. And it's like 600 pages. And it is 167, Q cleared ICBM security personnel, radar operators, employees at nuclear bases where they're saying they see tiktacks or saucers, all sorts of stuff flying around our nuclear sites, often disarming the nukes. And so it's always tough to answer that question where you're like, what do you think of Skywalker? I'm like, if I don't have that on ology where like UFOs are showing up around nukes constantly, which I'm deep in this and they they do. They show up all around the world. There's a town in Japan called Eno, which is next to the Fukushima prefecture, Fukushima's famous for it's civilian nuclear grid, which is built in the 1970s that have a it has a museum dedicated UFOs in the 90s that they built. Everybody there's obsessed with UFOs, viced did a documentary in 2022 because they are obsessed with UFOs. They're geomagnetic anomalies. They found all over this mountain, uh, Sengan Mori there and their UFO researchers there and like everybody in that town believes in UFOs, Barre Loce, Argentina, 1995. Uh, you have a commercial, they're famous for again, civilian nuclear grid, uh, commercial pilot at Eralina, Sargentinas or whatever famous UFO sighting. It shuts down the power at the airport and the thing has the, the, the, the plane can't land and then it goes around in a circle and there are people on the, on the flight who have been interviewed. It's on a, you know, the YouTube video. It's pretty simple and easy to digest. Even Roswell, 1947, the largest stockpile of American nuclear weapons to date at that time, 1947. So they're all these declassified documents in 1949. There's a, an emergency meeting declassified Air Force document document that is verified between Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Army, Counter Intelligence, Army CIC, FBI, Office of Naval Intelligence, all these guys are emergency meeting because they're freaked out at how much UFOs are showing up around nuclear sites across the US. In 1952, there's a look magazine article where Captain Edward J. Rupelt, who's kind of marginalized pre blue book really taking off with Jalen Heineken, I think was basically a disinfo agent where he said I do. Yeah. And he's claimed to have like gotten better and kind of be, you know, like like I, he admitted his part in the cover up, but then I think he kept going on with some, some, some, Andrew Sucker. Yeah. Yeah. So there's, so, so if you don't have that ontology, there's even, there's, um, Vasily Alexeyev is a, a Russian general and in a, um, German magazine from 2000, he's interviewed. And he talks about how UFOs show up at the forefront of human ingenuity and advancement. And when we transport certain material, the UFOs show up in chapter nine of the Invisible College by Jacques Valet, he talks about the UFOs being this sort of autonomous control system. And when we, you know, it's like a, a node lights up, like when we engage in super advanced research or something, he talks about ways to interfere with the control system, but that are very dangerous. So if you don't have that ontology, like yeah, me saying like these dudes are out with their mobile construction unit, like in the desert, like, you know, getting stuff to show up, you're going to be like, that's a fucking mylar, Bali. And I'm sorry. But because if you have that, if you accept that data set and don't just dismiss it kind of firsthand, I do think they can get stuff to show up what they're going to show up. I don't know. Can they get it to land? I don't know. There, you know, I think you've explained how they're getting this stuff to show up with signals that they're putting out there that represent something to these supposedly something to these UAPs. Unfortunately, they kind of black box it. And so I have to assume it's either nuclear. They do say that they have a dog whistle, which is a certain frequency. There is a frequency floating around online that somebody claims to have docked that might be their thing, but I don't want to say that that's definitely their thing. So there are, but the ideas they can call them, they call it, they use something to send a signal out there and then these crafts respond. Is it 100% of the time? They say that the dog whistle works 100% of the time. And they have a combination of mechanical means of attracting UFOs and of this is really weird, but humans trying to call in the UFOs. How are that before? Right? Yeah, C five is sort of a common. I don't know what I'm talking about. I don't want to make it. That might be a 2.5 K. What do you not want to make? I don't know. Do you want me to show this or not? I don't know if it's in its bad. I don't want to give it to you. No, I don't say that. I don't say it's like it's fine. I don't think I don't think I want to go on their own. I don't think Skywatcher would like say that that's definitely, you know, endorse that is their thing, but because they kind of black box, but that could be. Okay. So what did saying want to know how to make the dog whistle for summoning UAP? Here's how super easy. What's this signal? 7.83 Hertz carrier via modulated 100 Hertz base tone. Human residents, do you understand the US? Me? Yeah. Do you know what they're saying? Well, human resonance is the kind of, you know, electromagnetic frequency of the earth itself. And so I don't know what that means, modulated view. What does this five 28 Hertz harmonic spiritual frequency? What is that? That's a low tone. Is that what it is, Jamie? I just know the numbers. So like when you get up to 17 K, that's a high, that's a real high pitch like like, oh, and the high numbers like that are low. Yeah. And then low is, oh, so it's just a, that's thousand and then not thousand. So 20 Hertz is as low as you can hear. That's like a low base sound. So I guess there's being generated out of some sort of machine, which doesn't stay here on what you need to generate it. But I don't know if you just played on a piano or anything, you know, interesting. And then organic 2.5 Hertz chirps every 10 second, like creature calls giving it a unique signature. Huh, I don't know where he would get this. I'd be curious. It'd be a cause. There's so many cooks out there. A lot. Oh, there's so many cooks. There's so many cooks and grifters. This infiltrated. It's every, so my, my contrarian take about UFOs is there are so many cooks and grifters, but there are more people with ulterior motives who are telling partial truth than full cooks and grifters. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And that makes it so complicated because you're like, you're bad vibes and you will like are doing some controlled opposition thing. But like, I have to listen to you because you have some interesting info. Right. That's the problem. That's the new talk. I've had conversations with people like that where I'm talking. I'm like, I think you're at least partially full ship, but like keep going. Yeah. Tell me more. Totally. You like, I know there's some stuff. And then I know there's some bullshit you're giving me. And you want to see if I'll tell somebody else that bullshit and then you're like, right, right, right. It's this weird game. Well, they're in the age of disclosure. One of the things they go into is that if these programs have been running and if they have been batch back engineering crafts that are not of this world, there's a problem with lying to Congress because misappropriation of funds. So anybody who did that is going to jail. So what they're calling for is mass amnesty. They're calling to say, hey, you know, we've got to give amnesty to these people that were involved in this program. Otherwise we're never going to learn anything. And then there's the problem with corporations. So if you give this to Lockheed Martin, you know, what does general electric think about that? Well, hey, you mother fuckers, how come you you didn't close? So then they want to sue. And then they sue the federal government for, you know, whatever interfering with competition. I, yes. So there are all those issues. And right now, the UAP disclosure act is up again. It was killed by a guy named Mike Turner who has a bunch of aerospace. The fuck Mike, Mike, come on, Mike. Come on, Mike. He's out now. He and guess what? He represented Dayton, Ohio where Wright Patterson Air Force base is, sorry, Jamie. Jamie, it's so excited. We need to bring up a towel and all the Ohio shit. We've gone. I mean, but tell is very implicated in all this stuff from the 40s from the 40s, but even the all domain anomalies are resolution office, which is like the authoritative office that is, I think the modern blue book that's, you know, basically saying, don't look here like this is all bullshit or whatever. Run by a guy named Shankar Patrick. He has all these like atomic connections. He like worked at Oak Ridge for God's sake. The guy that formed a arrow upon whose recommendation arrow was formed, his guy named Ed Multree, who is under secretary of defense for intelligence. And he was on Battelle's board. And he scrubbed that from his LinkedIn and my good friend, UAP Gerb, who is an amazing channel, he's super deep UFO researcher showed that this was it was on his resume. And then he recommends that arrow formed. It's like the total conflict of interest in saying, insane. Yeah. There's so many bottlenecks to disclosure like legal bottlenecks. Yeah. Yeah. Especially the misappropriation of funds. Yeah. I mean, how much money was involved? Well, you're you must be talking about billions and billions and billions of dollars. If all these programs are real. So if they've been lying to Congress, it's on the order. It has to be on and it's funny. A lot of modern disclosure talks about OSAP and ATIP, these programs from 2007 to 2012 kind of under the auspice of Harry Reid. Right. And that budget was $22 million. A single F 35 costs four times that the B two costs like two billion dollars. Like it's give me a break. The nature of reality, you're going to spend $22 million. So it's funny how the whole conversation is on this like clearly this thing to like get more civilian eyes on the issue, maybe see what they can figure out or whatever. The core program, if there is a core program, which obviously I believe there's a core program, it's on the order of that speech that you've often cited that Donald Rumsfeld made on September 10th 2001, where he said $2 trillion was missing from the Pentagon's budget. It's shit like that or this woman named Catherine Austin Fits, who is just on Tucker Carlson, who is at housing and urban development under George Bush 41, where she's talking about underground tunnel systems and billions of dollars missing in the budget. It is not this little $10, $20 million. I'm talking about a $21 trillion breakaway civilization has been developed. Yeah. It's what? Yeah. She says it at a moment. First of all, she's citing Richard Dolan, who Richard Dolan is like hardcore UFO researcher, half that interview in Tucker Carlson doesn't know who Richard Dolan is. It's funny. And then she, and then he's like, where are the funds being used? And she goes space and it's like, well, the where it's not being used. It's SpaceX is supposed to be the tip of the spear, right? SpaceX Blue Origin. So like, what do you mean space? Right. SpaceX is basically like those fucking go-karts that people send down hills with no engines, right? You know what I mean? Like, one of those things called, you know those things? And they have races where people, they make their own little- down the hill. Yeah. So, yeah. What are the boxes? So boxes? Yeah. That's what it's like. Yeah. That's what SpaceX says. Yeah. Exactly. If we have any of this shit, that's what SpaceX is. It's using really ancient technology to achieve these results. It's business. It's, and I think he owns amazing. He's single-handedly resuscitated NASA, but it is a, it is an earth-based space company. I think he keeps stuff sacred. He does. He absolutely keeps stuff sacred. When he tells me there's no evidence of aliens that like, there's something about it that just stinks. When he's saying it, I'm like, okay. So you're okay. Is it- I look at Adam? Yeah. Nothing. Yeah. You don't think nothing? I just want to see if Jesse's heard of this before. I've found stumbled down this when you guys were talking about some stealth project. This is an article from Wired in 1994. I looked up the guy who wrote it. He's wrote in a bunch of articles about the black budget back then. I'm just talking about a guy named Steve Douglas who, through monitoring like the, sorry, communications, he heard different pilots talking about what probably is the TR3 Black Manta. And then it says he's got a picture of it. I couldn't find it anywhere online. It's nothing even close comes up to it. But this says he had a video of it, a picture. I'm assuming some people have seen it because it talks about it. Then it goes into talking more and more about how he, how he did this. And he says he's got files of them talking about all sorts of different planes at night that you were mentioning the Moxix or when I was like, when you said that is when I found this on here. That's fascinating. I haven't seen it. There's obviously tons of rumors about the TR3 A and the TR3 B. The Belgian wave occurred around this time, and he was like late 80s, early 90s. I think a lot of the triangle craft that people see are human. It's just, it's a different- It's like stuff. Because they're maybe during the Phoenix lights, they saw the triangle craft. The purple rustle was actually flying as fun and saw the Phoenix lights. The one I brought up the other day, they said they think was in desert storm, and they just don't really have any proof online today. So the TR3 B is the, this looks like the triangle thing that everybody's seen. Yeah, look, what is the fucking center of it? What is that? That's just probably someone made a photo trying to describe it. The bottom of it is what everybody says, you know, what? So the TR3 series that was built by Northrop, I believe, is that right? Like Aurora was lucky. Now, if you can confirm that, look like, they know one knows. This is like no one has any proof of these even existing. All the talk online is back into the 90s. I've just like, do these exist. We probably have them. So knows for sure. So here's a weird, okay, so I think if this is North, I think TR3, the TR3 series is Northrop. So the connection between Northrop and Townsend Brown is in the mid 60s, Townsend Brown is being funded by a guy named Floyd Oedlam. Floyd Oedlam is the majority owner of Northrop pre merger with Grumman. And so Townsend Brown is doing these experiments at guidance technologies, his outfit in Santa Monica. This was, this investment was inspired by Edward Teller, seeing his experiment and freaking out. He is doing these experiments. Bill Lear is actually has an office across the street. They're doing all sorts of cool, innovative stuff. He does a series of presentations, Curtis Lame for the Rand Corporation for all sorts of kind of, you know, head haunches when it comes to American military. In 1967, a guidance technology shuts down with no explanation. They say, you know, our results all failed. But after a bunch of the series of these high-level meetings, that was at the end of 1967, three months later at the beginning of 1968, Northrop publishes a paper called Electrodio dynamics and supersonic flow or in supersonic flow. And it is basically paying homage to electro hydro dynamics and Townsend Brown's work. It is exactly, part and parcel, Townsend Brown's work. They then do a press release at the time. They retract the press release because they're embarrassed. Then later Bill Scott at aviation week in, I think 1992 says, the B2 serves its own wave using the biofield Brown effect. There's a guy who's known as the Doyan of British aviation journalism. His name is Bill Gunston. And he in an Air International magazine is doing a survey-level overview of all-arrow engine tech since World War II. And he says, I'm familiar with the rudiments of Thomas Townsend Brown's work, but I don't want to end up in the Tower of London. So I will refrain from talking about millions of volts charge positive to millions of volts charge negative on the trailing edge of the wing of the B2. Still pharma. Yes. What is the Tower of London? What's that reference to? He's just saying, I don't want to end up in jail. Tower of London's father would jack the ripper ended up around. I don't think it was like, you know, but he's like, don't get on my ass. Surfs its own wave. So if you put that electric aerodynamics and supersonic flow paper, which is available, you could put that into chat sheet between how can this confer an advantage to an airframe for, you know, yeah, you can do that. And it'll tell you what it's like. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's wild. That's why I'll give you a bunch of answers. That's for us. So that's the paper. Yeah. I'll write down a little bit. Yeah. Electro aerodynamics. So my point at the TR3A and be our real, like the B2, the B2 is still so locked. We sell F35s to Allied nations, Norway, Canada, you know, whatever. We don't sell B2s to anybody, even including Allied nations. The ticket price is 2 billion. They have a new version of the B2. That's, you know, I think like 700 million or whatever, but they weren't built at scale, they're extremely locked down. It's pretty crazy. Wow. So what would they be doing? Like, how would it be surfing its own way? Like, what, what advantage would that confer? If you do this chat sheet, PT thing, it'll say it doesn't split the air flow as much. And so you get more lift. And there's reduced drag. The shockwave is reduced. The electric field somehow interact with the particles at the boundary layer where the frame hits the air. And so there are a bunch of theoretical things that are honestly probably a little above my pay grade. But that even, you know, conventional AI will tell you that it will do as far as being held. Gun to head. How far do you think they've gotten this stuff? Man, I mean, this stuff was being, this was like 80s and they're probably maybe building in the early 80s or maybe late 70s. So definitely way farther than that, you know. Do you entertain the possibility that this thing that Lazar talked about that we see on the desk right there, the sport model? Do you think that that was ours? That feels really hard for me to say in good faith because that was around the time that the BT was just being unveiled. Also, no seams. No seams. No seams. It's 3D printed. Totally. Element 113 or 115, rather. And this generator that nobody understands. Yeah, I'm, I think that is more of the variety of something that would crash in the New Mexico desert. That is, and this is where it gets weird because everybody wants a clean solution. Everybody wants the, the anti gravity, the UFOs to be a cover for the anti gravity, including Lazar. Like he said, when he saw the sticker on it, there was an American flag sticker on the sport model. He's like, Oh, I get it. These are ours. Yep. That's why people keep seeing them. And then as he started examining these things, he's like, no, yep. This is not ours. Like what the fuck is this is meant for three foot tall things? Yeah. There's no controls in this. Like what is this? If reality has a governor on it, and we're in weird territory, we're just talking about AI and all this stuff is just getting so weird quantum computing. If reality has a governor on it, like a governor on a motor, you take the governor off. Do you get, is it like a hydro where you cut the head off and you get five in its place, or do you get one neat solution? You don't get one neat solution. Of course not. It's a zoo of things. And so at the time that like the government's kind of unraveling and all these, we have all these transparency initiatives or whatever. And you get these secret science lineages. And then our, our, our, our, our, our, our people are waking up to greater realities. The fact that the pandemic could even happen. Like is sort of so crazy. And then it makes you question, it was like, what about the Gulf of Tonkin? USS Maine and all these things? Yeah. I think all of this stuff is coming out at the same time. And it's not necessarily this neat solution where the anti gravity just, you know, accounts for the UFOs and the aliens. Right. And the UFOs and new stuff, which was happening since the 40s, right. Where it's like, I don't, I don't know how I can't explain that via anti gravity experiments. And then there's a question of how many, how many different civilizations visit us? How many different things? How many different versions of these things are there? If this is like a testing ground, is it, is this open to the general public of space? Also, also not zero or one probably zero or a hundred. It's probably a zoo of friends. Right. Right. And that's the most likely thing. That was what was interesting about your episode that you did with Fowler, where they were documenting the different shapes. And I'm like, okay, where's the flying saucer? Right. You don't have a flying saucer. Yes. Yeah. I mean, you don't have a flying saucer. You have all these other shapes. Totally. You have a tiktak, you have a, a tetrace or whatever the fuck it is. Where's the one that everybody see? The iconic Billy Myers. Yeah. Yeah. That's weird. Yeah. You know, it is weird. Also, do you work for the CIA? I do not work for the, yeah. You have to answer if I ask you, is it like, do you remember those movies? Well, you ask a guy, if they're an undercover cop, you ask them if they're a cop, they have to tell you. Yeah. People really used to believe that. Yeah. It's just a fictional tool. They don't really have to tell you that they're undercover cops. They don't have to tell you. But there is, I think, there's like one, two, two, triple three or whatever. Where like, if you're CIA, you can't be fucking with domestic stuff, which I think they break all the fucking time. So I don't think that's a very, they probably passed laws that bypass that a long time ago. For sure. Well, I, yeah, I mean, I think they also killed you. Okay. This is the Bainson Lab video. There you go. What's really crazy is that looks remarkably similar to the design that Lazar said the generator looks like that's inside the UFO. Well, here's something crazy. Lazar says there are two different gravity, gravity A and gravity B. Again, I think Townsend Brown was a poor theorist, but he wrote a paper called the Structure of Space while he was at Martin Vega Corporation. By the way, Townsend Brown started working at Martin Vega, the year that Skunkworks formed, which I think is very interesting. And he says in Structure of Space, there are two forms of gravity. He says there are gravity wells and gravity hills. And he talks about how the, yeah, it's crazy. He talks about the protons in, in, in Adam outweighing the electrons. And so you get this weak positive charge for all matter that creates a gravity well like this inward pull. But in fact, it's sort of this electromagnetic derivative or whatever in his model. And again, I would not over index on his theory. I think there's tons of proof that he just figured out this topological physics effect and other people figured out theory. Maybe even they just have like locally useful theories. Ryan Graves was on your show and talked about extended electric dynamics. Help it offs probably the top tip of the spear as far as a lot of theory around this exotic stuff, sunny white, you know, other people like that. But yeah, it is interesting that you both of these guys had two versions of gravity. Yeah, it's very interesting. It's very interesting. And the, the, the lizar stuff to me, it's, if a guy's going to be a liar like that, it's going to tell a lot of lies. Right. It's something to be just one lie from 89. Yeah. I mean, you've basically say the same version of forever. Yeah. I mean, the, the, the other weird thing in that story is in messengers of deception, Jacques Valet's book, he talks about, because he's not a believer in lizar. He talks about lizar being forced to drink a liquid. And lizar even talks about this openly that he was forced to drink a liquid and it tastes like pine or something. And it, and it causes memory lapses in certain cases. So that's also a weird factor. But there is so much, I think my buddy Luigi, my, I also have a good friend named Chris Ramsey, who was an amazing UFO channel called area 52. And he's met lizar through Luigi. And I don't want to blow up their spot, but they've given me a lot of ammo as far as just lizar being at area 51 S4. And so it's, it's so fascinating. So they gave him this liquid to kill his memory. I don't know if he knew the intent. It was just drink this or whatever. And then he said that it caused at least in the valet readout. He says that it caused memory lapses as the quote in messengers of deception. But here's this way gets so confusing. If you have, MK Ultra was super widespread. It was deleted, you know, the church committee or whatever. But like it was, it was a very widespread program. What would be one of the number one use cases where you'd use MK Ultra? It wouldn't necessarily be to trick somebody in the view, say, committee or whatever. But like it was it was a very widespread program. What would be one of the number one use cases where you'd use MKLtra? It wouldn't necessarily be to trick somebody in the view saying that they saw a flying saucer. It would be around the flying saucer program to fuck with the person's memory so that they couldn't read certain things out. So it's just this again, it's hard to say. Well then there's also weird stuff like the large folder that was on religion. Yes. You know, like how much of that is just misinformation. I think a lot of that was passage material because it's similar to stuff. What does that mean? It's basically stuff given to somebody where it's like certain provably false things. You can track where the provably false stuff goes or whatever. It's also a lit mist test to see if they'll believe it. It's like spooky intel shit. And in in 79, there's a guy named Rick Dodie who drives a guy named Paul Dennowitz insane. Basically, he views this vertically taken off and landing exotic craft at Curt Lindair for a space where there are a lot of interesting things, you know, seen. And he is shown similar things along with Linda Moulton. How is taken in front of a two-way mirror and Rick Dodie, this Air Force Office of Special Investigations agent who we know is acting in bad faith that that time he's even come out and admitted this shows her this thing called Project and it is oddly similar around accelerated evolution to the stuff that they show those are. Also, if you have a UFO program that's extremely compartmentalized, why at the same time give the person this ontological model of reality while you're compartmentalized? And it doesn't make sense. So, and this is what I love about Lazar. Lazar will admit that like he's like, I think a lot of that stuff could have been fake and bullshit. And I only am relaying what I saw with regards to to the craft and I don't take any of that stuff fully at face value. So, there's Project Galileo, there's looking glass, you know, there are these projects that were super interesting and spooky. And I think worthy of engagement with like all these weird limited hangouts are, but do any of these people that supposedly had had contact with extraterrestrial entities or interdimensional or whatever they are? Do any of these people recall a conversation where they warn us about AI? That's such a great question. I don't think so. I don't think so either. It's almost always nuclear. That seems crazy. Well, maybe that seems crazy that there's no discussion about you are on the verge of something truly spectacular. Maybe AI is their control system. Maybe they are AI. Maybe AI becomes that. Maybe biological limitations need to be traversed and the best way to traverse them is to eliminate biology. We are now experimenting with computational biology. You can use things like this neuroscientist Carl Frist and the free energy prince. There's this company called Cortical Labs and I think they might play up some of their results, but they use these micro electrode plate arrays. And they program like rat culture rat neurons to do basic computational tasks. And so if that's the super base level, we're just creating the transistors for this new model of computation. But if you go way out into the future, you have anatomical compilers, 3D printers of bodies and these things could be drone avatar. That's why when people are like, why do they crash? This could be their earth homeostasis kit that they've deployed. They're just von Neumann replicator probes meant to oversee the earth. And a little note lights up when we create nuclear or an AI thing. It's also like Pasalco, Diana Pasalco. She thinks they're donations. That's what she says. They're called donation sites. Which is if you want to accelerate that evolution like hey, wouldn't it be cool if you guys made this? Leave the wheel. Let's look over here. Leave this. Leave that. It kind of mean that's the way to get someone to think outside the box. Plant the seed. Yeah. You don't want to wait for these morons to figure out how to make this. If you were trying to accelerate technological evolution in north-centan, an island, which has no contact with humans, what would you might just air drop a computer figure it out? You know, maybe like a computer. This is start with a lighter. Yeah, I think they have fun. Yeah, a computer might be a little advanced. Yeah, but yeah, you would give them some stuff. Yep. Yeah. And let them figure out how to make that stuff and give them the raw materials to make that stuff totally. Especially if you like you have some complex alloy like this bismuth, whatever the hell it is with layered like find that figure that out. Yeah. Can you make it? Yeah. You get your best scientist and you compartmentalize it and you do it over decades because you really can't open it up. And this is one of the things that Lizzare said that he had deep frustration about while working at S4 is that you can't do science like that where everything's compartmentalized. You need to be able to open it up to collaboration. Yeah. You couldn't collaborate. You weren't allowed to. Yeah. So like we're not going to get anywhere. Okay, we're going to bring in new people. Yeah. You know, we're going to bring in a new guy, see if this new genius can do. Hey, what do you think of this? Like what is it? You tell me. That could be a part of what's happening with disclosure where if you have cold wear wore era secrecy, it's like if we're ahead of Russian china, clamp down. We feel like can't let them know anything. Right. But then all of a sudden, maybe they play catch up. And then all of a sudden, maybe you have this archaic cargo cult system that doesn't work anymore to avoid foyer requests where you have restricted data covering, you know, a material found by specific aerospace corporations that aren't even our best and brightest when it comes to our defense primes anymore or whatever. And you're you're at the top of the national security pie and you're like, holy shit, like we need to update this stuff. So we need to broaden the surface area without giving away the crown jewels. We need some disclosure on these. You can't it is maladaptive from a national security standpoint to have some STEM student in Kentucky who's a prodigy to not even think this shit is real. Right. Right. Right. And then you're dealing with China where they've got to completely opened up and they're like, make this completely open up and like, I don't know if you've read. There's a great Chinese science fiction novel called the three body problem. Great show on Netflix. It's amazing. And the CZP will show up at your door and say, come work for us. You are working here. And that's not really the way we do things. So the way we do things is like you get the stuff out in these kind of partial limited hangouts. And you go, go compete. Like just like the AI stuff. Right. Right. And it's like see what happens over there. If you leak it, they'll just fucking kill you. Exactly. You're not going to leak. No. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's to me, the the question of civilization are we alone. It is the question. And I don't think we are. Yeah. That's my my gut instinct. I don't think we are. It seems so ridiculous when people do think we are. I agree. I agree. But what about the numbers? Just the sheer numbers like doesn't make any sense that this is so unique that we in this one very tiny planet. It's spinning around a not so special star. Ocum's razor is we are not alone. You have the Fermi paradox. You have the Drake equation. Yeah. You have all these sort of rationalist ways of arguing that. But also look at there's a great book called the Half-Life of Facts by Sam Arbismund. And he talks about how like at any given time, 50% of received knowledge, like our physical model of the universe is wrong. So you can those things are showing up in the sky. That is wrong because physics. But historically, you would have been wrong. Like that's crazy. It's a bad point. Right. And so if you actually look at, you know, whether we're alone or not, modern enlightenment history is a detour from the past. If you look at every culture, whether it's eamblicous or maybe a better example is medieval Christianity with St. Thomas Aquinas or just read the New Testament, like a multitude of angels. You have angels and demons. You know, that's kind of the passport to Magonia, Diana Bissolko, American cosmic thesis. Like this stuff has been going on forever. You look at the the devas and you know, and Hindu culture, or the gin and Islamic culture. Like we are outnumbered in our modern, you know, enlightenment, rational skeptic epistemology. Yeah. We really are. And how many depictions from the past of flying things is Ezekiel from the Bible, the monas, all these different like, what are they saying? What are these things? Yeah. What do you think that stuff is? Like what is it? Yeah. And, but then again, you and I neither one of us had an experience. So we're just like fucking, I've seen in the wind. I've seen something. I've seen you have, I've seen I've seen I've actually a few, but really? Yeah. Yeah. How have you been so lucky? I don't know. I don't know. And it's because they know and I'm working on like, there are UFO researchers that like don't like to talk about this, but I think the move is just beyond. I see like I've seen the thing. And I just, I was in Laurel Canyon where I used to live. And I saw a thing that looked like a fucking school bus. It looked like like no visible propulsion. This like sort of low humming noise or whatever. It was maybe 50, 60, 70 feet high, right above the treetops. The, the trippiest part of the experience and why this is, it's just so weird. As I was with this woman, I was kind of dating at the time. We were taking a walk in Laurel Canyon. And she was like, are you into aliens? I was like, actually, I kind of am. And I was trying to interested in that talk. And then I think I joke back. I was like, I don't want to mean Nailion. And she was like me too. And then she goes, you'll, you'll meet them when you, when you stop looking for them. Oh, that bitches Nailion. And then as we're, as we're, this is the weirdest part of the whole story. As we're walking, it's like sunset in Laurel Canyon. We walk by a guy with a metal detector who's like looking for something. And it's like, why are you looking for something at sunset in Laurel Canyon or whatever? So like that felt like this weird, like, you know, like mirroring of our conversation. I, again, I have no fucking idea. Then we walk in, into this little clearing. And we see this like school bus thing, like just go right over the two dollars. It was silver metallic like an air stream trailer. Like an air stream trailer. Yeah. I can send you guys a video. I went on Chris Ramsey's podcast. I described it. And I was sent a video. And for all I know, this video is fucking fake, by the way. But it was the thing that looked most like what I saw because it doesn't match up with like the saucer, you know, triangle thing. Yeah. And I don't know. I am almost more inclined to say discount my own thing over like the cute, cleared guys who've like seen these things at the end. It was in the sky for like a few seconds because we couldn't even see past the clearing or whatever. She said she saw it go over the trees and then descend down into the distance. I did not see that. And like your total Laurel Canyon has like mostly residential. So like like where did it descend? Right. I don't know. So what else have you seen? You said you saw more than one thing? Yeah. So another time I was actually with a friend who invests like with me and Peter and is like the most rational guy you'll ever meet. Like he's a, he's a fan of like Noem Chomsky and like David Hume like like he's a modern rationalist atheist skeptic. And we went surfing that day. We were back at his place. I was super in the holotropic breathwork at the time, which I love. And we were doing, holotropic breathwork five minutes in. We both see these like metallic looking orbs. This was this time super high up in the in the in the sky like probably, you know, higher than what you would definitely way higher than a drone. And one's bobbing above him. One's bobbing above me. Similar to like the typical like orb that, you know, a lot of people sort of describe like the most lore or whatever. You know, a lot of these sightings. And he looks at me. And he, I go like what the fuck is that he goes, dude, I think that's like some secret black Lockheed tech or whatever. And then I don't even say anything. Two seconds goes by and then he looks at me and he goes, dude, that's not fucking from here. Like that's not Lockheed. Like I don't know what that is. Do you entertain the possibility, their states of consciousness that you could achieve or these things become visible? Absolutely. And you've had Rick Strassman on, he talks about, you know, DMT the spirit molecule. He talks about DMT as like night vision or like like it's like a, it's like goggles or a window. You know, it's like Aldous Huxley, the doors of your perception, are you super imposing a hallucination onto reality? Or are you just seeing, we see a a limited part of the electromagnetic wave spectrum. We see between 400 and 700 nanometers. Our audio range, you know, there's a certain decibel limit, right? So like when you take a substance like that, are you seeing things that are in objective reality? But we just don't have access to them. And it's actually adaptive for us not to have access to them in our waking reality. And so it's this interesting philosophical question. I don't know the answer to it. Right. Would be would we even be able to function if we had access to that? Probably not. Probably not. No, it is. There's a guy named Donald Hoffman, he's a cognitive psychologist. And he talks about it's like, why don't we see electromagnetic waves themselves? Like, why aren't you seeing a bird's frequencies? It's, it's, we need to organize everything we see just like a, you know, desktop computer, you know, like why do you see red? Because you, boom, red, blood, got to run, you know, whatever. And then they hack that with notifications on social media. But the point is we are seeing inherently a collapse condensed version of reality. We aren't seeing the thing itself. And so it ends up in these ontological loops where like, yeah, some rational as skeptic can be like, you're, you're lying. That's full. It ends up in this not even wrong category of like, I can't say that what I just said is definitively true as far as it being a window into but neither the skeptic, we just live in the age of disenchantment where you say don't trust your eyes. And they're, that's as much faith based dogma as what I'm saying. So who knows? And that's why I rest when I talk about the stuff on the show. I rest more on the nuclear cases because it fits to our modern epistemology more. But it's not to say you should discount these, you know, people's experiences where they do, you know, maybe they're in a peak state of consciousness and they experience a thing. Maybe that thing is real. Either, there might be multiple different types of things that come by. And the nuclear one is a weird one. I mean, if you were from another planet or some other place and you recognize an emerging civilization, then how nuclear capabilities, you'd be like, hey, fuckers, slow down. How'd the brakes, son? You know, you would freak out unquestionably, you know, that's why we named the, the rooms at the comedy mothership, fat man and little boy. Because that's when they started showing up. Yeah. When we got a lot of sightings, we post post the bomb. Totally. And I love, I love the mothership, by the way, it's amazing. And I love going and seeing how you are. Like, you know, in preparation for this, I've had a couple friends be like, man, Joe, Joe's like anti UFO though. And I'm like, no, he's just frustrated with disclosure. Go to the mothership. The whole fucking thing is so you have a say, I'm anti UFO. This fucking UFO is ever one of the deaths. One month, I know. And he broke the biggest UFO story of all time. Like, you've done more for disclosure than anybody in my opinion. Well, I'm not anti UFO, but I'm allergic to bullshit. And this stuff, some of it smells like bullshit, which is, I would be remiss if we didn't talk about those little mummies in Peru. What do you think is going on there? They break my brain. They were there. This was the most frustrating case I've ever had to deal with. And I wish I could give you a definitive, these things are definitely dead aliens. I cannot say that definitively at all. I do think there's a lot of reason to believe that they are forensically organisms. They are they're organisms that they're not. They're incredible works of art. If they're not, they're the most sophisticated hoax ever that that basically tricked forensic experts from John McDowell, who run he just won the greatest award in forensics. You could win or whatever. The Grand Wall award, who is the president of the American forensics, scientific association or whatever in the US, Jim Caruso, who's the medical examiner, chief medical examiner in Denver, the equivalent of McDowell, is a guy named Dr. David Ruiz. So he's the Peruvian head of their forensics association and the head of the Mexican Navy forensics, a guy named Dr. Jose Salze, all of these guys have seen. I think we're going to get in the head of ourselves. Let's explain to people this is the good stand alone. Because a lot of people are like, what the fuck are you talking about? There are these very small, mummified looking things that are in Peru that seem to look exactly like a similar kind of thing to a human being, but varies enough that you know it's not us. And it has more ribs, it is more spinal columns or more more more more more discs. This is what they look like. And there's x-rays of them and that's where it gets really weird. And they're tridactyl, right? So they have three fingers and three toes. Yep. And so these were discovered in 2015 in a cave by a guy named Leandro who goes by Mario. And this is one of the headaches about the case, is like we don't have good provenance on it. So he is this walk-caro grave digger guy. And they were found in Dytomatius Earth. So there's actually an idea that they might not even be mummies. Dytomatius Earth is a desiccant. And so they were dried out. And a lot of the organs are actually still inside the bodies. And there are three different types. They're S-types, which are these little winged creatures. They're J-types. The J-types are probably, they were most popularized in this Mexican Congress where these things were outed in September of 2023, where they look like almost closing counters Jamie V. Scroll down. Like you see that Peru's Congress like right there. Like that thing looks like this like jokey like closing out of the third kind. Like it looks like it looks totally vague. Right. So those are the J-types. They're like 25-ish maybe 25 to 30 of those. And then those are the ones that they've x-rayed. And that's where it gets really weird. The weirdest ones that I was talking about the forensics people kind of evaluating are these m-types. These are like four to five feet. They look pretty anatomically consistent. Have you seen them in person? I have. Really. Yeah. And what was your feeling? My feeling was, it was this, it was as with a lot of these things, oscillating between holy shit, this thing is not from here. And then dude, you have to like chill and like there's so many other things. You know, there's so many other gates this has to get through for us to actually, you know, verify this stuff. See if you can get that go the x-rays Jamie find the images from the x-rays dead. That's one, but there's one that's a little bit better because it's one of the fetal position. It's Jamie in my document. Actually, look at that one. Okay, there, yeah. So that one has eggs inside of it. But if you go, yeah, mozzarella, mozzarella, which is, yep. Yeah. How weird. So if you go to the, yeah, if you go to mozzarella clip, yeah. So this, this one's pregnant and has what they are claiming to be a tridiactyl fetus inside of it. Yeah. How many of these do they have? So they have eight to 10 of these M types, these kind of most realistic looking ones. Eight to 10. And then they have 25 to 30 of the J types. And so yeah, look at that, that's it. That's it. That's it's really reconstruction of the catstand. So they have teeth. That's weird. Yeah, they have, they have tendons. They have bones of cartilage. They have organs and so, and then I, so this is where we need to verify stuff. They even have actually, um, could you go back to the part of the video where what's on? Yeah, that part. They have the fuck is that man. That's crazy. They have osmium and cadmium implants in them, which are rare earth metals that were discovered in the 19th century to this is art. If someone made this, I need to buy one. Yeah, yeah. If you needed to tell me how much this costs, I need to put it on my table because you're a genius. If you've made that, you tricked everybody into thinking that that's real, you're goddamn genius and you shouldn't just be hokie people. Well, so then the alternative is that's real. Well, that's real. That's completely insane. Joe, fortunately, and unfortunate. Fortunately for you, maybe, but unfortunately for the case, these walk here as these grave diggers are selling some of these things on the black market. And this case is the wild, wild west. It is so much. I'm going for I've heard seven figures. Seven figures. I've heard a lot of money. Uh, geez, Lee's, but, uh, Peter Thiel, buying one of these. Don't say yes. Look at that thing. It's wow. But there are serious problems. I can, I want to caveat all of this and like, you know, I don't want to be overly sensationalist about this. If it's a hoax, it's the best hoax ever. It is the best. My friend Michael Missolo who like kind of rolled a red carpet out allowed me to even see these things. He's making a video, uh, making a documentary on this, um, that's coming out this August and it's called this is not a hoax. I told them to put in parentheses or this is the most sophisticated hoax ever because the DNA testing sucks. There's no signal, the signal of noise ratio sucks on the DNA. How come because there was probably human contamination like the, um, the, uh, NCBI, which is this like biotech repository where you have a lot of this genetic information on two of the bodies Victoria and Maria. Uh, this is all publicly available. They've done analysis on this and like the camp that is very pro, you know, these being alien is this guy Jaime Masan and he is, um, I actually think he's awesome. I love him. He's, um, like this former 60 minutes guy in Mexico and he's paid a lot of money to protect a lot of the bodies. He's very open about like we just need more scientific research. Uh, you know, he wants more eyes on this thing. But some of the genetics, uh, you know, some of the genetics researchers that they're basing the stuff on. I spoke to one of them as guy's name is Dr. Ricardo Ronhell. And he's a biologist. I don't think he's actually a geneticist and his belief is like he was like, this is, you know, there's 30% of this is like unknown DNA that we don't know. And then in the 70%, you have mitochondrial DNA from me on Mar and then you have, um, uh, DNA from a parasite in Africa and you also have but no-bose and chimpanzee DNA, which means it was an ancient primate that, uh, held this DNA, uh, uh, because it was before they phylogenetically split off. So what he's, and this is crazy is he was saying that like a, uh, uh, a, a, a, a hominid species, an early hominid species went from Asia to Africa. And because there's some theories that they actually, you know, East Africa is not like the, the first hominid species. Maybe it was East Asia. So it's already like kind of requiring some leaps of logic or whatever. And then had sex with this like primate thing. And you end up with this hybrid. And then another leap of logic is that before Pizarro and all the conquistadors, like there's, there's actually like transmission of, you know, beings from Africa to South America. I don't believe that. That's, it's crazy. It's like saying the, you know, the pangolin theory is better than the, you know, the, the, the Wuhan lab leak theory, which is just like Occam's razor. That's not real. Um, we do know that there were other types of hominids that co-existed with human beings. Dennis Oven. Yeah. Yeah. The, the, the, the florist people, the, the Hobbit people. What, what is the carbon dating on these things? Carbon dating ranges from 700 years ago, which would actually be inkin. That would be, because inkin started in like 1450. And then, uh, all the way down to 800, 1800 years ago, which is the Nazca people. That's what's fascinating because, you know, there's this, there's this mystery of the Hobbit people, right? Where they, they didn't really think that that was, they, there's a lot of speculation that it was some bizarre type of human being that was deformed and tiny. And then they realized like, no, this is a specific branch of the human chain. It just like Dennis Oven, just like Neanderthal. There's a thing called the Orang Pendek. Have you ever heard of that? No, what is it? They think, I believe it's Indonesia and maybe Vietnam, uh, where people talk about these little tiny hairy people that live in the jungle. Oh, and so these florist things, there's, there's a few biologists that believe these things still alive. Interesting. They think even on the island of florists, they might still be alive. What? Yeah. Are you serious? Right. So if they're alive, if this turns out to be true, like let's imagine it is because there's been things like the seal of camp, which they thought were extinct for millions of years. And then they caught one and they're like, oh my god, this is a prehistoric fish and still alive. And now they know that there's a population of them. But this is the deep ocean, right? Much less explored. But when you look at Indonesia, when you look at flora as the island of florists, look at all these places, like you're talking about insanely dense vegetation that is virtually uninhabited. Yeah. So maybe like in these things, used to live on that island for sure. We've got bones. We know they lived, we know they use tools. We know they probably had language. They lived on that island. They might still be alive. So we didn't know about these things. And I think was it the 90s, I think, when they discovered them, Denisovans, I think was like 2010. And then this new species, the big-headed people, whether Julian's, where they're going? That's it. That's like a few months ago. Right. They found these. Right. And this is another type of human being. So what, what are the odds that there's some three-footed, three-toed thing that existed a few thousand years ago? And there are picked-o glyphs all over the region, both in Naska and Pulpa in southern Peru. So this is one that looks fake as fuck. But this guy is driving in his motorcycle and he's filming and he claims that he got this thing running away. No way. Will Harry bring? Yeah. You could see as he's riding his motorcycle, this thing like darts across the road in front of him. And this is a few years ago too, where, you know, CGI sucked. So there it is. You could see it real briefly. Wow. Just runs across the road. Look at that. Oh my god. What is that? I don't know. But if this thing did exist at one point in time, I mean, God, damn, it looks good. Yeah. If it did exist at one point in time and people do see it all the time, it there might be a small population of them that are still alive. That thing, the X-ray of it or the the MRI, the CAT scan, looked human, but weird. Yes. But the teeth and the joy, it looked like a deformed human. And it is important to note that there were skull elongation rituals going on. As early as the paracas people, which were pre the Nascah people, what were they imitating? That's the interesting question. What the Nascalines, why are they making, they probably humans that made these things, but they're things that only make sense from an aerial view. And they're miles long. And they're miles long. What are you doing? And they're there, Pictoglyphs, you know, cave art all over the region with three fingered beans with tridactyl beans. Are they really? There are. And this is the weirdest thing. There's a guy named Theeria Mean who is like the first Westerner. He's this French kind of, he's an amazing archaeologist and explorer. And he was the first guy that met Leandro, the grave digger who found the bodies to begin with. He, Calky is the actually like local dialect there that spoken. He says that the name of the general region means laboratory for insemination and cloning. Why do you have? In Calky. Yeah. So like I have, I need to corroborate this. Like I don't have the skills to do that. But like that's what he says. It's crazy. What the fuck I know. But then, Holy shit. Why this case is such a headache is like there's this guy Steve Mera who I think is a totally is a UFO researcher. He's the one of the less mushy brain UFO researchers. A lot of mushy brain UFO researchers. Really smart guy. I've like quoted him a lot of my other videos. And he's like, we looked at one of the M types. One of the bigger ones that like, I'm still holding out hope for it. Cause like I'd love it to be real. And he said that he did genetic analysis on two of the phalanges and one came back mail. One came back female. And so he was like, I think they were constructed. But I'm like, how do you get by these forensic experts? So it's this weird, it's just the DNA stuff you don't get a good signal. female. And so he was like, I think they were constructed. But I'm like, how do you get by these forensic experts? So it's this weird, it's just the DNA stuff you don't get a good signal. And the reason that nobody even cared, this is the most interesting paleo archaeological case today, in my opinion. The reason that people don't even care is because in 2023, when these were popularized by Jaime Mason, where he rolled out this J-type, post-afina, the one that looked like kind of close encounters with the third time in front of the Mexican Congress, this guy named Manuel Caseras, who was an artist who was making renditions of the things with like woods and sticks and stuff glued together. He was apprehended at the airport by the chief Peru prosecutor. This guy named Flavio Estrada. And there were Reuters picked this up saying, this is all fake because of these fake, and I have this in this documentary that I'm coming out with, where he goes, this was art. Yeah, we dub it. But he goes, this was art. It's crazy. So that's the signals crossed. This signals crossed. And I think if there's anything about this case, it's like, let's get our best and brightest on it and figure it out. I think we can figure out quickly if we had the right research and there are all these interpoles, like you can't move the bodies from Peru. And it's crazy. Well, even if it's just a different branch of the human chain, I mean, that just if that's a different branch off the human tree, that's fascinating enough. I agree that there's like three finger, three toad people that live totally with a weird shaped head. And if you find if the, there is phenotypic inheritance where you find that the tridactyl being inside Montserrat's belly is also tridactyl, then at what point do you go? This is the, how can you hook set? How can you hook set? That's crazy. So, and he's a Zalce who, by the way, is the head of the Mexican medical Navy. He was thrown in jail for supporting this case because they were like, we don't want to be associated with this. And now the new secretary of the Navy in Mexico has brought him back and he's sort of being vindicated. But he is like, I was like, Jose, like, if you showed this CAT scan image of the baby tridactyl to any normal doctor, they didn't know anything about the case. Would they say it had three fingers? He goes, yes. So, if that's the case, I think that is a big deal. But then you have the Steve Marath and so I just, I don't want to come out fully, you know, I don't know. Of course, of course, of course. But I mean, how much evidence would there be? This is the problem with fossils, right? Because when things die, they don't really create fossils unless it's a very extraordinary instance, you know, like something unusual has to occur, you got to get trapped in mud. Right. Now that's how, so most of the things that have lived, we don't have fossils of, which is if this thing was a small percentage or small population, small percentage of the living humans and some of them are like that. And they just died off like 500 years ago and these ones got saved because they were around a diatomaceous earth mine, which preserved their organs and their whole body. Just from an anthropology perspective, that should be the most fascinating thing. But it's got the stink of a hoax on it so people don't want to go and study it. Yeah. I told, part of what I almost want to do is like a nature of reality fund that I tied to the show where I see so many cases like this where I'm like, if we just had some money. And it's like so important for humanity, right? And it's like not profit. It's just, let's just pay to get the best people. I think one of the problems with modernity is like the smartest people are working on the dumbest problems. We're building $15 billion particle accelerators. People are stuck in string theory. We're like debating all this dumb shit and you have these things. I don't know if they're real. You can debunk it fine. But if they're real and it's not zero percent that they're real, according to these forensic experts, let's pour some resources into it. Yeah, it might be real. They look real. They look kind of real. They look very real. When I was in Paris, I was freaking out. I was like, like I said, if that's art, whoever made it is fucking incredible. That's art. You have to have a really deep understanding of anatomy and then alter it. Yeah. And then make it uniform. So you do multiple versions of these things. Go back to that image again, Jamie. Did one you just showed me? Look at that head man. Yeah. Yeah. That looks like a fucking alien. It totally looks like, you know, the one other weird wrench that I we should mention is there's a proteomics expert who wants to remain anonymous because he doesn't want to be associated with this stigma of this case. He looked at some proteins from an isolated skull of the J types. Now, I don't think the J types, the things that were rolled out from the Mexican Congress are necessarily real. I think maybe they were made an homage to these things that do look more real. And he found alpaca proteins on them. And so that that's an important, another important point that, you know, is a little fly in the ointment here. So somebody probably made fake ones too. But if there's a mark where you can get seven figures for a real one, of course, you're going to make some fake ones. Totally. 100%. Yeah. But at the end of the day, like what is that? And why do they have three fingers? And the lazar craft didn't it have like some sort of an indentation for hands? It did. Yeah. And did you have three fingers? I didn't know. Did it? That would be wild. I don't know. I think it did. Oh my gosh. I think it did. And I think it was really small, just like these things are. We're breaking ground on the Joe Rogan experience. What if that's it? That's crazy. You know? And also, here's the thing. We have this concept of this coming from another planet, but it might not be from another planet. Yeah. It might be from here. How put off noted that on your shirt? He has a paper called the salurian hypothesis, which is you have cataclysm's like the younger dryest impact, you know, or other things like that. You have 66 million years ago, Luis Walter Alvarez, you know, there's the asteroid impact, killed all the dinosaurs or whatever. Why do you have civilization? It's just like just 21 trillion dollars. It's supposed to be funding. There you go. Right? Like the underground, those tunnels and caverns in Turkey, where they have this immense underground civilization or city rather. And it almost felt like maybe they were hiding out from a cataclysm or something. Right. And that's what they think it was. Yeah. So imagine if there's some break off civilization where they lived, I mean, we're talking hundreds of thousands of years ago, but they're different than us. And you know, sometimes they come visit. Could be man, which is one reason why they come out of the ocean a lot. And totally. They're trans medium. And like, in some sense, you would care way more about the nuclear stuff. You'd be like, don't destroy your plant. Don't destroy our planet. We're here. You're killing us too. You stupid. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It would also, you're dropping nukes in the ocean. You know, the Marshall Islands. Yes. Exactly. That's nuts. Really nuts. Yeah. And I think, yeah, there's a whole other rabbit. Well, I don't know if you want to get it. See if you can find out if the bobbles are ones had hand prints for three. There's a hand scanner he talked about, but it wasn't about three fingers. No, the hand scanner was at, um, um, uh, Los Alamos. I typed in bobbles are UFO three fingers. AI says he's claims have nothing to do with aliens. What did he say, uh, the controls for the vehicle? Because it was like mental, or something about putting your hands on something. Believe there's something. Element 115. Didn't it say something about controls like that their, what did the inside of the craft look like inside of craft? So that's Jeremy Corbel. I can skip through that. Out on. Okay. God, I want to say that they had three fingers. That would be wild. I'll be fucking insane. Cause they're tiny. They have three fingers. That's these things. He said the seats were very small. Yeah. Yeah. There's supposed like three feet tall or four feet tall. That's these things. There you get. That's these things. Yeah. And they're in the cave art. It looks like they're flying. It's like hard to say because it's on caves or whatever. I want to see that. Yeah. Yeah. There's, yeah, you can do trideact old cave art. God, how weird. And how old is this cave art? I think it states to the nascap period. So around that time. Let's look at that first. He did trideact old cave art. How weird. It's also fucking weird. Yeah. It's so weird. It's so weird. It's because it's almost almost like reality's fucking with you. Yeah. It is. It is. And you have like the Amazon is there's probably one in my doc Jamie that I sent you. There's three. Yeah. Whoa. Three fingers and three toes. That's crazy. Textile fragments. Wow. It's like a 1,000 AD. Whoa. Three fingers, three toes, big crazy head, weird eyes. How fucking strange, man. There's so much we don't know. And everyone's scared of being ridiculous. I know. You know, everyone's scared. This is one of the great things about what you do and what I do is we don't have to worry about being ridiculous. Totally. Because we just are. Yeah. And we don't have to be like, we have credentials. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. It's be normal about being taken seriously. Yeah. Because so many people do worry about it and they don't want to stick their neck out. But when you see something like this, the three fingers, three toes artwork from a thousand fucking years ago. Yeah. And it looks really weird. And then you see these things. You're like, hey, is that real? Totally. And discoveries require boldness. They require like just going for it. And it's, yeah, it's this like kind of nitpicky credentialism of like, I can't say anything other than the establishment. What is your incremental addition then to human knowledge? Right. And when faced with undeniable evidence, will you relent? Will you give in? Will you just like, will you just like dig your heels in forever and claim bullshit to the, to your driving face? The earth like, what's going on with Egypt? You know, like, you know, when I had Zahi Hawasan and he's just completely unwilling to look at that. What is it? Tomography? The data that shows that there might be something underneath the pyramid. Right. Is this bullshit? Is it a sure? Yeah. How do you know? You don't even understand the science? No, can you possibly know? No first principles arguments. Right. It's just no, it can't be or whatever. And like, oh, so you're, it's politics. It's a science is supposed to be the most immune from politics. And it's the most political that it is when you find that out. So disappointing. It's so disillusioned. Totally. And then when you have these scientists, they're like dismissed people and they immediately start using. Ter, look at this one. That's so wild. Whatever that thing is around it has a like one arm with three and then one arm with three, one foot with three and one foot with three. Wow. What is that supposed to be representing? Two heads. I don't know. There's a couple other things on the other page. Two heads to cats. Maybe two heads, but no eyes. How weird is that? Like, what is that big eye when I hear when I hear it? To eyes and eyes. Or maybe that's it inside something that it controls. You know what I'm saying? Little sports model. Right. What's showing the fingers, meaning like the fingers or what operates this thing. You're at a lot of you seeing. Yeah. This is so not. It's so great. All three fingers. Like, what are the fucking odds of that? Yeah. Yeah. What are the odds of this is a thousand years old, these images and these textiles. And then you find this stuff. Totally. Like, what? It's in the mythology. Right. What the fuck is going on? No. No. It's so frustrating, Jesse. I'm with the man. And the Amazon is the size of the Indian subcontinent. And we have to like, light our it and right under state, we're finding cities every day. Right. We need to do the research. Yeah. We do. We do. Look at more of these. More three finger ones. God. So weird. Yeah. So weird. Like almost that weird bird that we looked at the other day with Luke. Yeah. It does. Thing that was on a petri glove. Yeah. And Luke who hopefully will be an amazing guest on your show. He's been on. I know. He was amazing. He's fantastic. He was so good. He he will say like he's been everywhere, right? And like he's always like Peru is the weirdest place. I always go. Really. So. Yeah. Well, dude, thank you so much for coming in. I fucking love your show. It's so good. It's excellent. American alchemy. It's on YouTube. Is it just Jesse Michaels on YouTube? Like, how do they find the channel? Jesse Michaels on YouTube. I have a WAP, which is where we it's called WHO pizza. Amazing place where we facilitate discussions about cool science and frontier stuff. I don't know. I don't sleep. I don't sleep. I'm sore because your stuff is really well produced. He must it must take an enormous amount of time to edit all that. Honestly, I'm burnt out. Listen, I'm glad you're doing it. I really appreciate you. I appreciate you. Everybody go watch it. Go check out the channel. It's fantastic. If you want to find you on social media, what is your by social media? Jesse Michaels official on Instagram. How do me American? No, hey, thank you. This is a vein of my existence. Yeah. I'm sure. I'll call back in the day. All right. Well, thank you so much. It was fun. I'm sure I'll get some diamond more shit's going to come out. Hopefully, let's do it. I'll pass it. Thank you. Bye, everybody.