The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day So what possessed you to write a book about getting hammered? It's a really good question Like my colleagues are are flabbergasted when they see the topic So my day jobs early Chinese philosophy and I do comparative religion and then write this book on alcohol It actually it grows organically out of work. I've done before so my My specialties early Chinese philosophy my early work focused on this idea in early China of Translate his effortless action a word is way It literally means no doing or not trying but it's this it's a spontaneous It's kind of like being in the zone in sports. So it's a state where you lose the sense of yourself as an agent You feel like everything's just happening. You're making effort and yet everything works perfectly you solve problems people like you everything works out and The early Chinese thinkers want to get you into this state of way But they had this problem that I call a paradox of way, which is how do you try not to try? You you want to be spontaneous You're not being spontaneous. How do you get from A to B and All of when I argue in my dissertation is that all of early Chinese philosophy is this series of attempts to solve the paradox and No one does it because it's a genuine paradox and so I revisit my first general audience book is called trying not to try and It's about this tension and I walk people through the various strategies that the early Chinese came up with But none of them really can be a hundred percent effective because what's happening when you're trying not to try cognitively You're activating the part of your brain that you want to shut down Mmm, it's Dan Wagner the social psychologist talked about that what called the white bear problem So if I say don't think of a white bear you think of a white bear because I've just activated that concept in your brain if you are If you're a stand-up comedian and you're choking like your everything's falling flat the audience is turning ugly You're getting nervous and part of your brains like just relax just do your stuff be funny How do you how do you be funny if you're not feeling funny? How do you force yourself to do that? And so this is a real tension and I that that's what my previous work focused on But there is a story in one of these texts this Dallas text where Drongs of this early Dallas thinker compares the person who's in way to someone who's drunk They kind of lose a sense of itself. No, relax. They can bump into things and not harm themselves And it's clear that that text is just a metaphor for the spiritual state Tongs that want you to get into but I think that Story made me start thinking about how cultures might use alcohol as a technology For getting around this paradox of a way You want to be spontaneous you want to be relaxed You want to just be loose but thinking about it's not going to get you there Yeah, alcohol is a way to kind of directly reach into your brain and just turn down your prefrontal cortex a little bit So you can relax and so that's what started me thinking about alcohol as a as a cultural technology to enhance spontaneity and It has to be modulated correctly. That's the thing about alcohol, right? One of the things about alcohol is When you are when you start drinking the moment you start to lose your inhibitions You also lose the inhibition to drink to yeah, it's a problem. That's why alcohol is super dangerous Especially that kind of alcohol distilled liquor super dangerous Buffalo trays. I feel like we should have a drink I think it would be like mess. We have to To drink That's nice we do in a podcast about drinking. Yeah, sounds we should have at least a small So the historically there's been a safety feature built-in to alcohol so for most we've been drinking Thank you cheers. Yeah Yeah, that's nice. I'll start your Monday morning. I'll start your Monday is a way to start your day morning. Yeah So this stuff is new so having alcohol that's this strong is something we've only had for a couple hundred years Real yeah, so a lot of people don't realize that so for most of our history. We've been drinking like two to three percent beers Great a three percent. Yeah, that's it historically. It's typically what beers came in at Great wines you could get up to like eight to ten, but there's a built-in limit to natural fermentation so The yeast are turning sugars and alcohol which is a poison So they're the yeast are slowly poisoning themselves basically and we've bred these super hearty yeast So like nowadays you can get an Australian serop to like 16 percent A B V Wow which is hot historically really unprecedented, but that's as high as you can get because then the alcohol shuts down the yeast But away around that is distillation so you heat you take that wine You heat it up Ethanol is really volatile so that comes off first and if you could figure out how to capture that vapor and turn it back into a liquid You've got this you've got really concentrated alcohol. Do they do that with wine? They do it with wine or they take they'll take something that's naturally fermented So a weak beer or wine and then they distill it and what do they call that when they get it on the other end? Distilled liquor that's what liquor is. Oh case. It's just a kind of liquor. Yeah So liquor liquor or spirits refers to something that's been distilled So you've basically extracted the alcohol out of the mixture and made it into a pure form and Once you do that you've got like 90 you can get like some vodka's could be like 90 something percent ABV so that's crazy Strong it's just really we're not equipped to so that what you're talking about You know this it needs to be modulated It was always modulated historically by the fact that we were drinking beers that weren't very strong so there's gonna be just Volume limit to how much you can consume is also modulated by social stuff so we're drinking typically historically in a communal situation Where there's really clear ritual restrictions on drinking so you only drink would so it makes it toast You're you're modulating your drinking with other people and even you know you think about just even in a pub You don't just drink as much as you want you order rounds Right and if you down your your beer real fast you got to wait until everyone else is ready to order another around So we socially regulate our drinking and then it's been regulated by it's inherent weakness if you want to think of it that way But then all of a sudden you get this kind of stuff you get really strong liquors and and you can have that in your house That's when alcohol gets really dangerous It's only been the last couple hundred years. Yeah distilled liquors weren't because the the concepts really simple are Aristotle described Distillation but technologically it's really hard to do because you got to be able you have to have metawurgy You need to be able to keep liquids and keep medicine temperature that makes their pressure It's really it's actually kind of a day so prohibition when people created stills at home It was like early 20th century version of meth labs You know because of like splitting people are like getting scalded with hot liquid because it's really is dangerous So it's hard to do so we only mastered it um I mean, I'm telling an evolutionary story so my story begins 10 million years ago with primate ancestors who adapted to alcohol and just so 10 million years ago about 20 thousand years ago to 13 thousand years ago we start making alcohol Seriously not just relying on fruit line around that has some alcohol in it and then distillation happens Probably around 1300s in China and 15 1600s in Europe So that sounds like a long time ago, but really evolutionarily. It's yesterday We just we really haven't had time Culturally or genetically to adapt to access to this kind of alcohol and a long time ago when people were drinking beer and Drinking wine in particular like a lot of what they were doing like if they were carrying it around with them They would carry beer or wine When they were going on trips because it didn't go bad the way water would right Beer unhopped beer. It goes bad pretty quickly A couple days a couple days. Yeah There's a theory that beer might have been useful in some cultures because it pure Fermenting water purifies the water So you've got bad water from a pond or something like that and you ferment it and make beer out of it. Yeah Yeah, yeah, so that's one of the story I mean the purpose of my book is to try to explain the puzzle of why we do this Why do we put poisons into our body? Why do we like to drink? And it's mysterious because it's so it's really costly. It's damaging physiologically It's got all these social potential social problems and yet we've been doing it forever We've been making and drinking alcohol for just about as long as we've been doing anything in an organized fashion In fact, we the it's looking likely that we were doing this before agriculture And that it's possible that the the desire to make beer and wine is what motivated culture So hunter gatherers hunter gatherers were making beer before they had agriculture real yeah, and There's the making clay pots and yeah, there's you know, they're pounding the stuff They're multing it to up the sugar content I think that's the effect of that and then they're fermenting it and so we have these sites like and and what's President day turkey the site called go black a tep bay is this really cool ritual site. It's These huge stone. Have you seen pictures of them? Yeah, I'm super familiar with it because of Graham Hancock Who's gonna podcast multiple times? Okay? obsessed with ancient civilizations and that is sort of the rosetta stone of ancient civilizations because It's at least 12,000 years old and the thought process was at that point in time No one could build the kind of structures that those people built so when they did it it's sort of it lent Credence to some of his theories that civilization has gone through multiple periods of Ascension and then resets usually through catastrophic disasters like asteroid impacts so his theory It's not really just his theories the younger driest impact theory. Okay, and the younger driest impact theory It's pointing to the end of the ice age which coincides with real proof of impacts on earth in the sense of They take soil samples and when they go down to the same amount of time where the ice age ended they find with this the stuff called It's called nuclear glass or tri-night and this stuff it it occurs at blast sites where they test nuclear weapons But it also occurs at asteroid impact sites. Okay, and they find it all over the place at around 12,000 South 12,000 ish years ago and so this theory is That at the end of the ice age what it happened was we pass through an area in our solar system That is rich with comments. Okay, and then we were hit And that it literally restart civilization killed off a mass of amount of people stopped Civilizations then it's dead in its tracks and then there's a period of rebuilding So it's go black eight tech bay Go back retell his a rebuilding. No back. Go back. They don't know right? It's it's all speculation because go back Le Tepay was for sure covered on purpose. Yeah, somewhere around 12,000 years ago That doesn't indicate how long ago before then it was built right, but what they do know is it was made with some pretty sophisticated methods because a lot of the carvings were three-dimensional instead of carved into the stone The stone around it was carved away right to leave and there's also like animals in it that aren't even supposed to be from that part of the world Okay, they find that pretty fascinating about that. Yeah, there's a pretty cool shit to it and it's huge You know, they're only uncovered. I think like 10% of it so far. It's a cool site So the the role it plays in my story is that you They're hunter-gatherers the people have built this place They used to think that but they're not necessarily sure of that. This is the theory. Okay, I'm Hancock is proposing all right He believes that civilization so they were like they had full on agriculture and they were this is just Completely theoretical all right because and and very disputed Okay, because you're dealing with You know, it's like so long ago. It's hard like what what evidence is there? This is always the evidence against something like go back to the topic Where's the evidence of sophisticated structures 12,000 years ago? Yeah, and then finally they found go backly tepay So now they're like, okay, well now we have evidence of sophisticated structures 12,000 years ago Which should have been built according to our timeline by hunter-gatherers but um they are they're they're resisting that and they're thinking this younger dries impact theory may indicate That there was something that happened that you know if you look at Egypt There's clearly more than one era of building Styles mmm-hmm. There's like an old kingdom style and you can a lot of the old stuff is like deep under the sand when they're finding it and It's their position that a lot of this stuff is thousands of years older than the pyramids. Okay So my my understanding of the site is that it was a hundred of the hunter-gatherers There's no grain storage locations they were clearly gathering they were coming from all over and they were gathering at this site To build so they were working to you know erect these pillars and stuff and they were having blowout feasts So they have all this these remnants of feasting and they have these big vats that almost certainly contained Beer and possibly hallucinogen place beer so a lot of early so these hunter-gatherers They weren't growing the hops or whatever they made the beer out of they were just finding it wild They're making it out of wild grains, but the argument so the standard story about alcohol is We invent agriculture Then sometime after that We note that you know so when these are sourdoughs starter out too long and it starts turning to beer and they're like oh It's actually tastes all right. That's the standard story. So we had agriculture and then we get alcohol Around the 1950s or so some archaeologists started to argue You know sites like this one and other sites around the world suggests that hunter-gatherers were gathering and making alcohol before Agriculture and so this is the beer before bread hypothesis Is that crazy is that what motivated people to settle down and start focusing on making these grains more productive? Was they wanted to get high not because they wanted to make bread and it's it jives You see the same pattern in other parts of the world so in South America They make this beer like substance chicha Out of now they make it out of maize out of corn But they used to make it out of the ancient the wild ancestor of corn is called taiosinte And what's interesting is taiosinte Sucks for making grain like if your goal was to make tortillas You wouldn't even notice this plant because the grains don't make very good grain products to eat But it makes great beer is really good for making chicha So this plant if these early people were looking for something to make food with they would overlook this plant But if they were looking for something to make beer with they would focus on it cultivate it start making it produce bigger Grains and that's how you would get corn That's like what was the do they do we know what the original thing that they got high with was Well, we have like uh like the The you know the first the atom Yeah, yeah, I mean certainly we're getting a little bit drunk on just naturally fermenting fruit So that you know fruit falls on the ground It starts to rot what the rotting is is some of it's being turned into alcohol by yeast And so clear it's easy to discover alcohol because it's happening naturally in our environment all the time The earliest evidence of deliberately produced alcohol is from about 13,000 years ago So a little bit before a cochopiclet type bay And this is in modern day Israel they have traces of beer productions of people are clearly fermenting beer Are you aware of Brian Murrow-Rescu's work? No, he wrote a book called the immortality key and it's all about ancient Greece and the illucinian mysteries and he has proven through examination of these vessels that they used to carry their wine in That the wine was laced with ergot. Yeah. Yeah, so they were they were trapped in her That's just theory. Yeah, they were adding psychedelic compounds to their wine So they were they were doing these things where they would have these ceremonies where everybody would get together and they would I mean And this is where they figured out democracy they saw Get a lot of new ideas. Yeah, and they're doing hallucinage That's very common So in in Europe a lot of the beers were clearly mixed with hallucinogens. Yeah, he talks about beer as well And I think these the golden triangle it's called this region in Turkey, you know around 12,000 years ago. There's a There's a carving from a site near Gobuck a type bay That has a picture. It's a carving of to a human Dancing with these two dancing turtles. Wow, and It's hard to imagine seeing that on two to three percent Beer, right? You have to have this got to be something else going on Right, right And so I think it's likely that they were lacing their beer with hallucinogens. It's really common thing to do all probably eating mushrooms too They're possibly eating mushrooms as well. Yeah That's why turtles wonder why is that like that look at this. Oh, yeah, there it is. Yeah, it's great Yeah, yeah, yeah, stand some with turtles. So do you does that look like people on two to three percent beer? It doesn't it looks like something my kid would make when she was four Okay, and so also I mean what and toxic hints are doing to you is returning you to a state of a four-year-old so Do we know how old this is? That's around it's around I think 12,000 years ago now now when did they you know What's that wacky theater theory that the earth is suspended by turtles? The bay turtles all the way down. Yeah, I don't know if they had a mythology like that So yeah, that's interesting like go back and look look right there scroll down Jamie Down no no no other way. Yeah that in that image off the go with the cat Yeah, that right there. That's one of those go backly tippy things as a three-dimensional image that's cool carved into the Stone or taking the stone all around it to leave it there. That's super sophisticated stuff for 12,000 years ago Yeah, so my argument is this is why people settled down originally I mean so Civilization comes from intoxication 100 gatherers who were living in these small bands wandering around We're motivated to come together and settle down and start getting organized about growing stuff Because they wanted to produce the stuff that was gonna mess them up so they could have these kind of ceremonies I guess that makes sense if you think about Like their everyday existence being like very difficult, right? You just try to find food you get food you eat it You try to keep neighboring tribes from coming in stealing that food. Yeah, and then you bond through these hallucinogenic experiences or these Alcohol experiences or yeah, any altered state right? Also, it's doing a lot of different things for you. It's it's helping with creativity So one of the functions of alcohol and hallucinogens is it's you mentioned for your old So there's good work on creativity and development by Allison Gopnik because the child psychologist at child development also like college is it Berkeley and She's got this great task where you've got it you have to figure out this really counterintuitive problem And she's got a graph that I reproduce in the book of how people do on it as the age and so four-year-olds are awesome I think solve it right away and it just goes down and align until adults are really bad at it and What I do in the book is lay that on top of Chart showing the development of the prefrontal cortex. So it's part of your brain the prefrontal cortex Is it really important? It's in charge of Self-control cognitive control executive function. It's what allows you to stay focused on a task It's what allows you to not meander in a conversation and I actually say focus what you're talking about But it's it's an enemy of creativity for one thing So it seems to interfere with your ability to think out of the box or think laterally Doesn't this also coincide though with responsibilities in life? Yeah. Yeah. Well at the timeline Well, it's the other I mean in a way it's the other way around So you get more responsibilities because you can handle them because you actually have a prefrontal cortex But is that really what's going on or is it just that you actually have a family and you have to feed them? And then you have these primal responsibilities that sort of rise up that force you to think much more pragmatically I mean what came first a chicken of the egg right? I think they're happening. They're co-happeting So it's developing the way it's developing because evolution has a problem. It needs to solve The prefrontal cortex is the enemy of spontaneity. It's the enemy of creativity It's the enemy of kind of childlike trust. You know, you see kids Just walk up to stranger in the airport and be like hey, do you want to meet my stuffed animal? Kids or just they're open right? That's a good trait for some things but kids also Can't tie their freaking shoes and get to school in the morning right? And so we there's this tension evolution wants us to be able to take care of our families and do our jobs and get food And so its solution essentially is to give us this really extended childhood So we have this long period where we're just gradually building our prefrontal cortex And that allows us to be open to make ties to other people to learn from our culture to learn language We have all these skills we need to learn and then right around kind of mid-tway It's like 24 or 25 is when you're you finally finish developing your PFC And that's around the time when you have to start being hyper responsible And so it seems like a good solution for evolution to do that The problem is once you've got that fully developed PFC You've lost a lot of these childlike traits So you've lost your ability to trust people implicitly You've lost your ability to be creative as as God makes work shows And so it would be awesome if you could be a grown up and have a PFC and be able to get to work on time and do everything you need to do But you had a way to temporarily Be like a child again for a few hours And This is how you do it, right? It's basically a cultural technology for temporarily turning down your prefrontal cortex So you can be like a four-year-old for a little bit That explains comedians That explains comedians I mean it's central to combat I mean it's gotta be the case Do you use you must use alcohol? Yeah, right? Yeah, I like a little bit of alcohol and a little bit of marijuana mix together It's good for writing. It's also good for performing You know, it's like don't give a fucks off Yeah, I go up there and be loose So you do that before you go out? Yeah, I like to have a shot And a smoke a little weed Yeah, yeah The first time I ever lectured to a big crowd I was a grad student And I had to cover for my professor and lectured to like 150 people in this auditorium Just go to the shadow of me And I was a waiter. I worked in a service industry in San Francisco And I was um Fitter-shook up a shift having to drink at the bar with a bartender And told him, yeah, I gotta go do this lecture tomorrow I'm really nervous about it And he was like, dude, bring a flask into a shot before you go out there And I was like, it's well, it's 10 30 in the morning And he was like, do it, it doesn't matter, just do it And I'm dating myself here, you're old enough to remember this Remember with film photography You had this little plastic thing, did you have film in? I filled one of those with vodka And put it in my backpack And right before I went out, I did a shot of vodka And just as I was starting the lecture, that's the hardest part Like you stand up there, 150 people They get quiet, they all look at you And you need to start talking and saying something that's compelling That's usually when you choke and freeze up But right around that time, the vodka was hit in my brain And I was like, this kind of mellow relaxation was spreading through my body And it got me through that initial nervousness Until, you know, about a time it started to wear off I was into my lecture, I knew the material It was just getting over that hump And so people use alcohol in this way, right? To get over stage fright To get over, that's why people have drinks on first dates Right, you know, you're meeting someone, it's a little awkward You want to be relaxed and funny But how do you try to be relaxed and funny? Yeah, a couple drinks helps with that, right? It relaxes, it turns down the prefrontal cortex It's alcohol is doing a lot of things at the same time It's turning down your prefrontal cortex It's making you feel better, so it's boosting serotonin and endorphins It's making you feel People who are drunk think they're more attractive And they see other people as more attractive So the beer goggles thing is true, you actually rate other people as more attractive When you're a little bit drunk You're feeling connected with them So there's actually some good experimental evidence That people who get people drinking together in small groups And they just start to like each other more and feel like, oh, we're really a team And I like these people I'm hanging out with So it's a tool for getting We're primates We're our nature is to be kind of selfish and suspicious And hostile Like if you took, I've never met either of you guys And if we were chimpanzees and someone just threw three chimpanzees into a room together You know, one of us would walk out maybe And there'd just be blood left It would just if we would tear each other apart But humans solve this problem all the time I sat on an airplane coming here with a whole bunch of other people We all sat in our seats, behaved ourselves So how's that going to be the southwest flight I wasn't in the southwest flight Yeah, yeah, no, why's that they got How do you get primates? So the way we cooperate in large-scale societies we look more like social insects We look more like kind of ants or bees And yet we're not ants or bees or primates And so there's this trick of getting primates to cooperate in this ultra-cooperative way And the argument in the book is alcohol is one of the tools we've used to do that What do you say about sober people that are also very cooperative? What techniques are they using if they're not using alcohol? There's a lot of ways you can get into these kind of states So you can use exercise You can use meditation Meditation can do it You can use breathing exercises Right, you can do extreme breathing You can stay up all night So religious traditions that for various reasons Decide they don't want to use chemical And toxicants usually substitute some other way to do it I like that you said stay up all night Because I used to be on the sitcom called news radio and the writers They had that strategy Amazing show because the writing was so good But the way they wrote it was so nuts They were a bunch of young really smart guys who were kind of crazy And they would stay up until like four o'clock in the morning playing video games And then start writing That's crazy So sometimes we would show up You know like maybe called time would be 9 or 10 a.m. And they were just done with like the first draft of scene one Yeah, you know And we're like what are you guys doing? Like they were all fucked up and their hair was a mess They were barefoot They were animals But they it was a strategy Yeah The strategy is to get over tired and really really silly And then they would come up with some of the most preposterous scenarios for And hardly enough They weren't getting high These people were getting high of that way Yeah, no, you can do it through sleep deprivation That's it Yeah Literally how they did it on purpose Which I'd never heard of before But then once they told me about it I was like well that does make sense because when I'm loopy You know, it's like I'm hanging out with my friends that have been up like in its four o'clock in the morning We just laugh at anything Yeah, you don't get me shitting in silver And that's that's the PFC being shut off playground monitors Right, playground monitor Interesting Yeah Yeah, you want to get rid of that playground monitor if you want certain types of things to happen Exercise We were talking about that earlier that that seems to have some sort of an effect Where do that playground monitor if you want certain types of things to happen? Um, exercise, uh, we were talking about that earlier that that seems to have some sort of an effect that's similar. Like that's where runners are coming from, right? Yeah. So, you know, extreme, like if you're running, doing any kind of extreme exercise at a certain point, your body is like we don't need the prefrontal cortex any prefrontal cortex is really expensive. Oregon, it's a lot of it's sucking up a lot of energy from your body. And so at a certain point, you're like we don't need the prefrontal cortex anymore. So it gets turned down by your body because you need to send it to your lungs and your heart and your muscles. So how do we know how much energy it's using specifically? Um, you can look at, um, kind of fMRI studies. You get a sense of how much blood flow is going through the brain, let's say. Um, and you get a sense, it's a proxy then for how much energy it's using because that blood's delivering nutrients to it, right? So they've done fMRI's on people that are really tired and loopy and you can see it shut off. Yeah. So that's interesting. I'm trying to think the guy who's done work on runners high is called RNA D trick. And I'm trying to remember now if he was putting, I don't know how he would get people, maybe he would stress them physiologically and then stick them in an fMRI machine. But he talks about what he calls hypofrontality. So it's a state where your prefrontal cortex is shutting down in response to physiological stress. And I don't remember now how he was getting that measurement. Me and my friends, uh, a few years back did, uh, this, we do this thing every year. We do sober October. So the whole month of October, we don't do anything. No drinking, no drugs at all. No, no drugs at all. Um, we're allowed to smoke cigars though, which me and Ari both of you is kind of cheating. It's kind of cheating. But not enough that it's a drink caffeine. Yes, you're a drink coffee. All right. You just can't get fucked up, right? Which as a comedian, you know, yeah, that's hard. Well, it's normal. It's, it's not hard. That's really, but here's the point. One year we had a fitness challenge. And when we had this fitness challenge, we were using this thing called my zone. It's a heart strap that works with an app and it measures how much time you are, uh, in what percentage of your max heart rate. So how much time you are at 80% max heart rate, it'll, it puts you in the yellow zone and then you rack up points for every minute that you're in this, this state. And we did this competition where we were competing against each other. So like, I would wake up in the morning and I'd be like, shit, Ari got 600 points last night and oh, my God, Burke got 600. That must be a motivating. Yeah, it was crazy. So we were, we were just all day, like one day I did seven hours of cardio in a day. It was crazy. Yeah, I just decided to just bury everybody. I watched all these movies. But the point is that the feeling that you get when you do that is incredible in terms like like how much you don't give a fuck. You're so relaxed and calm. And my friend Tom Seger was saying the same thing. He's like, man, it cuts all the chatter down. Yeah, when you do that, you like get rid of the chatter. But it cuts it all down where you like really calm. And it's I was always trying to figure out like, is it because you're so tired that you don't have time for nonsense? It's for like, is your brain like, are you occupying your mind with nonsensical concerns and worries and anxiety? Is that a function of the fact that you don't have enough real threat and real struggle in your life? And is doing something that's incredibly physically struggling like seven hours on the elliptical machine? Yeah. Like that's so taxing. Yeah. That when it's over, your body doesn't have any time for any stupid nonsense. Like, you're not trying to worry about your, you know, you're not worrying about it like an email that you sent was a long time ago. You know what I mean? Like, you know, the kind of things that sit at the store. I don't work out for a few days. I second guess every single day. I do like it crazy too. I've got a wrestle in high school and just got in the habit of weightlifting as a wrestler. And if I don't do it, I get really weird. Like I get really cranky. And it's true, I start thinking too much. Yeah. And I get the same. If I do a really good workout, I get that feeling of kind of not giving a fuck. 100% that's 100% relaxing. I wrestle in high school as well, but only one season. But what I did do for many years is Jiu Jitsu and it's still do. And Jiu Jitsu gives me that feeling. Yeah. Jiu Jitsu, when I'm done with a hard Jiu Jitsu session, first of all, I am so friendly. I'm a super nice person. I'm so friendly when I'm done to Jiu Jitsu. I love everybody. I love everybody. I don't have any aggression. And I wonder if it's the human, this is my theory and obviously I haven't studied this. These are just guesses. But you know, without really understanding the whole neuroscience behind it, I've always felt like that the human body has certain physical requirements. And we don't meet those physical requirements. Your body starts coming up with problems that don't really exist. So it's like, if you don't have problems in your life, your body creates those problems for you. So what I, the way I always like to point out to people is like, I make my own problems. They're all, they're bullshit. Yeah, they're not real. But like, like if I, like, one of the things I like to do is hit a bag, like hit a heavy bag. And I have the one of them, uh, electronic timers. It sinks up with your phone. And I, I set it for like 15, three minute rounds. Oh, I use that for sprinting. Yeah. So I do sprinting. Like I do like really intense sprinting. I hate running. Like law and distance running is boring as hell. But sprinting is awesome. Brahm distance running is boring as hell. But if you can do cardio in front of a TV, this is the secret. Our fear of being this out when we're doing the soaprock to overthink. All right. He's like watch movies. You watch movies and two hours is gone before you know it. If it's like a really good movie, right. Because like, especially if you have headsets on, because you're like completely engulfed in the film and you're watching it and you don't barely even realize. But you get the same effect by sprinting really hard. Oh, yeah, no, for sure. And I'd rather just do that. Oh, yeah, listen, I'm a big fan of Tabadas. Yeah, that's what I use. Yeah, I love those. Those are great. That's a great way to build real usable cardio. Yeah, I mean, it's amazing. But the point about the like distracting the mind with something else, while you're doing it makes, that's what music does, right? If you hear a great song while you're running, I swear you can run faster. Oh, no, absolutely. I have special music that I actually only use it for workout because I don't want to fuck it up. But you don't want to waste it, right? Because if you listen to it and you're not working, I can't use to it. And it's kind of not as so I save it. I have special music that I only allow myself to listen to when I'm working out. So yeah, well, I'm lucky that I have a lot of music like that. I don't have to worry about wearing it out of it. But the other some songs like like Aussie Osborne, like Crazy Train, crazy train, something like that song, you know, and any Wu Tang clan song. Yeah, so music's doing that too, right? It's taking you. Yeah. So there's a Greek term, so the word ecstasy comes from Greek, extasis, getting out of yourself. And there's something humans, humans crave it. Humans really like the experience of getting out of their own heads. Yeah. And either getting absorbed is something bigger than them or just almost oblivion, right? We're not thinking about anything. And it's beyond the just functional. So I'm arguing in the book that intoxication has all these social functions. So it, you know, makes us more creative. It makes us more trusting, helps us to solve these cooperation dilemmas, which is why people who, you know, you're, I want to make it treaty with you or I want to sign a business deal. I'm not going to just talk to you on the phone. I'm going to come to where you are in person and we're going to drink. And only then am I going to trust you. So people use alcohol that way. But there are lots of other ways to do it. And you can, you can use music, you can use dance, but you know, keep parrot. You're talking about the treadmill, did it treadmill for 12 hours? That could, that works. Staying up, you know, religious traditions that have you stay up all night, dancing and singing, hymns. That's another way to do it. But you can also just sit in a really comfortable chair and drink this. And so there's a reason people use alcohol because it's just easy. It's just like having some doing it other ways. And so there's something to this chemical path that's always been appealing for people. Turns back in I had a great story that he would tell about this monk who practiced a city of levitation for decades. So you know, that is it's like a meditation, like it was concentrating on levitating. And so he practiced this for decades. And then the Buddha came to town and he said, I have practiced a city of levitation. And now I can walk on water. And the Buddha says, yeah, but the fair is only a nickel. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And they serve beer in the fair. So why don't you just fucking do that? Like that has always been the argument about enlightenment. Like you can, can you achieve enlightenment through meditation and all these different things? Yes, I mean, well, whatever night means, you can achieve a state of elevated consciousness. Let's put it that way because the term enlightenment to me always, um, it always sounds like you're done. Yeah, right. Don't think you're done. No, you're not done. But you can change, you can get into an altered state. Yeah, you through meditation and elevated level of consciousness. That can be achieved. But there's ways to help that along. And you can help that along. There's stuff that people figured out. You know, it's like you don't have to chop a tree with a knife. You know, they feel like accidents. Yeah, yeah. And the reason why is because like they're like, hey, this time's got to be better than this fucking knife. Yeah, it's huge. I'm working on it for a month. Yeah. And so you mix in a little bit of alcohol to a lot of these other things and they work better. Yeah. So religious traditions, use intoxicants. They're doing, they're doing the dancing and the singing and all that stuff. Right. They're moving in synchrony. They're chanting all that's great. But they're also slowly turning down the prefrontal cortex with chemicals. Yeah. And it's interesting. I mean, this is one of the arguments I have in the book is that we've ignored this function because there's this kind of weird, pure, tannical discomfort with chemical intoxication. So what do you think that comes from? I don't know. It's this weird kind of distrust of pleasure that baffles me. But I have a theorem that what's your theory? I think it comes from the idea that some people are not going to chip in and do the work that needs to be done because if you're in a tribe of 150 people or so, everyone has a crucial role. And if you're a person that likes to lay around and get drunk and fuck off, you're not going to be the person that gets up and gathers food or hunts the food and you're going to be a non contributor or you're not going to contribute your part. So we think of people that engage in these frivolous activities, not just normal, like, you know, not ritual things where everybody does it together, but normal frivolous activity. Like it's a part of a normal everyday life for you. You're not going to be as productive. Yeah. It's also, I mean, getting intoxicated alone is historically really weird. We've never done that. We always do the chores. It's all good song. Yeah. I know. Well, that's the reason that so effective is because it's weird. Right. So I drink alone. This is the guy who also wrote bad to the bone. It's if you drink alone, there's something a little bit off about you. We have nobody else. Right. This is weird. People are suspicious of that. Cultures are suspicious of people who drink alone. So I always do it and company with others. Yeah. But I think part, I mean, part of the reason we're suspicious of pleasure is mind body dualism. So we, we have this kind of sense that if I want to get into a great state of mind, relaxed, open, friendly, loving people, if I do it through meditation, if I meditate for 10 hours and get there, everyone's like, that's awesome. That's a wonderful thing to do. Even if I do it through exercise, I feel like there's a sense that, okay, that's all right. But there's something about using, I think we have a feeling that using a chemical to directly change your brain is cheating. And so there's this, there's, Eliata was this famous religious studies scholar who wrote a lot on mysticism. And he talks about these mystical states of ecstasy where people are feeling outside of themselves, no self, you know, one with the universe. And he grudgingly admits at one point that, yeah, sure, some of them may have been using chemical substances. But that's just a vulgar way to attain spirituality. And it's this kind of prejudice to get, in a way, it kind of prejudice against the body. The idea that you could be using chemicals to get to a state seems to us like cheating. Well, it's kind of a foolish notion, right, because everything is chemical. Everything is chemical. All your food is essentially in some way or form. It's broken down to chemicals or it's coming in as chemicals. Yeah. You know, it's not turtles all the way down. It's chemicals all the way down. Everybody's chemical factor. Yeah. And that's the crazy thing about music, right? Like a great song. You know, you hear Azzajos born, like if that's your jam, you're, you're adrenaline rises. Yeah. Right? You get goosebumps. Sometimes you hear a song when you're on the radio and you're like, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Not the radio, the fuck was in the studio. Jamie, Jamie, Jamie, Jamie, I'm only a three in a political talk. Yeah. But like, but that's all physical. Yeah. So they're sound waves that are being transmitted into your hair. That's making something vibrate. That's driving signals. So it's all drugs. It's all drugs. It's all drugs. Yeah. And so I have a quote from Aldous Huxley where he's talking about this prejudice. You know, we have this, you know, people look down at chemical means of attaining ecstasy, but it's chemicals all the way down. It's all chemicals. And so whether you do it through meditation or, you know, breathing exercises or whatever, it's all physical. I think our problem is by not acknowledging that we don't recognize that there's not just strategies, but there's methods where you you do it correctly. There's one of the good things about alcohol. Like we've had a drink, right? We had a drink and we have a second drink. And we both know what that means. We've wasted ourselves. Right. Yeah. We're pasting ourselves. Right. Right now we're doing. Okay. So, but we both know how much that is like a drink of whiskey is, you know, okay, that's one shot in this. Yeah. Okay. I know exactly. We're modulating correctly. And the, by the thing about recognizing the correct doses, just for all these different things, is we have a roadmap. And that's one of the problems with the illegality of certain drugs. Yeah. You know, and it's like, it's always been a really big problem with in Los Angeles, with marijuana, because it's the Wild West there. Especially with edibles. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, edibles are bad. So what do I argue in? In a book is at the, I call alcohol the king of intoxicants. So there are other ways you can do it. You can do it. You can do it with cava, which is this intoxicant drink they drink in the Pacific. What's special about alcohol is that it's easy to dose like you're saying. You know, so it's easy to dose. You know how much you're getting. Yeah. The cognitive effects are similar across individuals. So it does kind of the same thing to different people. Whereas cannabis is really like, I can't, I've been my whole life. I, you know, I spent my twenties in San Francisco, Aaron spoke a pot. When I smoke cannabis, it, I get briefly really paranoid. And then I get horny for about like two minutes. And then I, and then I fall asleep. Catch it. Catch me. Catch me in those two minutes. I have a great time. But that's it. And then I fall asleep. Like at all I want to do is go to sleep. And so and everyone's been like, oh, you have an ad, you have an ad, you have an ad, the right strain. It's bullshit. Like every strain of cannabis affects me that way. Well, I definitely think there's bio diversity in terms of like the way your body responds to cannabis. I've seen it. Yeah. And there's Guy, Alex Baronson, he was a writer for the journals for the New York Times. And he wrote a book called Tell Your Children That's Highly Criticized by people that love cannabis. But I had him on with this guy, my heart, who is a doctor from Canada who prescribed cannabis. And Alex's his take on it was we by just pretending that cannabis does no harm. It doesn't do anybody any good. Because some people have schizophrenia breaks while they're on cannabis. And I, I personally know of people that, especially with eating cannabis, yeah, have had schizophrenic breaks. And some people who smoke too much of it and smoked it all the time went, went nutty. I know multiple people where I could point to. And I could say that guy was doing pretty good. And then he started smoking a lot of weed. And then he eventually got crazy. Yeah. That's real. I have a friend who recently had a kind of breakdown in psychotic. Yeah. It's real. What's real is he was just smoking too much pot. And this is coming from a person who loves pot. I'm a pot enthusiast. But I also have a lot of willpower. I'm really good at like not doing something and stopping. Right. Or if I thought that I was fucking up my life with pop, I would just I hit the brakes. If I started not blowing off podcast or, you know, canceling things and just sleeping and watching. Yeah. You're drinking. You're drinking. Yeah. This is okay for my job. My job at actually enhances our conversation. Which leads to your book, right? But this guy, Alex, parents, and he's like a lot of people resisted that. And I was like, no, I think he's right. I think he's right. And I think we need to be studying this because the fact that it has been a schedule one drug for so long, our understanding of what it does to different people. Look, I love peanuts. I'm a big fan of peanuts. Some people peanuts kills them. Yeah. Yeah. Right. That's not me. But that doesn't mean that peanuts should be illegal. We should understand what the fuck is going on. And the only way we understand what the fuck is going on is if we're honest about it. Yeah. And I think we have to be honest about the effects of cannabis because they're different with everybody else with with everybody with different people. And for me, I'm okay with it. It doesn't bother me. But I don't see what's the effect on you. What is it? What depends on what I'm doing, right? It depends on if it's before bedtime. But I don't like it before bedtime because then I don't go to sleep. See, that's what it's bizarre to me. I'm a thing. The only thing it's good for is to make for me when I'm on high, I'm a thinker. Okay. I'm not a sleeper high. I'm a thinker high. I just go to sleep. I'm a good sleeper. I could go to sleep at a fucking train station. Okay. I'm always tired. I'm always working out. I'm always tired. And I do like a little bit of meditation. But what I really like before sleeping is sauna. I like to go to sauna and get racked in the sauna. I like to do like 25 minutes in a sauna. And then I like so it relaxes your muscles. Also it relaxes you. It sends your body a lot of anti-inflammatory, heat shock proteins. And it's difficult. And I like it that it's a struggle. And then after it's a struggle, I feel like I earn my last skill. But cannabis depends on the dosage. And it really depends on if I eat or smoke it. I'm sure you know the difference. Yeah, eating is weird. It produces we I had Rick Doblin on a couple days ago from maps. You know a multi-disciplinary full advanced studies of psychedelics substances. What is it? Multi-disciplinary. Anyway, maps is an incredible organization that is working to make certain psychedelic compounds available to people for therapy and to like particularly MDMA for people with PTSD. I've read some of the research on that. It's still a sibin as well for a lot of these different things. And Rick Doblin and I were talking about this the other day that there's this thing that happens when you eat cannabis. It's processed by your liver and it produces 11 hydroxy metabolite, which is five times more psychoactive than THC. No, interesting. Yeah, so it really wax people. And they don't think that it's pot. They think, oh my god, I got dosed. Because it really has a psychedelic effect. Yeah, no, I've experienced that. The first time I actually never smoked pot and I moved California. So I'm from Jersey, originally. And then when I was about 20, I dropped out of college on these coasts and rode by motorcycle to California. And I was Jack. Yeah, I was like such a self-righteous as only art of motorcycle maintenance. Yeah, it was done a good time for me. But it was a good move and I moved into California and I'd never done drugs before that. But I had been, I was out of my apartment in San Francisco and moving into a new land and I rode my motorcycle north and did some camping and then I got too cold. And so I ended up at this, this youth hostel. And so on who worked there introduced me to hash cooked and do an omelette. Yo. And so I did it. I ate it and I felt nothing. I was like that. It's not affecting me. And then I had to go to class. So I was like, how's it Stanford? So this was happening up in Point Reyes, National Park, like North of San Francisco. And I had to ride on my motorcycle down to school for class. And about halfway through the ride, I just started tripping. Like it felt like I was tripping. I was just the trees started moving. And I was high for like three days. It was horrible. It just would not stop. I'd wake up the next day. I'm like, am I still high? I was like, yeah, so high. So the eating scares me because I had such a, it's just an uncontrollable experience that it lasts for so long. You know, you never know where you're getting it's so inconsistent. And you know, these goddamn stoners, you know, when they make that hemp butter, they're cooking the bottom of them. They add weed to the food too. Like, oh, there was a restaurant. Um, where was it? Colorado? There was a restaurant that was making marijuana food. They're making food with marijuana. So it is cooking with cooking with cooking with animals. Yeah. And they were, that was part of the appeal of the place. I was like, Jesus Christ, it sounds terrible. I would never fucking go there. That sounds like the worst nightmare, right? It sounds so dangerous. Because at least they have certain things like one of the things about the legalization of past in 2016, California is that they put limits on edibles. And so the limits on edibles are I believe it's 10 milligrams. Oh, how strong are they going to get? Yeah. So you can buy a bunch. You can eat 10 of them. You're going to 100. But the thing is like, a 10, 10 is like a good dose for a lot of folks. It's not that unless you're Jamie, Jamie has this weird thing where he doesn't get high off edibles at all. No, not at all. Like he's taking a thousand milligrams. I've seen it. I've seen it. It's been happened. He's weird. And apparently it's the, it is a thing just like some people die of the Brazil nuts. Right. Yeah. So this is the thing about cannabis and all these other drugs is none of them are as predictable as alcohol. Right. So alcohol is easy to make. You can make it out of anything. It's easy to dose. The results are consistent across individuals. Like what's happening to you right now is we drank this is similar to what's happening to me. We're not having completely opposite experiences, right? Right. And it's going to wear off. So we have dedicated machinery in our body that its job is to identify ethanol and get it the fuck out of our bodies as quickly as possible. And so the half life is pretty is short. Like in two hours will be fine. But it's interesting that different cultures have almost like, uh, where they, if cultures traditionally don't have a use of alcohol as a part of their culture, they have lower tolerances. And then individuals for whatever reason, some individuals are like predestined to be alcohol. Yeah. Yeah. Which is really weird. That's, it's part of the puzzle I'm trying to explain. So the estimate is that up to 15% of the human population has a predisposition to alcoholism. Wow. So they can't use really high. You can't use a few of that predest, you can't use alcohol safely. And so the question is why has our taste for alcohol been allowed to stand our gene pool for so long? And so one of those stories I tell is we have, so one possibility, the standard scientific story about why we like alcohol is it's a mistake. So it's a way we get a reward for no good reason. And so it's kind of an evolutionary hijack. And so it's, it's similar to masturbation. So people can get, pleasure is our genes way of getting us to do what they want us to do. So they give us pleasure for things that advance their cause and they give us pain for things that don't. And the best pleasure you could have as human being is an orgasm. It's everything else is compared to that. And it's because that's most directly associated with the thing the genes most want us to do, which is make copies and pass it on to the next generation. But it's a, it's not a perfect system because we can get orgasms in other ways. Right? So we've asked you're very engaged in all sorts of non reproductive sex. But it works good enough because the cost of whatever else we're doing is minimal. The point is over evolutionary histories, statistically speaking, orgasms were associated with getting us to pass on genes the next generation. And it's because the reason evolution can tolerate all the non reproductive hijinks we get up to is because they're not costly. It's not imposing adaptive costs on us. In the case of alcohol, especially if you have a predisposition to alcoholism, it's imposing huge costs on you. And so evolution should be really interested in getting, we are taste for alcohol should be eliminated from the human species if it really is only a costly mistake. It's just kind of brain parasite. And so one possibility as well, evolution just hasn't figured out a solution yet. And that's possible. Selection can't work on a mutation that doesn't exist. But there's a gene complex that evolve separately at least three times, different points of history and around the world, where people don't like to drink. And so the most, I think people know of it, the most common prevalence of it is in East Asia. So some people from East Asia, if they had that first drink we had like about halfway through that first drink, they would start, they would turn red, they would start to get heart palpitations, they would feel nauseous. They would, that first drink you poured me about two sips and they would stop drinking because they would start feeling really uncomfortable. Why, why East Asia? Well, this is, so it's an interesting story. So it seemed to have a row, it rose about 7,000 years ago at the same time as rice agriculture. So something's going on, there's some connection between this set of mutations and rice agriculture. And one theory is that, so what's happening is they have two mutations. So alcohol gets broken down in your body in two steps. So ethanol comes in this first enzyme called ADHD takes it and pulls a couple hydrogens off it and turns it into this substance called acidaldehyde, which is still really nasty, it's still very poisonous. And so then there's another enzyme ADLH that takes another couple hydrogens off that and turns it into acetic acid, which is harmless, you can get rid of that really easily. What's going on with people with these mutations is that first step, their ADH enzyme is hyper efficient. So they're taking alcohol and immediately turning it into acidaldehyde. But then the second step, that enzyme is not very good. So all those acid aldehydes building up in their system and it starts happening right away. And that's what's giving them the flushing and the nausea and all this other stuff. The theory is that there's something about high acid aldehyde concentrations in the body that might help with tuberculosis or fungal poisoning. And so the theory is this was useful for hunter gatherers who had just settled down and started to do agriculture. Suddenly you're living in big groups tuberculosis becomes a problem. Suddenly you're storing grain in a wet climate that's going to start to start to rot. And so you're vulnerable to fungal poisoning. And so it may be an adaptation to rice agriculture. And you said this is East Asia? It's basically it started in kind of where modern day Shanghai is, the southeast China. It's spread in the book. I show a map of the distribution of this gene right now. And it's so it's spread to Japan and Korea a little bit. But it pretty much stayed there. And so part of my argument in the book is that if alcohol is just an evolutionary mistake, if it's just hijacking reward networks that are brain that evolve for other reasons, this what's sometimes The hall is just an evolutionary mistake. If it's just hijacking reward networks that are brain that evolve for other reasons, this, what's sometimes called the Asian flushing gene complex, this is the silver bullet. This is the solution. Evolution figured out the answer to this. And it's such a good solution that actually a chemical that simulates the same effect of this mutation is used to treat alcoholism. So you give it to alcoholics and they don't want to drink it anymore because they have all these negative effects. Was that called dye sulf, dye sulfamine or something like that? It basically creates a chemical version. It somehow reproduces the effect of high levels of acid aldehyde in your body. Now, one of the theories about Native Americans is that they didn't have alcohol as a part of their culture until the Europeans came in the, you know, the, what was it, 13th century or would have been for the sake of coming in. When they started introducing them to alcohol, they didn't have the genes for it. Yeah. Does that make sense? Yeah. So you have to talk about North versus South America. So South America, they've had alcohol for a long time. So they were making G-J-J this beer. But North America is one of the few places in the world where they didn't have indigenous alcohol cultures. Do we know why? I think that it's because they had a different drug that was doing the same job. So they had to back this really native forms of tobacco are really powerful. They're much more powerful. They actually get you a little bit high from just the nicotine high. And then they were including, they were mixing in hallucinogens. And so I think they had a, they had a smokeable drug for whatever reason their culture is hit upon the smokeable drug that they use it exactly the same way other cultures use alcohol. You've smoked it at treaties, signing what you needed to get along with strangers. You'd sit down first and smoke, you know, the piece pipe is the colomet. This is where it comes from. And North America, when you include Mexico, there's a long history of consumption of soil-solving mushrooms, right? Yeah. I don't know how far north it goes. I'm not sure they were doing it in North America. It's possible. They were the hallucinogen they were including and the tobacco was Dr. I don't know what this, it'll get, Jimson weed. It'll get you high, but it's not so alive. And as far as I know, still aside, it was primarily used in kind of once you started in Northern Mexico going south. And then it was used in ancient times in all those regions. Dot, Torah. Yeah. Is that, are you saying it right? Is it to Torah? Maybe to Torah. Is that that one that's like really oddly dissociative? There's one that, I remember reading, as again, it was McKenna talking about it, where he had to take it. He had to stop using it because he was talking to a friend at a market. And he realized that the friend believed that they were back in his apartment. Like he didn't recognize that he wasn't outside in a market. OK. And this was, I want to say he's taking it in India. All right. It could be. I mean, hallucinating is do all kinds of crazy stuff. But to Torah is, let's see if you can find that. Yeah, let's see if we can find out about these things of it. I found like, I didn't like to Torah. Terrence McKenna, I've just typed in his name in the drug. And yes, all this was in Nepal years ago. Right. That's it. Yeah, that is it. Because he felt completely. They felt like you really have no idea what reality is. Like, like, say if you took the Torah and we were in this room doing this podcast, you might think we were back at your house or you might think we were at the bus station. Right. Or you might think, you know, we were in the movie theater. Like you really have no idea what the fuck is going on. And the reality that you're perceived through your eyes is completely distorted in some, I still aside and does that too. Sort of, but it doesn't put you in a different place in terms of like, you don't think you're at the movie theater. Right. I remember this, he was discussing it with this guy where that's when you realized it was way too odd. This guy didn't know that they were at the market. He's like, hey man, where at the market, where not your house? Yeah. Have you ever done ketamine? No, I have not. I did it once. And it sounds a little bit like that where I was like, I was convinced I was just in a different universe now. Yeah. And it's not a universe I was thrilled about. It's kind of a fucked up universe. And I was never coming back. Like it was I was just filled with this. Fuck. Why did I walk through that door? And now I'm in this universe. And I'm stuck here. And I will never get back to my old universe. Wow. It was really strongly disassociated feeling that was unpleasant. I wonder if that's real. I wonder if you really can, through chemicals for a brief moment of time, take a poke, just take a peak into a neighboring dimension and experience some sort like a chemical gateway into, we know that there's more to the universe and what we can observe. Like if you wave your hand over the top of an earthworm, it has no idea you're there. OK. How many of those senses do we lack to proceed? Like how many senses to perceive things that exist but that for whatever reason, we don't have the instruments to pick up? How much of that we can only imagine, right? We can imagine that what we see and what we can measure and what we observe with our eyes and ears and our senses, that this is all that exists. But that's just speculative. We really have no idea. When you take into account things like dark matter and dark energy, we really don't know what the fuck 90% of the universe is. And then there's weird things like the concept of multiverses and the concept of parallel dimensions. You can use one carol on this. Oh my god. He hurts my brain. Sean, last time we talked, you heard my brain. Yeah, they idea of multiple universes is trippy. Yeah. So I think there's almost a genetic predisposition to being attracted to these ideas and not. And so I have a good friend Jonathan Schuler, who's a social psychologist, who is convinced that consciousness is all that exists. And it could be multiple universes. Consciousness is real. So it's actually the only real thing. And what's interesting is he has access to all the same, he's a scientist. He has access to all the same data that I have access to. And yet we are both looking at that same set of data and my conclusion. I'm a physicalist. So I just think this is it. We're in a bunch of physical chemicals. There's no meaning in the world. Humans create meaning because we're built to create meaning. But there's no inherent meaning in the world. And consciousness is just an epiphenomenon. So it's something that evolves for a certain reason because it helps us regulate ourselves and communicate to others in a certain way. And he looks at the same data and says, no. It's consciousness is all there is. There are other universes. And this physical life is just one life. Do you have any more? Do you have any more? No, Pat. Do we have one of these for me? You want to just hear? I just want to write that. I just do it down. No, it's OK. You should have one. All right. OK. That, because I want to write his name down. Did you have a book out or anything? No. Yeah. But he's a fun guy to talk to you. I like him. And does he, where's he at? He's at. He was my colleague at UBC in Vancouver, but he's at Santa Barbara. Jonathan Schuler. Jonathan Schuler. Schuler. He's a schoolhouse schooler. And what leads into that conclusion? He's got a lot of funny ideas. Why? So he thinks one of his research projects is on the decline effect. So you do a study and it works. And then you do it again. And it doesn't work as well. And then you do it again. And it works even less well. And my interpretation of that is that it's not a real effect. You've got a random, you know, looked good randomly initially. And then the whole thing about statistics is that it washes out. If it's not a real effect, it goes away. But he thinks the universe gets tired of effects. He's like, you know, the universe gets bored with this. And that's why the effect is happening. And I understand like intellectually, you can't rule that out. I can see how a kind of mind only view the world. There's no, you can't point to any particular bit of empirical evidence that rules it out. But the kind of stuff that sways me is selective brain deficits. So I knock out a part of your brain with a stroke. See if a stroke and some part of your brain gets knocked out. And now you can't use proper nouns. Or you can't use verbs. Like really the brain subsurves consciousness in such a really specific way that I have trouble imagining that consciousness is something. Is anything, first of all, ontologically, like really in the world separate from the brain. And is really anything more than a kind of effect. We can talk about human level things and conscious level things in a way that makes sense to us because it's more efficient. But the only real description is the chemicals all the way down one is my view. And just because when you do studies over and over again, that the effects don't work, that can't be with every study. No. And I'm probably misquoting John. OK. So you have to ask about it. But yeah. It's just a weird conclusion to draw. But here's the take that one of the things that makes me curious about it is the idea of a simulation theory. OK. Now, if you believe in the possibility of a simulation theory and Elon played that out for me. So what's the theory? The simulation theory is that if we can do now, we can have virtual reality. And I don't know if you have ever experimented with the HTC Vive or any of these things, they're not very good in terms of they're very cool. But they're not very good in terms of convincing you that this is reality. But they're way better than pong. Yeah. We're all duffed to remember. We're not real. Space and beta. Yeah. Right. So we played with really engrossing at the time. Oh, my god. I can't believe it, right? You're like, can't believe I'm playing something on the TV. I'm making the TV move. But now you get Call of Duty. And it's like way more engrossing and Halo and all these crazy games. If you extrapolate that with this sort of HTC Vive or Oculus technology, you would imagine that one day there's going to be an artificial reality that's indissernible from regular reality. When you talk to people like Elon Musk about neural lake, and they're going to essentially wire your brain. They're going to reach areas of your brain and stimulate them with some sort of energy, electricity. I don't know what kind of what they're doing to do that. It hasn't been really clearly demonstrated how exactly they're planning on ramping this up into the future. But one of the things that Elon said to me, you're going to be able to communicate without words, which is kind of terrifying, but also fascinating. But I would imagine that this innovation is also going to apply to things like artificial reality and virtual reality, and that it's going to get so good, you're not going to be able to tell the difference between reality and artificial reality. If that's the case, how do we know if we're not already there? If it one day, it becomes indissernible and virtual reality or the simulation of reality is indissernible from regular reality, how will we know? Well, Nick Bostrom, who is another guy who broke my brain, who was on the podcast, was arguing that according to probability theory, we are in a simulation. And this is where it gets really weird and very but why is the last to be a bit too late? Yeah, this is where why would those people create us's simulation? I don't think that's what they're saying. So we did it. We created ourselves. The idea is that, well, look, let's imagine that a simulation doesn't exist. OK, we're not in a simulation. This is just for actually you're exhausted. Right, we're here in Austin. Carbon-based life form are really drifting whiskey. If human beings don't blow ourselves up or we don't get hit by another asteroid and we last another million years, I can't imagine a world where we don't have something that you can plug into that's indissernible from this. We can't imagine. Dude, this conversation. I wouldn't. Right? Why wouldn't things? I'd look, I'd love conversations. Why would we do new things? This is what I guess new things are what we think. I think I've heard about the simulation theory before. But what I wouldn't, I don't get is why. So let's say it's 1,000 years from now we have the technology to do that. Why wouldn't we just simulate new things we haven't done already? Maybe we are doing that. Maybe we haven't done this. Yeah, I mean. OK. But here's the thing. If you could do simulation, what do you think Westworld is? Right. The show Westworld is you're going back and living like it's 1840. And that's really engrossing for people. That's really, people are very attracted to that idea. I would be attracted to that idea. If I could go with Lewis and Clark, if I could virtually go with Lewis and Clark and make that trip across the continental United States, oh my god, I'd be all in, man. What is this, Jamie? It's the new background Unreal Engine 5. Oh my god. I just, I tried to get a good spot here. So when they put the lights on here in a second. Let me pause. Let me pause and explain to him. Do you follow video games at all? No. OK. I haven't done video games. The Unreal Engine, the most recent version of the Unreal Engine is absolutely sensational. It's so good and so vivid. And the dynamic lightings I was called, dynamic light. Yeah, yeah, because you have to do that stuff on. Or you just like, no, this is just visual. You could. You could. They use it as the heart, like the engine, it's what it's called an engine of a virtual reality game if someone so chose to use it. Oh, so someone can do it in a VR game. So what it is is it's so, you know, the uncanny valley. Yeah. OK. This is really close to bridging the uncanny valley. So let's play some of it. This is fake. I mean, this is a video. We're watching a video. So this is a guy he's fucking with all the different. You don't have to do it. Just let it play out. He's fucking with all the different textures and all these, the lighting. Like this is all real, man. Yeah, that's cool. It's crazy. So it has dust in it. It has lighting effects due to the sun traveling over the place. I mean, it's fucking incredible. And look at the textures and the details of this. They're so close. They're really, really close. But you know, again, if you look forward, if you see this, it sort of extrapolate and say, OK, well, what would this be like a thousand years from now? Well, then you're going to feel things and smell things. And that is certainly inside the realm of what you can imagine. Especially when you can see something like this, where they can have the sun moving across the sky and changing all the shadows. I mean, it's incredible. We have that by going to Arizona and just walking around. I'm thinking this is the thing is like, yeah, of course you can. But hey, of course you can. But that doesn't mean this isn't fucking insane. Like, of course you can go there. But the idea that you could put on a head piece, like some sort of Oculus Rift head piece, and be transported to the full emergency. So now he's changing it to a different place. So he's going to look at all these different textures and all these things. Go way ahead. There's one thing I went. I don't know if this is exact video I was watching. I think it is. They turn it from like, you tell like it is like, we're watching. And then hit like, there it is like medieval lighting. And it goes to like, Lord of the Rings. With the same shapes. Look at this. And every more door. Now you look at how for Sauron. Yeah, right. I mean, it's what they can do now just with video games is pretty incredible. But again, like if I'm looking at this, I'm like, oh, she's not real. Yeah. She's two uniform in her movements. Right. People have like weird little sort of herky, jerky variability. But yeah, this is even easier for us to now. We could mow cap you, Joe, and get your body movements in there. And it probably an hour less than an hour, half an hour. It's like Joe. And it would be Joe's movements, Joe's kicking and walking and jumping. Well, I'm in a video game. I mean, that is right. You've already done that with video. Yeah. Yeah. I'm in a UFC video game. But that's trippy. It looks, that's not nearly as good as this in terms of like the visuals and even the movements of the characters. The point is, as technology advances, they're going to have that shit dialed in where you're going to feel it. You're going to be haptic feedback. Have you ever done anything with haptic feedback? Yeah, I understand the concept. There's a company in town called Sandbox. And there's always cool games that you can play. And one of them is this wild zombie game called Deadwood Mansion. So you put on virtual reality headsets. My family loves to do it. At one time, I had a third place in the world. I was the third place zombie killer on Earth. Yeah. Some motherfuckers have killed the beat my score badly since then. Yeah, you're coming back. This is one of those things. I'm not going to come back. There's fucking kids. They're too good. But the point is, they put you in a haptic feedback vest and they give you these goggles. And you have this gun, like this plastic gun. And these zombies come running at you. And when they grab you feeling your chest, it's very crude. But it gives you this hug. It gives you just enough of a job where it makes it extra fun. But again, it's like pong. Poop, pooop, pooop. And then go from pong to Unreal Engine. Yeah. No, I could see it. Yeah, that's the one. Oh, you could buy one. Yeah. That's a haptic feedback. So that's why I'm making a lot of the different VR things. It does enhance the experience. It definitely does. It gives you a little bit extra fun. But it's so crude in comparison to something that one day, like Ready Player One of you're familiar with that movie? I have not played video games or really done that. No, Ready Player One is a movie. OK, that's a Spielberg movie. And it's about immersive video games in the future. People's lives just completely revolve around these immersive video games. And all of the money they're chasing is all these virtual money in these games. That's now, right? A lot of people are addicted to video games. Yes. The way they lay it out, though, in Ready Player One, it's amazing. And it makes you realize, wow, this isn't too crazy. Like the Matrix when it came out was crazy. Yeah. But the Matrix today, you're like, maybe that's not that crazy. And Ready Player One is in my eyes a really an excellent example of what we may be looking at 50 years from now, or 100 years from now, or whatever it is. And the haptic feedback suits that the lead character has on in this film allows this girl that he has a relationship with in the game to touch him. And he feels it through the suit. You see the suit like lighting up. It's pretty wild. She's in these because of the US. I'm in Canada where it's closed. We need some sort of haptic. He's time for that. I can't. I need to get the tyrants up there. What are they doing with people? Jamie, you just read Ready Player Two, right? You ready? The books are more in-depth and more than the movie was even capable of doing. Because the IP, I guess they would have had to pay for, just impossible. And what they were doing. They were inserting people in the movies, re-enacting things with their favorite movie characters. You had to memorize the lines and perform them in the exact way that was done in the movie or you fail. We had to reach. We started again. Yeah. That kind of stuff is very close to almost being able to be done. They're working on something like Ready Player One in real life called the metaverse. They're trying to look it up. I've heard about it sort of with NFTs. This might be on the way there. I don't know how much computing power it's going to take. So in a matrix movie, they want to escape the matrix. Some people do. Some people that one do. The one do does it. And he's a pussy, right? We hit that guy. He hit that guy. He's a, we don't like him, right? And why is he rich? And he wants to eat steak and have the women. But it's all fake. So we want the real world. We want the real world. But what is the real world? That's the question. What is the real world? I think it's this world. So I mean, I completely grant the intellectual point that, I mean, this is an old philosophical problem. So in philosophy, there's always been this idea that we could be deceived about everything we think we know. So Descartes talked about the demon. So this demon, I think that I'm sitting in front of a fire in this end, and that I just ate this food and that I'm drinking this beer. But it could be the case that there's an evil demon who's deceiving me about all this. And it's all an illusion. And I can't really know it. And so this is an ancient idea that everything, and actually, Drongzo, this early Dallas philosopher, talked about, he used dreams to kind of guess into the same thing. But dreams are basically like a low-tech version of what you're talking about, right? Sure. You dream about a thing, and you think it's real, and you cry, and you get scared, and you feel these emotions, and then you wake up and you realize it was just a dream. And so how do we know that we're not in a dream now? It's exactly the same problem. So philosophers have been thinking about this for whatever he was for us, or 2,500 years. Sure. But it's Occam's razor. So it's just what's the most parsimonious explanation that we have. So it could be the case that we are all simulations in our future selves lives. Or they're actually in tanks, and these aliens are farming us out for our electricity, and we're not really here. It just seems to me the most plausible explanation is the simplest one. I'm not necessarily sure, I agree. Here's why. How about your friend, Jonathan. You're going to super get along with Jonathan. I bet I am. I'm thinking of that. But how about we have this attachment to the idea that all of our life has been real? And so since it's been uniform and its realness, we assume that it's real. We assume that the touch and the textures and the tastes and the sounds and the emotions and the pains and the joys have all been very similar or at least recognizable, that this is what we have. But there's so many variables, and there's so much we don't know. Like what the fuck is going on when we go to sleep? We're just guessing. We're completely guessing. We shut off every night, and we like it, and we look forward to it. We look forward to going blank and disappearing and traveling to wherever the mind goes to while the body just lays their prone. It's odd. I want to check out my daughter the other day to see if she was asleep. Looking at her lying there. And I was thinking it's so strange that this is a normal thing that people do. We just shut off. And we just lay there with our mouths open. And our eyes closed. But we're doing stuff. We're doing stuff. We're reorganizing information. And we're repairing and repairing stuff. Yeah. But it's fascinating that the human animal, and not just the human animal, but most mammals. And it does this too. Yeah. It's an incredibly vulnerable thing to do. And yet we all do it. It's like what purpose has it served in evolution? Like how come sharks don't do it? Sharks just keep moving. Just keep moving. There's stupid as fuck. So there's stupid as fuck. So we often do it. Because dolphins are really smart. But they sweat animals that are smart need it. So we need to consolidate. I mean, this is outside my area of expertise, but my understanding of the function of sleep and dreaming, especially, is that it's allowing us to consolidate the information that we have the data we've acquired over the course of the day. And that's really crucial for smart animals that are accumulating knowledge. And that is not a shark. Sharks just want to preach the problem. They're pretty small. They're a small, small, small job view. But don't dolphins whim while they're sleeping? Yeah. They can do it. It says they don't. Smotionless. Oh, they're so water. They need our sleep a day. And shifts weirdly. Oh, the right half gets four hours of sleep. But the left half also gets four hours of sleep just a different time. So they're doing well. And they're so poor. So that's an adaptation to the fact that they're in water, but they're air-breathing mammals like us. So they need to have part of their brain on. Fuck in danger everywhere. Yeah. Yeah. So I think there's stories you can tell about why we dream, why we sleep that are completely consistent with the idea that I am the same body I was when I was little. the scar I have on my forehead really is from George. Says who? Hit me with a snowshell. Says who? That guy's a part of your memory. It is totally, I understand, opera or anything about how bad memory is. No, memory is bad. Terrible. But the body is not bad. The body records. The magic of memory is that bad because it's like a built-in design to keep you confused. Yeah. You feel like you're going to, it's super good a lot. His friend, his friend, the only thing I googled about him, he has a very interesting theory about memory. Yeah. Oh, what is it? That verbalizing it fucks up the actors. Yeah, verbal overshadowing. Yeah. That's for sure true. Because how many friends have told you, like a story from childhood, and you're like, bitch, that did not happen that way. Like, you know things didn't happen that way. Yeah, that's different. So his research actually looks at the fact that if you have an experience and then you try to describe it in words, it fucks up your recall of the experience. Of course. Yeah. So if the classic study they did was on jam, so you have like people taste jams and rate. And you know, which jam do you want to take home? Which one tastes the best? If you have them, then you taste the jams, but you have to write down tasting notes on the jams. And you rate them? Yeah, you rate them. Then you get really confused and you take home a shitty jam. Because you're thinking that too much has messed up your appraisal. Well, that's one of the things that people always say about psychedelic experiences and that you're in describing the psychedelic experience. You then become attached to the narrative of the description of the psychedelic experience. Yeah. That's, I mean, psychedelic experiences are interesting. So I talk about them in the book as well. You had Michael Pollan on at one point, and I watched part of that show. And he repeated an analogy that he uses in his book that I quote in my book, which is that psychedelics are for cultural evolution. What mutagenes are for genetic evolution. So genetic evolution needs mutations to work on. And usually mutations suck. They usually don't work very well on those organisms die. But every once in a while, you get a mutation that works and that can get selected on and become the new normal. And for cultural evolution, this is possibly what psychedelics are doing. So we need humans, part of the argument in the book is that humans are uniquely dependent on creativity, unlike any other species. So cheetahs, chase, gazelles, they have their claws and their teeth. They don't need to think up new technologies for gazelles. They just, and they can get better, but it's through genetic evolution, not cultural evolution. Humans are help us without tools. So we are, we're literally help us with that tool. So one, the most basic tool is fire. So at some point in our lineage, we tamed fire. And fire allowed us to cook food. And once you can cook food, you can digest it a lot better. Cooking is basically pre-digesting your food for you. It's almost like a parent for chewing up food for their chicks. It allows you to digest it better. And then our genes change. So once we have fire, our jaws change. So our teeth get less robust, our jaws. I was going to digest it better. And then our genes change. So once we have fire, our jaws change, so our teeth get less robust, our jaws less robust than our ancestors were. And actually our guts change. So our stomach and our intestinal system is shorter than it would be in a primate that ate raw foods. So we're so dependent on fire that we biologically have adapted to eating cooked foods. We could not survive without cooked foods anymore. Just like our bodies of biology adapted to clothing. Yeah. So, yeah. So the hairlessness and so humans need tools and we need constantly evolving tools because the environment's changing, even if the environment's staying the same, we have other cultural groups that are trying to exploit that environment and competition with us. And if they do a better job, then we're at a luck. And so we're uniquely dependent on creativity in a way that no other primate is. No other species is really. And so we need innovation. And Paulon's point is that one way we could get that is occasionally completely scrambling. So what psychedelics are doing is just depatterning the brain completely. So just parse your brain or talk another part of the brain that Norway doesn't happen at all. And as he points out that usually results in bullshit. So I did a lot of psychedelics in San Francisco in my 20s and I used to go up to Mount Tam and do mushrooms or LSD. And this one trip I always brought a notebook with me. I talked about this in the book that I was convinced during one trip that I had solved everything. I was in a PhD student at the time. I was convinced that once I published this thing I was writing, they would give me my PhD. They would give me a tenured full professorship and that was it. And it was because I had proven that truth is the color blue. And I had like a 20 page treatise where I laid this out and I'd diagrams and there were mathematical equations. And I really came out of the trip thinking this is it. I'm fucking solved it. And then the next day I like to add, I was like, oh yeah, I probably won't publish this. So most of what comes out of trips is complete nonsense because it's just like there's a kernel of something there was and actually the kernel of information I took out of that particular trip I kind of remember was about my personal life. So it helped me figure out a relationship I was in. But what did it have to do with the color blue? Nothing at all. The color blue was nonsense. So it was this complete. So Paulon's point is that most of what gets produced is nonsense. But every once in a while it might be useful. And so it's basically in terms of evolution, it's a high risk, high payoff strategy. What do you think there was there something that had to do with your confidence in having achieved some sort of revelation that maybe you were trying to seek the same thing or come to find some sort of understanding about your own personal life. And you chose to do it through a proxy. Like you tried to seek it out through this thing and thinking that if I solved. It could have been analogy for. Yeah. That's possible. It's possible. But the actual argument was bullshit. It's not. It's not publishable. Was there anything in there that like when you go, wow, I had a real good point here? No. It's all. I'll set it to you. It could give so much stress. My brain. Yeah. So I think Paulon's right that psychedelics are scrambling stuff. But then every once in a while something really cool in you comes out. And my argument, I actually don't explicitly make this argument in the book, but listening to him on your show is what I thought is that alcohol is a way to do that in a slightly lower risk way. Right? Lower room. I think our brains a little bit right now, but we're still pretty much connected to reality. So the innovation level is going to be lower because we're not completely depatterning our brains, but the likelihood that we're going to come up with something useful is higher. And so what I would argue is chemical intoxicants all have this role to play in accelerating and enhancing cultural evolution. And so, the indigenous have a place in that ecosystem. But typically hallucinogens are used very rarely. So in cultures where everyone does them, they do them every once in a while. So typically there's like an annual ritual or semi-annual ritual or everyone takes a loose and a jens and gets really messed up. Another way to do it is have a special class of people whose job it is to get messed up in a loose jens pretty regularly and then bring their insights back to the group. How are you going to trust those guys though? Those are shamans, right? Yeah, right. Those are these people, shamans are supposed to guide you through it. They can, but I mean, traditionally in cultures, they do the hallucinogen. You come to them and you say, we're not catching gazelles anymore. We go out to the usual hunting grounds and their nookazelles, everyone's hungry. What are the gods? What do the gods say? So it's always couched in terms of communications from the supernatural realm. So what I think is going on is there's this problem. We have a problem that we haven't figured out as a culture. We need some insights. And so we go to the shaman and we say, what have we done wrong? Why are the gods angry with us? And the shaman goes and gets completely lit up on psychedelics and spends whatever two days in the woods and has and writes a thing about truth. It's color blue and writes something about thinking about really random. And maybe somewhere in there they have an idea that we've angered the gods because of X, Y, or Z. And that works. Like actually doing one of those things gets us to the new hunting ground where we can get gazelles again. So sometimes it's a particular class of people whose job it is to do intoxicants in a much more serious way. And that would normally impair you. Like you wouldn't be able to hold down a normal job and do stuff. But that's okay because that's their job in the culture. It's their niche that they fill. So you think that there's some sort of benefit to having some people that are professionals do that work rather than in the general population. If you're talking about seriously messing yourself up, yeah. So I think and you know you could argue that maybe in modern large-scale societies artists fill some of that role. But why? Here's the thing like why would you pawn it off on somebody else? Don't you think the more people that have these revelations, the better and the more people that have these revelations, the more people are going to sort of understand some of the dilemmas that we face and maybe what's happening with the ego and various parts of the psyche that are tripping us up? Yeah. I mean I think now in modern society, maybe we have a luxury where everyone can figure this out for themselves. But I think in a traditional society like if your job was hauling stones to build the pyramids, like you getting more insight into stuff is not going to be very helpful. You need to just haul stones. It's like half the whole stone. If you have to haul stones and now I think working as a slave. Yeah. So I think now we have more egalitarianism and people have access to resources in a way that maybe this is something everyone should be doing. I don't think I used to say that everyone but now I change my tune because I think some people are just not wired right for it. And I don't know why. I only know how I'm wired. Everybody's wired differently. I've talked to people that they'll have some sort of weird interaction with people online and they have to get on medication. Yeah. I know quite a few people like that. They'll do a podcast and the podcast goes sideways and they get on fucking anti-exciting anxiety pills. Yeah. I mean human cultures are clearly ecosystems. So we have people with different personality traits. Sure. It's different roles. And they're important. Everyone's important. The super sensitive people are important. Just like the super cows people are important. Yes, it's a super gullible. You need people that can handle anything and you need people that they have a really difficult time with everything. And sometimes those people make beautiful songs. Yeah. You know, like you don't, there's a place for everybody in this strange, weird soup of humanity. And I'm always very wary when people dismiss certain things as being trivial or certain experiences being non necessary. I don't think, you know, and again, I used to be way more cocky about this because I think I was operating on limited information and then I think I had less control of the ego. And I say less because it certainly was wet in your life when I was younger when I first started taking psychedelics like early days. Yeah. I think I had a distorted perception. I'm not think no. I know I did. I still do. Right? No one has a real clear understanding of what the fuck is going on when you trip it on DMT, you're guessing. But one thing that I've gotten out of it for sure is that to be more open to the idea that everyone is going through a different experience. And that we're all, you know, a lot of people say like I couldn't imagine being, you know, whatever, a fireman or I couldn't imagine being a musician, singing on stage in front of all those people or I couldn't imagine being a professor, giving a lecture in front of all those people. But some people, you know, I couldn't imagine being a bricklayer. Yeah. I couldn't imagine being a motorcycle mechanic. Like everybody has a different fucking thing in this world. And we're all this weird container of chemical soup. Yeah. And everybody's genes and life experiences and all these things play a part of what it means to be you or to be me or to be Jamie or anyone who's listening to this thing. And we all like to look at the world like, oh, I see the world and you need to live the way that I live because I figured this out about the world. But I've always figured out that part about the world like how it works for me with my peculiar genetics and my peculiar life experiences and sensitivities or lack thereof, you know, everybody's so different. Yeah. There's this concept in evolution of frequency dependent selection. And so if you're in a population, let's say, so I'm introverted. And it's a bit of a puzzle why introverts exist because we're not very good at social stuff. I spend a lot of time alone. Don't you think you think a lot? When you're probably probably we think more. So you sort things out more. So you probably come up with ideas that are beneficial to the rest of the tribe. Right. But how does that help me? It helps you because you're a general character about me. Yeah. So there's probably so there may be group level effects. And there's clearly an effect where if I'm in a culture where introverts are rare, there's going to be a marginal advantage to being an introvert because I can bring things to the group that other people can. So what that's going to end up, what you're going to end up with is a mix of people. So you're going to introverts and extroverts, you're going to have people who are very conscientious and people who are incredibly not conscientious. And each of them are going to play some role in this in the culture. Well, I have a theory about today's culture. That one of the things that is unfortunately happening is that we have become so kind and compassionate that we've allowed certain personality traits and certain people to exist unchecked. And it's certainly not talking about introverts, but I am talking about sloths. We've allowed a lot of like really like the homeless situation, right? Clearly some of the homeless situation is mentally ill people. really some of the homeless situation is people with drug dependency. But it's also some of it has got to be people that have no desire for growth. They just decide to lay down on the concrete floor through for whatever reason. I'm not judging them. I'm just saying this based on the current state. They could have been abused as a young person. They could have gone through personal trauma. They could have been who knows what happened to them. Whatever it is about our culture that cottles that San Francisco is a fantastic example of how that's a disaster for everybody else and bad for the tribe. Whereas the perceptions, I don't believe that there are more people that don't have their shit together today than did in 1930. But I do believe there's more homeless people today than there were in 1930 per capita. And I think it's because we're more compassionate and in being more compassionate, more understanding and more kind, that's all great. Like I love that. I want to live in a world where people are more compassionate, more kind. However, I think there's an argument that opens up the door for a lot of people that take advantage of those things. We all know someone who says like, man, I'm too nice. Fuck people, fuck me over. I've got these moochas and all these people in my life because I'm too nice. We all know people like that. I think a society can be too nice. I think there's a real argument for that. I think that from the microcosm, if you look in the macro, I think those things, they're analogous. They work. You can make these connections between the way human beings live their life with people fucking up their problems. How many of us have people like that in our lives? I know quite a few friends that are like, they will tell you, I am too nice. I have too many people that are trying to take advantage of me and they're always doing this. They're always doing that. They want this. They want that. They're always selfish. I think that's the same thing with our culture. There's people that don't want to contribute and they don't want to be a part of society in any meaningful way, but they think the society owes them something. That has accelerated in modern times because we've placed value on being compassionate and being kind, which is a great thing. The side effect of that, the imbalance is that we've created this time where we have unprecedented numbers of people camping on the sidewalk, which is wild. I think they're connected. I think you could look at human beings that have problems like that in their lives and you could look at a culture that has problems like that in their streets. I think it's kind of the same thing going on is that I love kind, compassionate people, but it always frustrates me when I have friends that can't get mooches out of their life and can't get vampires. My friend Duncan Tressel calls them emotional vampires because they really are like vampires. People they will cling to you and suck your lives blood and they will take energy from you to feed themselves and they don't contribute to your existence. They just distract from it. They just detract from it. All right. Yeah, it's a complicated issue. I mean, San Francisco, some people are homeless because to live there you have to make a million dollars. You don't have to learn that. You don't think we can't talk about the middle of a fucking mission. You could go wherever you want. You don't have to live access unlike the 30s. They have access to really powerful drugs. So this is the modern life. Modern life is weird. In traditional societies, you had very limited access to intoxicants. If you were living in a traditional society, you would get access to alcohol or hallucinogens in a very controlled ritual environment. There would be times when you would do it. You would do it with other people. A lot of cultures when you drink, there's a kind of toast master or someone who's in charge of the pace at which you're drinking. So I get a traditional Chinese banquet to this day. You don't just drink as much. We don't sit here drinking out of coffee mugs as much as we want. It's sitting there in front of you and then someone makes a toast and that's when you're allowed to drink. Then you put your cup down, it gets refilled, but it sits there until someone makes a toast. That's a way to control alcohol consumption. Alcohol has always been consumed in these communally organized ways that help to, there are safety measures. There's like a seat belt and that's gone in modern societies. The fact that you can drive into a drive in liquor store and have your SUV filled up with vodka and scotch and firearms and cannabis probably and some chido is whatever. Take that all back to your house and you have it in your house and you can just consume it whenever you want. That is something that we're not evolutionary equipped to do. It's never happened before. It's gotten worth with COVID. I don't talk about this too much in the book, but I talk about it in some other pieces I've written more recently. That COVID has made this so much worse because it's driven, drinking, totally into the household and all the normal social cues that you have to help control your drinking or gone. Well, not just that people are trying to cope. Yeah. It's trying to cope. It's very bizarre, strange. Not so much now, but you know, 12 months. It was Canada. Unless you're in Canada. Yes, thanks to it. They still live in March of 2020. If you're going back to last year, like April of last year, I found myself drinking a lot. I was drinking a lot of wine. Every night I'd have three or four glasses of wine with dinner because I think I was trying to calm myself. Yeah. And you're not going out doing other things that are distracting. I've got my partners in the States and so we've been doing a long distance thing across the clothes border. Every time I go to see her and I come back to Canada, I've got a quarantine for two weeks. Do you teach in Canada? Yeah, but I've been on sabbatical. So can you teach on Zoom from the years? You can teach it. Yeah, but my daughter is in Vancouver as well as in. Yeah, so I've reason to be in Vancouver. What's your partner do? Sorry to be prime. She's a neuroscientist. She's a neuroscientist. She's a neuroscientist. She's a smart people. So we have the same, she has kids in Boston, I have kids in Vancouver. So we're doing a lot of distance thing. So every time I came back from seeing her, I would have to quarantine for two weeks alone. And I've done that now. I've done two with her, but I've done seven alone. So 14 weeks of being in my apartment, not allowed to leave. And with essentially unlimited access to alcohol because you can order alcohol online until it hurts your door. That's really unhealthy. So like when I was writing the book, so it was helpful when I was writing drunk, it was awesome. The first three quarantines I did, I was still writing. And I wish the quarantines would ever end. It was great. I'm an introvert too. So I can go long periods of time without seeing people. And I just focused and I wrote it was awesome. It was really great. Do you have to specifically stay in a place or you can stay in your own house? You can stay in your own house, but you can't leave. But there's like apartments or hotels that they make something. That's a new thing. That's a new thing. And that's why I drove to Seattle. A new thing. It made it worse. And it's a don't get me started. Fuck in Canada. Don't get me started. Don't get me started. Don't get me started. Don't get me started. Don't get me started. Don't get me started. Don't get me started. Don't get me started. UnCanadian code. Go possibly. But how does this happen? I don't understand. It's the Trudeau government wanting to look tough. There's no scientific rationale for it, especially when they did it. Like if they had done it earlier, it would have made more sense. But now it's just catering to people who feel like they aren't being tough enough. I'm going to test negative here. I'm going to test negative for a go back. They test me at the border. Yeah. At that point, I am safer than any random person for sure around the streets of Vancouver. But I still have to stay in my apartment for those rules. So it's frustrating. But the point of this is the solitude, like being alone, especially once the book was done, normally when I finish a project, I go into this weird, I don't know if you have this, like if you write show and then you perform it. And then you need to do a new thing. I can't do the new thing right away. Like I go into a state where I just want to not think for a little while. And that's normally when I would kayak or I'd garden or I'd top wood or do something. Physical. That's healthy, right? But instead, I was stuck in my apartment. So I don't have a project anymore. I can't leave my apartment. It was bad. My drinking got my drink a lot by yourself. Yeah. I mean, I would start drinking earlier. I would drink more than I wanted. And so co, and this is not just me. I mean, this has happened to a lot of people. There's there's good data on this that obviously consumption moved away from bars and restaurants at home. And some people initially said, oh, all that's happening is it shifting from one place to another. But there's evidence now that it's actually gone up in absolute terms. So people are drinking more. There's more drinking disorder problems. People are getting weight. People are feeling that they're not in control of their drinking. Apparently there's more domestic violence and child abuse as well. Yeah, it's not good. And it's because we're drinking in a social environment that is unprecedented. We never had unlimited private. In my apartment in Vancouver, I'm going to go back and quarantine there when I'm done with this. I have an alcohol to like kill a midsize village with people. You know, really, I mean, so on Drake, all that. It just be dead. And it's mine. I can drink as much of it as I want. Whatever I want. That's we it's heavily clear. You plan out what you're going to do when you go back. You have 14 days. You probably get in wicked shape. I can't wait. I work out. Yeah, I've got a lot of stuff in my apartment to work out. It works out. It's hard. It's not normal for people to be isolated like not. It's not. And it's also not smart. And especially because there's no when you look at the motivation, like you pick, you poke so many holes in it. No, I know. Don't make it angry. We should have a whole show about Canadian Go Bizha. We should get Justin Trudeau drunk. Just hit your dad. Put him on a pocket and find out why he was fucking doing. You do it, dude. It's hard. His problem is he's too handsome. Yeah, yeah. It's a big problem. This has been hardest on my daughters 14. And that age group is been brutal for them. Because it's the time when they just want to be out with their friends. Socializing. It's one of the reasons I moved to Texas. Right. Yeah. Because in California, all the parents were paranoid. They didn't want their kids to. But I'm like, well, look, we know what it does to children. It is statistically safer than the flu. If you just look at statistics for kids. My kids, both my kids got it. There was nothing. And I know some kids got it. And it's not nothing. But usually that's because of preexisting conditions. And you should adjust accordingly. Kids that have all sorts of comorbidities. They're the ones who have real problems with it. But most kids, they don't have a problem with this particular disease. We're very fortunate because of that. Yeah. It's a cost benefit analysis, right? And some for kids, the cost is huge. You have not letting them see us. Yes. It's a giant cost socially. When you talk about 10-year-olds, oh my God, man, it's just bad for all of your kids. Well, one just turned 11 and one turned 13. So there are these young kids that I have that are experiencing this weird new life. It was way more troubling in California because people had a different approach to it. There's less cases here. And people just generally have a different attitude about it. And they had a different attitude about it back in May. So my kids, like we were on a lake out here in May and then we were jumping in the water and playing, like we can go outside. This is crazy. And I'm realized, like how bad is this for children? Where like two months of this shit where you're locked in home worried about an invisible demon that's floating through the air and taking people's lives. And we're all walking around with masks on. It's weird. It's very weird. Well, when they taped off playgrounds, I was just like, what the fuck? Not just like the safest thing. As far as we know, even back in spring in 2020, we knew that outdoor transmission was not very common. Wow, we heard that, but we were still nervous about it, right? And we were worried about touching things. It was still Amazon packages. Oh, yeah. My manager was spraying everything with the vegetables. Yeah. It's like everybody got weird. No, it's still like today. You know, people are constantly in Vancouver. So you walk into the store. They want you to sanitize them just like, you know what? Surfaces aren't a thing anymore. Yeah, we know that for sure. This is the thing that's so troubling. But here's the thing that drives me the most bonkers is like this is there's so many opportunities to educate people about strengthening your immune system. There's a reason why it only kills less than 1%. It's because most people recover from it. Well, how do you recover from it? Your immune system. How can we get our immune system stronger? Well, it turns out there's a bunch of proven methods. Exercise, sunlight, vitamins, water, healthy food. There's a bunch of different things you can do, a limiting stress, you know, eliminating stress or meditation, all sorts of different things you can do to strengthen your body, strengthen your immune system, community. Turns out actually being around people that you love and care about is good for your immune system. It's good for your health. It's good for your mental health. All these things we denied people. So weird, it's like what we did is exacerbate the spread of the disease unintentionally. In a lot of ways, the lockdowns in California, like when you force people inside, a lot of times those people, they transmitted inside unfortunately. Yeah. So I'm hoping that with candidates finally wrapping up vaccinations, so my daughter just got her first shot, which is great. All our kids have their first dose, all our friends in school. So life's going to get back to normal. But I think that you see the toll that it's taken on kids being isolated. And it's hard to know what the law and term affects that are going to be. Like it's going to take care of. Well, I'm hoping kids are generally resilient. But I really wish there was more time spent about education, about your immune system. And also, it's a long conversation about this. But the take-out message is try not to drink alone. Yeah. And it's really unhealthy. But what about if you're drinking alone because you're trying to achieve a certain result like you're writing something? Yeah. So that it's funny because when I was writing the proposal for the book, I wrote like 10 versions of it. And it's still sucked. And my agent, every time I'd send her the new version, she was like, yeah, no, really, it's a good agent, huh? She's good. She's this hard-fitting Manhattanite. She's getting praise out of hers very difficult. What is wrong with it? Finally good. She was like, okay, what was wrong with it? It didn't pop. It needed to pop. Like I had all the facts there. I had the ideas there. It just was boring. Like nothing drew you into it. And she was right. It didn't pop. And all of a sudden I realized, hey, you know what? I haven't written any of it drunk. I'm not taking my own advice. So in the book I talk about all the real evidence that, you know, when we get to about a point of eight blood alcohol content, you're more creative. You're able to think. That's when you should just about when you shouldn't drive is when you should write. Because you're actually making connections, you're loose. You're coherent enough that you can still do serious work. But you know, the prefrontal cortex has just been turned down a couple of notches so that you can start thinking laterally. How do they know that it's point? Oh, why point? Well, I was quoting a study. So there's one study that was done where they got people drunk. So they got them. They were either doing placebo or alcoholic drinks. And they were trying to solve a lateral thinking test. So this one's called the remote associate test. So you get like three words that seem completely unrelated. And you have to come up with a fourth word that unites them all. And the thing about these lateral thinking tasks is you can't power through it. Like there's no way to like do an algorithm and figure it out. And you just have to kind of relax and see the answer. And people who got, they seem best at this task at about point of weight. And there's a deterioration when you just make a situation when you get higher. So there's a sweet spot. So it's funny because I gave a talk about when I was doing the try not to try a book tour. I gave a talk about spontaneity and creativity and how they're linked. And I reported this study had just come out. And so I talked a little bit about how alcohol might be a shortcut spontaneity. and how they're linked. And I reported this study had just come out. And so I talked a little bit about how alcohol might be a shortcut to spontaneity and creativity. And after the talk was over, this is at a Google campus. This guy is hand shot up and he was like, do you know about the Balmer Peak? And I never heard of this thing. But suppose this is almost certainly a pocketful, but supposedly Steve Balmer, the former South Africa, Microsoft figured out that his coding ability peaked at this very particular blood alcohol content. So it's like, not good, not good, not good. Really good. Really good. Really bad. That's amazing that it's coding. Yeah. And so he supposedly, he kept himself hooked up to an IV. He just beat, it's almost certainly bullshit. But it captures this idea. It captures this idea that alcohol is a tool that can help you solve creativity problems. And so they told me about the Balmer Peak. And then after the talk, they were going to take me on a campus tour. And the first they came up and they're like, okay, we know where we're taking you first. And they took me to their whiskey room. So they have this room that is just a wall of really good single mall scotches. It was actually amazing. Because I live in Canada. I can't get anything in Canada. So I was just out here. Because everything's like 200% tax on alcohol. So everything's too expensive. 200% tax. Basically. Yeah. So you mean, so like if a whiskey bottle is 50 bucks. So my favorite, my standard whiskey is log of Owen 16 year. And I can get that KNL wine merchants in San Francisco, usually for like 70, 80 bucks at US and in Canada is more like closer to 200 Canadians. So yeah. So, so anyway, I was salivating over the scotches they had. But what was important is that this is where they go. So they said that when they run into, so they're working on a problem, they run into a wall. They can't solve this problem. Instead of sitting there at their computers, being in their heads against the wall, they stop. They go to the whiskey room. It's got bean bag chairs and a foos ball table. And they drink some scotch. And they just shoot the shit. They're like, well, what if we did this? What we did that? And they said often they come up with a solution. And so especially alcohol is really good at enhancing creativity in groups because it's making me more creative. So I'm thinking of more things. But I'm also less the playground monitor is off duty. And so I'm also I'll say it to you about loud, even if if I was sober, I might think it was stupid. Or I might be, this has happened to me in academic situations where we like we came up with this, this really multi million dollar grant to study the evolution of religion that UBC years and years ago. And I don't think it would have happened unless they had opened a pub. There's no place to drink on campus. And they finally opened this pub right near the bus loop. So after work on Fridays, me and a bunch of colleagues all for different departments would be at this pub. And just there's no purpose. We're just drinking and shooting the shit. And this huge project came out of it because I think we were we were both individually more creative. But we were also disinhibited. And so we would say things that we would normally censor ourselves from saying we would that might sound stupid. But then someone I'd say something that maybe was stupid. And then my colleague who does archaeology would be like, oh, you know what actually that relates to this other thing that I know about. And then that relates to the thing that my colleague who does cultural evolutionary theory knows about. And it all kind of gels. But it wouldn't happen unless we slightly turn down the knob. So it's I think it's the realization that really successful organizations like Google use, selectively use alcohol in the workplace in this way, really let a light bulb for me too. That was one of the motivations for writing the book as well. That's interesting. They're so open-minded. They looked at it that way and chose that approach because that's not just unconventional, but frowned upon in a work environment. Yeah, yeah. Because you know oftentimes we think of people drunk as being ridiculous doing stupid things. And we think about loss. We think about loss. Oh, yeah. So this is the problem is like right now part again part of the reason for me writing the book is trying to make the argument that alcohol is dangerous. It does, there are all these bad things. There's addiction. It hurts your liver. It increases your cancer risk. It leads to sexual harassment and all sorts of problems. From driving fights, violence. So we know about all the costs. But unless we understand the functional benefits on the other side on the positive side, what is there? Right. We have to look at what it really is. So everything else. Yeah. So once we understand so in addition to fun, we've got enhanced creativity, we have team building, we have trust building, we have all these things happening. So let's put some other things in the positive column. And it may be the case that you still look at it and you're like, yeah, it's too risky. We're not going to do that. So that's why at least you're making it. Yeah. And for some people, it is. And the other thing we have to do, and this is crucial, is level the playing field for people who don't drink. And so one of the, I talk about this in the last chapter, for all the positive functions of alcohol, there's always this dark side. So Dionysus has this dark side. So the God Dionysus, the God of wine and ancient Greece, could do all these great things for you. But he could also really fuck with you. So he would give you a gift. He's the one who gave Midas the golden touch. So yeah, you want gold? Sure. Here's everything you touch turns to gold. And then that didn't work out very well for Midas. So there's always like this danger touch of kids or something. He touched of what when he loved and she turned gold and he couldn't touch anyone anymore. And turned out, it was a bad thing. And that frozen, the moving frozen, it's got like frozen. So it's, you want to bring up frozen. No. All right. So there's a, there's a dark side to Dionysus. And you need to see that and you can't see it in its context without understanding the benefits. And so I think, you know, in terms of do you have, do you have alcohol at professional events? Do you have an academic events? Right now, the atmosphere and academia is so prohibitionist. It's just like we can absolutely not have any alcohol. It's so dangerous. When did that start? I think it started with kind of people finally, I mean, it started for good reasons, right? As people finally talking about all the abuse that happens. Right. And and the unfairness of it. So a lot of work at conferences, for instance, really ends up not, it's not it being done on the talks. It's being done at the end of the evening when people are at the hotel bar, they're down regulating their PFC and they're talking freely about shit. So we're striking up new partnerships. What is PFC? They're prefrontal cortex. So we're relaxed. We're talking about new stuff. I mentioned a postdoc opportunity that I have and you're a grad student who's graduating recently and you're going to need a job. All this great networking and creativity happens at the hotel bar. But it's mostly dudes doing it. And if you're a woman, you're not going to be super thrilled about hanging out the hotel bar. With lunch and lunch and lunch. And Pm with a bunch of drunk guys. And that means that you are now frozen out of everything that's happening there. Right? You don't get that postdoc because the drunken PI offered it to somebody, you know, after it's 50 kilo and you went home because you were uncomfortable or you went home because you're recovering alcoholic and you don't drink. You went home because you have to get up early and pick the kids up from daycare. You know, whatever. You don't have time to it's drinking around the bar late at night is a perfectly comfortable environment for a white man and especially white man who don't have farm white. I think because there's also you know, one of the things alcohol does is disinhibit you. And if you've got any prejudices, if you've got any kind of views about outside groups that you don't like, that's going to come out in drinking too. But mainly it's about it's men and it makes people who are not part of the in group not only feel uncomfortable, but actually really genuinely disadvantage because they lose that. Well, because it takes what is a working environment and turn it into a much more social environment and then a much more uninhibited social environment that leads like to air quotes partying. Yeah. That's a very bad stuff can happen. Right. But also very good stuff. It's a very good stuff. What do you do? Right. What do you do? Like what's a solution? There's no, I don't think there's a clear answer. So the one solution is ban it, which is the current, I think answer or academia. And I don't think that's right. So I think what we need to do is figure out how to harness the positive functions of it while putting kind of like bumper cars, like put on some barriers so that it doesn't get out of hand. So like simple stuff like limit. So it used to be the case that it perceptions at professional conferences, there were open bars. So you could just drink as much as you are at these receptions and shit. You used to be. You used to be. Right. And then it changed to where you drink tickets. But shit went south. Yeah, shit went south. So things good things happen, but really bad things happen really quick. And maybe there should be some way of stopping there really bad things from happening. So drink tickets. So like limiting the number of drinks people could have, making water easily available. So to even something, sometimes you're talking to someone and you just want to be drinking something. Right. Right. And so if all I have is that scotch next to me, I'm going to just drink some more scotch. If I also can pick up this water and drink the water, I will do that too. And so just simple things like making water available or non alcohol. Right. But isn't the real problem personalities? It's, it's persons and situations. Yeah. So personalities definitely play a role. I like to drink. I'm going to tend to drink more than most people. But also if I'm in a situation where I have non alcoholic options, the situation pushes my behavior in different direction. Right. Or if I'm in a situation, if I'm in an open bar situation, I'll drink a lot. If it's two drink tickets, then I'm not allowed anymore. That puts a limit on me that I have. That's the situation helping me help myself. Regular. Yeah. Helping me regulate. Yeah. That's the way to put it. It's funny. It's like it's such a human thing. Right. Like a human issue, meaning that like there's a lot of human issues that are so messy. There's no like clear binary one or zero that's like good. There's so many of those things. Yeah. So my goal in the book is just to lay out the complicated nature of it. Right. Because right now it's just like alcohol is bad. Right. Let's get rid of it. And it's not that simple. It's not. Well, certainly not that simple if you have really good friends. Right. Like I have a lot of good friends and we like to get together and drink and we have a great time. Like I have a group of friends where on regular basis is that a word based on a regular basis, we have a couple of drinks together and have tons of laughs. It's normal. Yeah. You know, and it's a standard thing. But if you get the wrong person in that mix and we've had a few of those guys, really, the wrong person gets in that mix and also they have like sharp eyes and they go, they go blank and then next thing that are naked and sliding across the top of the bar. Right. Yeah. You know that guy and that's the 15% that you were talking about. Yeah. Or just yeah, or there was a way to tell like if you had a turkey tester, you know, those things that pop up. Like, don't give this guy or the bottom of the house. I mean, alcoholism is such a it's such a strange term because like what is there a spectrum? There's a spectrum of alcoholism. Yeah. So is alcoholism like maybe you were in the wrong place in time in your life and you were drinking to try to avoid all the responsibilities that you had and you called yourself an alcoholic. And now you've got your shit together with sobriety and discipline and positive mental attitude. And there's also someone who has some weird genetic disposition where they can't have a drink. Yeah. Like I have friends that I know that can't have two drinks. Yeah. That's a strong, there's a strong genetic component. Yeah. The estimate is 60 to 70% is a genetic contribution. And then you're just you need to really be careful. Is there a gene we've isolated? There's the literature on this is complicated. So there's some there's some candidate genes. And some of them seem to have to do with regulating fear responses or pleasure responses. There's debate about this. But when an alcoholic's like straight up hardcore alcoholics are better at certain tasks, one of there's an evolutionary advantage to go and shark eyes. There's there. I think there has to be it. You know, we talked about this kind of frequency dependent selection. Like why are introverts allowed to exist? We're probably also about only 15% of the population. Why are alcohol like this? But define introverts because you and I have had an easy conversation the moment I mentioned. Yeah. So I'm not a rabid introvert. Well, you get really uncomfortable. But after this conversation, I'm going to need to go back to my hotel and not talk to a single person for like a day. So I can really yeah, I can be this is hard. No, it's wonderful. It's fun. But it's it takes energy out of me. And then I need to recover. But I just talking to people just talking to strangers. No. So I don't have it like with my partner, I don't. It's not a drain. I like how you girlfriend your partner. Yeah, my girlfriend. I don't know. We're fucking 50 years old. I could call her my girlfriend. I remember I was listening to a comedian. This guy, Richard Janney was brilliant. Who is uh, he's dead now. But when he was in his 30s, he was talking about his girlfriend. And I remember I was in my 20s. She's a, is she a girl? She's not a girl woman. So there's no good terms. Right. So what are you calling as a weird one though? So you guys are business together. You know, what do I call her? My lover. Yeah. My friend. That's kind of hot. Yeah. There's no good. Say that with a wink like this. Like raise the eyebrows like that. We're middle age people. So she's not my special lady friend. I love that. But we don't, um, she's, she has a traverse of tendencies and we don't drain each other. But it's interesting. When I was a grad, well, you're intimate with each other. You know, it's very well. So you're comfortable around. Yeah. Yeah. And my daughter does it. You know, so with family. But with me, I'm burning you out. You're not right now. No, you really aren't. I don't, I don't notice it. I enjoy it. So it's kind of like, um, waiting tables. So like when I was in grad school, especially once I got to a point where I wasn't taking classes anymore, my job, like when I was preparing for my comp exams, my job was to sit in my apartment alone and read things and take notes on them for a year and a half. I do that. And even as an introvert, that's too much. And so I loved, I kept these, I used to waiting tables and working bars. So I put myself through, through end of undergrad and grad school. But I got to a certain point where I was making a lot more money doing translation. So I know Chinese. So I was translating Chinese to English and that was much better money. But I kept like three weightering shifts a week because I needed to go out and do this kind of shit. I would banter with customers. I would have some drinks with my colleagues at the end of the I need doses of it. But then I need to rest. I was much more introverted when I was a kid, much more so. When I was, um, when I was young, my early 20s and I had to go to the bank, I would get anxiety like that I had to talk to the bank teller. I remember thinking that like I would be super nervous waiting in line to talk to the bank teller for no reason. But it was because my, my interaction with people was pretty limited. Okay. But you see him, your nature seems to be extroverted like you thrive off of talking to people. I enjoy talking to people because I find it to be extremely beneficial to my perspective. Like I like I'm a curious person. You're a curious person. So that's so when I, you know, I'd heard of you, but I'd never seen one of your shows until my public has booked me on the show and then I started watching some shows. Oh no. I was worried at first. And then when I as soon as I saw the first one, I was not because, you know, I talked about this idea of way, right? Um, effortless action. The Chinese think that when you're in that state, you have this power that there's no good translation for it. And unfortunately in Mandarin, it's pronounced, uh, that's hilarious. It's called Yeah, but it's, I translated as like charisma. So basically when you're in the state of a way, people like you. And if you're, if you're a Confucian ruler, people to fertie or authority and kind of want to follow you without you having to force them to they just, they admire you and they want you to like them and they want to do things for you. If you're a Taoist. So like for Zhuang's, the effect of your duh is to relax other people around you. So you're super uptight. You come and interact with me. If I have duh, I relax you and you become more natural. You start being, you know, hung up on the things you're hung up on. And they want that power so that that power is what allows you to be successful. And that's the tension, right? How do you get, uh, if you don't have it? And I was struck by the fact that you seem to have duh like you relax people and people will talk. And it's because of a kind of authenticity, right? You actually are genuinely authentically interested in other people. And that's hard to fake. You can't fake it. And so people relax around it. Well, this whole podcast came about because of genuine curiosity. There was no money in it when they first started doing it. And when I got to interview people at Graham Hancock was one of my first guests, one of my first really interesting guests, or I talked about earlier. And having people like that where I studied his work and read some of his books. And I got a chance to all of sudden I'm sitting down talking to this guy who I deeply admire. And I can just start asking him questions. And my whole life has been essentially completely non-conventional in terms of like my choices. Yeah. I think it's like a series. But it's all been authentic in that these are the things like you can't pretend to be interested in martial arts. You're either interested in it or you're not. You can't pretend to be interested in stand up comedy. You're either interested in it or you're not in pursuit of it. Can't pretend to be interested in people. I'm curious about in sometimes it gets me in trouble because like people like assume that if I talk to someone is like some hardcore right-wing person that I share their beliefs. But it's I'm curious. Just want to know what they're thinking. And I think it's valuable to hear their voice. And I think it's dangerous to not hear their voice. Yeah. I think we're in this weird polarizing time where people are scared to talk to someone who has differing opinions than they do because they're worried that the people will conflate their tribe is going to punish them. Yeah. Yeah. But that is what happens. And it's because of social media. And people without this core tenant of empathy, which I think is one of the most important things that we can have. And you know, I think we should all like again, no one's perfect. I'm not perfect. I've fucked this up many times. But I think we should generally stray or lean towards empathy as much as we can. And so their empathy exists also in the context of understanding people's perspective and conversations. And I when I'm talking to someone, I'm trying to draw out of them their thoughts. Because I want to examine them in terms of like, oh, okay, I see how he's framing this. Oh, I see her perspective. Like she's looking at different than me. Like we were talking about earlier, we're very different. Like all of my choices, I know that all my choices are fucked up. Like if I if I was a different person and I said, okay, well, here's your life, here's your schedule, you know, you have to commentate a cage fighting match. And then you have to go talk and that stage in front of thousands of people. And then you have to do this podcast where you're speaking, you know, about something you really don't even know what you're talking about. And you're you're asking questions to someone who is a doctor or a scientist or whatever. But that's so this is so it's clear that it works. Like because you're authentic, you send out. So in the book, I talk a little bit about these cooperation dilemmas that we have in life. So we have they go by different names. So prisoners dilemma or public goods games or tragedy of the commons. There are a lot of these situations in life where the best payoff for me is to cooperate with you and for us both to work together. But I don't have a way of verifying that you're going to do the right thing. You could you could defect in economist language and then I'm going to re really screwed. Yeah. And so purely rational agents can't solve the prisoners dilemma. Like they get stuck with a suboptimal outcome because they don't trust people. But humans human normal humans solve prisoners dilemma is all the time. And the way we do that is we trust people and we trust people based on cues. So emotional signals smiles. So for instance, there's a real there's a difference between it. So called Duchenne smile is your genuine and when you're really amused that's a Duchenne smile. And then there's the fake smile when you're kind of smiling for the camera or something. There's really disturbing people. It's really disturbing people. They're totally different muscle systems. And real. Yeah. Oh, yeah. One of them is is controlled by the PFC, the deliberate one smile now. Yeah. It's time for you to not and smile. That's your PFC doing it. And then if you say something really funny and I laugh, that's a different muscle system and it's not controlled consciously. And it's hard to fake. Actors can get good faking Duchenne smiles. And so part of the story I'm telling is this evolutionary arms race. So people need to trust other people. And we develop this signaling system to do it. I can tell if you're authentic or not by your eyes and everything else. But then if you can fake that, like if you can fake being trustworthy or being loyal and get all the benefits of that cooperation. But then as soon as the costs come for you, you're out of here, that would be great for you. But it wouldn't be great for you. It would be great for you. If you're a defector who's in a minority and the culture, you could get a lot of benefits. Yeah. But see, this is where I disagree because I think the benefit is always camaraderie. And there's because you're sincere. But I also think that it's like people should understand this. There's a deep benefit to real genuine love and friendship. But then if you are somehow or another getting financial benefit or societal benefit or some sort of status benefit without the actual friendship aspect of it, you miss the whole point. Like I had this conversation with a friend of mine the other day, a comedian friend of mine. We're talking about this comedian that threw another comedian under the bus. And I said, I feel bad for this guy because he's a comedian, but he doesn't have any comedian friends. And we were all talking about this group chat. We were saying, man, you missed half the fun. Half the fun of being a stand up comic is being friends with the funniest people on the earth. Like I have group texts that if they ever got out, I have some fucking real explains to them. So some people are such a horrible things to me do. And we're laughing. But it's just comedians understand each other and to be one of us and to be without any real sincere friendships within this group is crazy. Right. But that's because just put on your evolutionary goggles for a second. So like put aside the way you feel, which is because you're sincere human being and you're authentic. You feel like this. But imagine there was Joe Prime who's just like you in every way but you're faking it all. There are ways in which you would do well in a population that was full of cooperators. And so the upside is just there's a danger of Joe Prime is faking it. I understand, but I don't think it works in this setting. Yeah. This is my point is that I have this is 1,665, 1,600 podcasts, not including fight companions and MMA shows. Yeah. There's more than 100, how many MMA shows? 111 MMA shows. That's a part of fight companions. You can't fake that much. People will figure out your weirdness. Right. And they'll figure it out faster if you're drinking together. Yeah. This is one of the or if you're high or if you're high, the most, that's the most because that just like specializes your prefrontal cortex. But this, this thing of being genuine is it's not it's if you're not genuine and you're benefiting, you're not benefiting. You're fucking up. You're missing the whole thing. The whole thing, it's it's like being a loving relationship where you hope the person dies. What are you doing? You're supposed to hope that person feels great. You want people to feel great because then you feel great. We're all connected whether we agree or not, whether we look at it correctly or not. Like the all the information points, all the evidence points to the fact that we're all connected. And then when you have like genuine loving friendships, they're super beneficial for you. Yeah. They're good for you too. They're not just good for the other person. They're good for you. When that person is doing great, it's actually good for you. When you're genuinely happy for your friends, it's actually mutually beneficial. Yeah. Absolutely. I didn't mean to do that. You miss all that. If you're this actor who's faking it. Yeah. So when you're saying that they get all the benefit, I say they don't because I say they're this sad, lonely person with all this financial success, but they don't have all the real success, which is camaraderie. Right. But you, you care about that because you're a human and you're not your genes. So from a genes perspective, just transmitting those genes, producing a miserable psychopath is never happy is fine. Like genes don't care about that. So this is why cultures have to worry about the right sociopaths. Right? Yeah. They are going to take advantage of this. And so in this, this, so there's kind of arms raised. So the fact that I can tell at an instant, if you're interested in what I'm saying, if we get bored, if we need to stop soon, I can figure that out just from looking at your face. That's, that would seem like magic to a chimpanzee. Like it seems like telepathy. The way I can read your mind from facial expressions is amazing. And I'm actually not that good at it. But don't you think dogs have a little bit of the dogs have it too because they've co evolved with humans. So they're constantly worried about human intentional states. And so part of my point in the book is there's we are the, we're the end products of this evolutionary arms race, basically between sociopaths and normal people, I guess. We want to be able to pick out sociopaths. They want to be able to pass for normal people. So you've taken it down to this reductionist perspective where you're looking at not saying you you're personal life, but looking at it as a scientist, as a scientist, you're looking at it as these traits, they exist in order for people to more successfully transmit their genes or transfer their genes. Yeah. So it's a weird mindset because as a scientist, I think that as a human, I just like hanging out and talking to you. Right. I, you know, it's the same thing with parental care. So as a scientist, the reason that I love my daughter is because she's carrying half my genes. That's why parental loves and planted me by my genes. And yet if I really thought that consciously, I'd be weird, right? I love my daughter because I love my daughter. It's just, it's spontaneous, it's natural. It's part of just being a normal. Yeah, but don't buy that because why do I I'd be weird, right? I love my daughter and I love my daughter. It's just it's spontaneous It's natural. It's part of just being a normal thing. Yeah, but don't buy that because why do I my daughter has a little tiny chihuahua And I love him. Yeah, why does have him because you're carrying on your jeans your jeans are tricking you I mean so Jeans don't care is or just love no, it's love but so jeans are happy with mistakes They're willing to tolerate masturbation and they're willing to tolerate Adoptive parents loving their kids as much as biological parents and even puppies and even puppies because puppies look like kids Right, so I have a dog. I love my dog in my dog Again, I genuinely love my dog like when he is distressed. I feel distressed When is your dog distressed? He got we didn't brush him very well during COVID and he had he's a poodle like a miniature poodle mix And we had to shave him down And freaks out no, he was just cold as shit. So you should have a Coover, it's cold and cooler. It's cold and rainy and I just want to run it for it. We got him a sweater Quite quite attractive actually he looks handsome But you know so I feel genuine distress. Yeah, when he's distressed and so that's my proximate Psychology that's like me as a person But I can step I can always step back from that and as a scientist say well Why would I feel that way? I don't know where that's my jeans tricking me like it's me feeling parental feelings to run And it's why we love kids like it. I live. I have a view of this park where I live in Vancouver and my favorite part of the day is when there's an elementary school on the park and Like four or five times a day Kids, I guess they must do their pee out in the park So they go all go out in the park and they run around and I'm up on the 39th floor So they're kind of small so it's almost like brownie and motion like watching molecules bounce around I can hear them. I can't really see individuals But the motion of kids on a playground is so satisfied. There's like something beautiful about it Right just pure joy. Yeah, they're so free in so many ways They don't have responsibilities. They don't have and here's the thing Like people think that once you get wealthy that you know you can kind of have that same child like joy because you don't have any Responsibilities anymore or you don't have any worries in terms of paying your bills, but that's nonsense. Yeah It doesn't exist. It only exists in children and in people on ecstasy Well, and that's because you're chemically making yourself child again. Yeah in some ways. Yeah. Yeah So that desire and there's also it's not just joy, but there's a feeling of wanting to protect that right There's a every catcher in the rye. Yeah, but not having since like high school But that you know he wants to be a catcher in the rye where he's like protecting these kids playing in the field Mm-hmm, sure they don't run off the cliff and you know that that feeling of caring for all kids Like I see you know I see kids in the airport. So my daughter is 14 now and she's a different. She's now a Quasi grown up and we have a very different relationship now because she's still a kid in some ways, but she is negotiating Being an independent person right and not being my kid anymore and having independent relationships and I do kind of miss when she was five You know, I know it's just I was her world and And so that that intense feeling of like loving kids and kind of appreciating kids having fun You can experience it as a human but the power of Thinking scientifically is you can also abstract from it and understand where it came from Yeah, and then that gives you some understanding of how it can go wrong and some people What the barriers are to it and some people so that's what in the book what I'm trying to do is let's say we like to drink Drinking makes us feel good. We like to hang out with friends and drink let's it abstract away from that which we all know and think about scientifically why would we want to do that and Getting a scientific understanding of why we would want to do that then gives us the power to make better decisions because then we understand You know should we keep alcohol at public events professional events Maybe we should because you know within limits it has certain functions. So I think putting on evolutionary or scientific spectacles to look at human behavior is valuable Yeah, I completely agree and I think we should strive to experience things that exist outside the common plane of existence Whatever they are, you know, I think this the common drone of unfortunately most people's lives in In society because of the fact that most people are doing something that they probably wouldn't do if they weren't getting paid and they're stuck in traffic and they're On their way to an office where they have to deal with office politics and maybe they have a boss that's not so thankful and Appreciative and they have colleagues that they don't necessarily enjoy working with there's there's all these things that exist that are at this Common plane the common plane of existence when you get hammered with some good friends You jolt outside of that common plane and it gives you a little bit of perspective and maybe you're sitting outside that Bar and it's you know two o'clock in the morning you go to get some pizza with your friends You shouldn't they're eating you go you know what I'm gonna fucking quit this job. Yeah, I'm done And you got you go like serious Tom like dude, I'm gonna quit this fucking job. I'm done You know what I need to do? I need to save $20,000 if I can save $20,000 that'll that can keep me going for five months I need five months to get this shit going and this is what you need you need those moments in life and maybe maybe maybe you get that from Running a triathlon, you know, maybe you do that. Maybe you you get it from Yoga retreat whatever the fuck it is Something that takes you outside that common plane. Yeah, you know, and I think I've been very very very lucky that my Interest all they all lie outside the common plane. Yeah, but that's just dumb luck and fortune and the fact that I've you know I found myself in the right place and time But it's also because you pursue what you love So it's not pure dumb luck, but it was dumb luck because I started doing it when I was young I started pursuing what I loved when I was 15. Yeah, I guess I had a lot of luck too So for sure this fortune involved in this right I used to deny that too and I think that's very unhealthy to deny fortune, you know like you know Obviously there's like so many things could have gone wrong and they do go wrong with people all the time where health things Circumstance or just random random. So like Martha the philosopher of Martha in this town as a book on which he calls moral luck and Is trying to point out that a lot of our Well-being we have to recognize the extent to which our well-being depends on luck and if we can do that It enhances humility in a variety of ways. So yeah, you know, I went out You know I used to in San Francisco I would drink I worked in this nightclub Drink all night sometimes to hallucinogens and then I would go Joe Joy ride my motorcycle Downtown because I like going out the really steep hills and going down the other side It's so stupid I didn't die right and so I'm lucky I certainly there's a funny color. It's gotta be the case that You and I have both driven I guarantee you at some point in our lives you and I have both been driving it over point of weight Right and we didn't hit and kill someone and Other people maybe they only did it once in their life and then they hit and killed so in their life is ruined So there's all these ways in which we were also born into a certain society where we had certain benefits and privileges so I think that understanding understanding privilege and luck is important for Being humble and realizing that you didn't just you know do it because you pulled yourself up by your bootstraps Oh, yeah, yeah, it is very very important But it also can be weaponized against you sure that's a problem as well because then you get involved with grifters Who want to you know punish you for luck? I think that you should be humble Whenever possible and understand that you're Extremely fortunate just to be alive in 2021 Especially to be alive and to be living in North America Especially to be alive to be living in what is essentially the 1% of the population on earth if you make $1.34 $1,000 a year. Yeah, I mean that's that's hard for people to wrap their heads around But that's the real 1% when people want to talk about the 1% yeah, you make $34,000 a year You are in America, you know where we are right now you make more Money than most of the people alive. Yeah, 99% of the people alive are doing worse often you Which is really interesting because people love to use that term the 1% and it's because fortune is relative If we look at someone like Jeff Bezos, we're like, who's that girl? And you look at the person you're talking to like hey man you make $75,000 a year Crazy you are to say that you wish you were that guy like you're all right, man If you budget you do it pretty good. Well, this is a problem with humans It's called the hedonic treadmill, so we we have this built-in We're built to be dissatisfied. This is a good example of how Our interests and our genes interest diverge so our genes actually don't want us to be happy and just give up and kind of relax They want us to be striving right and so Anything that's pleasurable becomes less pleasurable after a while You know, I got used to when I was a grad student I couldn't afford very good wine So I kind of got good at enjoying whatever Trader Joe's a good deal from Trader Joe's and then I became a professor I had more money. I could afford better wine Then I had bituated on that better wine and then if I was at a party and so and served me Trader Joe's too much chuck I'd be like and It's the same but I enjoyed I enjoyed to buck chucked back then as much as I enjoyed this better wine now Probably you just adjusted you adjust right and so you're constantly adjusting Your expectations to match your resources and this makes if I were my genes I would make me that way too because it keeps me striving and trying to get more stuff but As a human it sucks and so a lot of a lot of the religious traditions of the world are Focus on trying to get us out of that that hamster wheel Always pursuing the next thing and learning how to actually just be realize the value of what you have right now Well, that is the thing that people always pose the question people always pose about someone like a Bill Gates Like what keeps that guy working? Like why would he keep working when you have so much money? There's no way you could possibly spend it all because it's not really what it is. It's this strange Internally motivated. Yeah, and there's an odd game and in his defense. He's turned a lot of it towards philanthropy You know, but there's this weird game of Acquiring currency and that is that's the game you played your whole life And we're built that way. Yeah, and there's good evidence that it's your your absolute wealth doesn't matter It's your relative wealth. Yeah, and so you could whatever you're making 34000 You're in the top one percent But if everyone around you is making a hundred thousand you feel like shit right right right right But if you're living in a place where very few people have any money But everyone has enough to eat you'd be amazed at how happy everybody is. Yeah, right? It's it's And the amount of stress that we take on in keeping up with the Joneses versus the amount of pleasure that you get from the the actual benefit of the success Boy if you could look at it on a graph you'd probably be like what oh, this is this terrible Yeah, and so this may be I think this is well as you mentioned like this is one of the functions of the tuxkins right It gets you it breaks you you're on a hamster wheel Mm-hmm and Your PFC is keeping you on your preferred cortex is keeping on that hamster wheel. It's like because it's about goal fulfillment right here's a goal. Let's be self-control. Let's get that goal So the PFC is keeping you on the hamster wheel Intoxicans momentarily pop you off the hamster wheel. Yeah, you get drunk with your friends You start to look at your life in a different way and you're like, you know what actually I fucking hate my job And and your friends are like yeah your job sucks You should hate your job. Yeah, you're miserable. We've seen you sit tight school You've gotten more and more unhappy You should quit your job like that conversation that that's people Especially good friends in a community helping you to get off the hamster wheel That's not gonna happen drinking coffee. No No, that's what the job of these substances here Partly I mean it's got a lot of functions, but one function for individuals. I think Is helping to pop you off the hamster wheel for long enough that you get some perspective on Do I really want to do this but like many other tools? There's inherent dangers involved and if you want to use a bandsaw you might cut off one of your fingers Yeah, or you might build a house. Yeah, might build a house and building a house without a bandsaw would suck That's a great way to look at the tools Yeah, do I think we should wrap it up with that? That's a perfect way to describe it. Hey, man I really enjoy this conversation. I'm really really good. Thank you. I'm sorry. You're gonna be tired for a day I'll recover. I got time. Yeah, I got some down in your book is it's drunk It's available right now. Did you do the audio? No my good friend Jordan did Oh, so I trust yeah, I fucking hate when authors don't do as long as it's a good throw god now So and I didn't know did my first book audio. It's like painful. I'll say that but now my good friend Jordan did it All right beautiful. Do you have social media? Yeah, so I'm on Twitter What is it at Sliderland 20 on Twitter at Sliderland 20 on Sliderland 20 Slingerland Slingerland 20. Yeah. Oh your name. Yeah, basically people could just get Edward Sliderland Dot-com listen to what you say it though. You hear the way you saying it? He's saying like Sliderland is faster than he said the whole time faster than You can have a how many buffalo traces of my red to be great. So yeah Edward Sliderland one word Slingerland No spell it out of from Jersey. We just Do make everything short. How do you say drawer drawer? I say draw well listen. I was born in Jersey But I lived there till all seven there it is great cover. Yeah, it's good cover. All right So yeah lingerland Okay Slingerland dot com is I really enjoyed our conversation. Thank you very much go get that book fuckers Bye, everybody. Thank you