Hey, dirty fucks. This episode of the Jeroid Experience Podcast is brought to you by stamp.com. If you have a small business and you have to go to the post office, you know what a pain the dick that can be. That shouldn't good for you. That's stress. That stress can be avoided if you stamp.com, what you could do is they give you your own digital scale. You could print up all your shit on your own PC or computer Mac or PC, either one works. And you just put your own postage on it and then the post office comes and they pick it up. And that's it. You don't have to do it in that weight-on-line chat. You don't have to wait like somebody weighs your stuff and then figure it all out. You do it all from your house. It's super easy. And people that are operating small businesses like if you buy any of the deskwad.tvt shirts. This is how Brian sends them. There's no other way to do it. If you have any small business or even if you're just getting into something like an online store like Etsy or something when you want to sell some artwork or anything that you're shipping stuff out, there's no reason to go to the post office nowadays. Or if you have some freak bitch who wants to sell panties. You don't want to go to the post office and start weighing panties. What you want to do is how many boys you send in panties to. Figure this out. That could be a business man. I guarantee you there's money in that because Duncan knew a girl who would wear socks and stuff. They would want her to get her feet stinky. And then she would send them dirty socks. Wasn't her like dirty stench? She had some sort of an unfortunate name. She called herself, but that was like her thing. She would get paid to wear underwear for several days in a row. She was the first person I ever knew actually did that. Not yet. Not only she did, she fucking did it legit. If they told her she had to wear socks for like three days, she would wear socks for three days. And she wouldn't let a guy do it. No, you can't wear my socks. It has to be my stinky feet. There had to be a tan stain at least. Maybe they do nose. Maybe you can smell it. There's no way a chick's feet smell this fucking bad. I'm not beat off to a dude stinky feet. God damn it. That sounded like somebody would know that. Maybe? Yeah, that is something that does sound like someone who would know Duncan A. And there might be something to that. Maybe if you want to keep an honest foot stinky socks business, you got to do the right thing. Yeah, that was going through a phase of his life. I think also that it was hanging out with that girl. Well, yes, this is this is getting very personal. If you go to stamps.com and click on there's a little microphone in the upper right hand corner, enter in the code word JRE. And you get this sweet deal where they give you a free digital scale. They give you a 55 bucks and in postal coupons. It's a sweet deal. And you can save a lot of money to up to 80% compared to a meter. That's according to them. I have done no research. And that scale is pretty bad as you just look it up to your computer. And don't use it for pot. You fucks. This is for selling sending shit through the mail. And I advise you to not send pot to the mail. I think that's like really dangerous. That's super illegal. Yeah, it's not funny. Like you can if you carry it in your ass, it's less illegal than if you send it across state lines. Like if you stuff a half a pound of weed up your ass, they'll at least be impressed. How about? Yeah, but if you stuff, you know, a tape. I take it. My ass is a broad capacity. Don't person have ever seen the brags about how big their ass is. The inside of their ass is Dana Deeramond. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm talking about a whole bigger butto's because she fits cat toys up there. Yeah, it's weird. Like some of those gaping videos when you can see shadows on the wall, it's pretty bad. There's no need for that gaping stuff. That's the society gone wrong. When they look back at us in the future, the way we look at Rome and the Vomitoriums and all the diddling of the young people, they're going to look at us and gaping going, what the fuck they were into? Because it's the way they won't really represent what a small percentage of the population actually in Georgia's videos. The fact that they exist is evidence enough that we've gone mad. We've gone completely mad. We're spitting inside girls' assholes. We're opening them up and spitting in there. That's a genre in pornography. It's not like a one time thing. Like somebody went, hey then, I lost my mind, man. I opened up a button. I spit in there. I don't even know what the fuck I was doing. Dude, don't do that again. I mean, that's so disrespectful. How do you think she feels? I don't know. I don't know what the fuck happened. I got to stop smoking meth. But instead, no, it's a fucking genre. There's like, there's how many videos are there? I remember when, like a long time ago, I saw an important, like my first time that somebody spitting on the crotch before being there. You know, using like some spit loob. I actually did it on Katie. I spit on her. I don't know what to say, names. All right, I think this is crazy. No, no, no, no. I got the information out there. I spit it on her crotch. She said, what the fuck? And she got pissed off and then she should. Brandon the bathroom and like a wash shirt. And they didn't want to have sex. That would totally not horny at all. You fucked up. I wonder why. I had a little chest cold, so it might have something to do with it. Oh, how dare you. Stamps.com, code word jerry. Save yourself some money. That's how you do a commercial bitch. All right. That's the only way I know. We're also brought to you by audible.com. If you go to audible.com forward slash Joe, you can get one free audiobook and 33 days of audible service. If you've never used audible before, it's a really fucking sweet service for looking for anything. And people said this to me, like some guy said it on Twitter, he shouldn't advertise that people listen to audiobooks when they're sucking traffic, because that's what we use your podcast for. That's like your competing against yourself. Do you know how many fucking people there are out there? Do you know how many fucking people there are? It's madness. And water is going to go where it's supposed to go. Okay. It all gets the attention it deserves. If you want to read a fucking book on your transit, you should not be listening to me. If you decided, you know, I'm going to use this time to educate myself. Well, I don't fit into that plan. So I suggest if that's your mean, then you do use audible instead of this podcast. How about them apples? Think audiobooks are some of the coolest things that people have invented if you're a commuter. You know, because it makes flying on a plane, or which is the same thing as podcast podcast do. And in fact, a lot of podcasts, one that I listened to a lot, Dan Carlin's Hardcore History, you can get that on audible. You can also get over 100,000 different books. And just an amazing collection of books as well as shows, old radio, shit, podcast, stand-up comedy specials, just the OPEN Anthony show. Yeah, that's great. It's a beautiful service. And like I said, if you go to audible.com forward slash Joe, you can try audible free for 30 days and you can get one free audiobook. You know what's cool about it is it's like if you listen to a lot of podcasts, and you instead just start listening some audiobooks. When you're done listening to an audiobook, you can say, I just write a book. Where you know what I mean? Like when you listen to a podcast, you're just like, yeah, listen to podcasts not so. I have a radio. Well, I told you I'm a fucking in love with that Dan Carlin's Hardcore History podcast. And even though you can't say you read a book after you get through one of those, it's way better than reading a book. It's super educational. You can't quantify it like you can a book. But that podcast is not just inspirational. That guy is a master storyteller. So they're fucking fascinating stories, man. It's really good stuff. That is awesome. And the thing about him is that he's not, he always say, oh, I'm not really a historian. He's way better than any historian because he can actually tell a story. You know, he has no dog in the game. He's there to try to discern the facts as clear as possible. He gives several different accounts of each situation as it's been deciphered. Like what people agree on. As far as like numbers and how many killed and shit like that. Really, really, really, really interesting stuff, man. Audible.com. Go check it out. You can get Dan Carlin's Hardcore History. Do you have any of your books? Do you have one of Audible yet? You know what? No, it pissed me off. It's too sexy. Your voice is too sexy. That's what it is. Because the old, the female population offered to turn last beyond since they cannot possibly be satisfied by another man. And old man would be very sad. Yeah, I can't do that. Or they can have men agree to only make love to them while they're wearing headphones listening to your voice. That's right. That's how it's... Well, we can need to get you to do one of those because that would be badass. You know, maybe you can just do it. I mean, didn't Scott Siddler do that? Isn't that how he started out? Was it Scott Siddler who had all the podcasts that he released with all of his books, the author? Yeah, I mean, that guy became really popular by just releasing his books. And podcasts for him. Yeah, he did it on his own. Yeah, he did it on his own. He's a go getter dude. You know, he just was unhappy with the publishing world. Like you're trying to deal with people. You know, maybe he had a bad experience. You could easily have a bad experience. Just the wrong publisher, the wrong people, the people with the wrong ideas of where you should go. Yeah. Anyway, go check it out. We're also brought to you by onic.com. If you haven't been to onic lately, we added a lot of shit on it. Basically started off selling nutritional supplements, like mostly, uh, neutropics, like alfabrain and shroom tech support, which is an endurance enhancing supplement made out of a cordi-cepts mushroom. It's a real trippy thing. They actually grow these mushrooms on fucking caterpillars. It's very strange stuff. Yeah, they apparently the story is the lore is that high altitude hurting populations. They notice that their cows, their cattle, are more active when they're eating this mushroom. So they try to figure out how to grow it and how to do it in process in a commercial way. And it's also related to that mushroom that fucks with ants, turns them into zombies. That is one of the weirdest, like, parasite relationships in the animal world. How does it work? What does the, this cordi-cepts is different strains. The cordi-cepts mushroom gets inside of the ant. And when the other ants know it's infected, they take him way out of town. Like, they're like, we gotta get him the fuck out of here because they know he becomes a bomb. So they have to take him out of town. And then when they leave him there, he explodes and sends mushroom spores into the air, which are like some invaders of the body snatchers type shit. It just lands on other ants, gets into them, infects them, takes them over. And then the same thing, they explode and become mushroom bombs. Jesus Christ. Yeah, what the fuck? Dude, by the way, have you seen this part on its website? What is it? It's all about lucid dreaming. It's one of the most amazing websites I've ever been. You just scroll down and it's all about lucid dreaming. And there's like, like, these cool visuals that pop up and then there's one point where like the whole space starts spinning around. Well, listen man, lucid dreaming. I've had lucid dreaming experiences before, but I've never had them as strong as I've had them before taking alpha brain. That's the fact. And I think it's not just alpha brain. I think if you, you know, you want to try, I believe, co-ling is one of the big ones responsible for it. A lot of people have reported similar results. And I think that when you take things like let her psychoactive, like that, like, um, neutropics at night, I think it has a pretty profound effect on your dream state. A lot of people have reported it. I've always said that it's one of the most, um, one of the best pieces of evidence that the efficacy of alpha brain is what the fuck it does to your dreams. It's hard to tell whether or not something's giving you an edge, like whether your brain is performing faster or slower because it's also subjective. It varies with how much sleep you've had or how annoyed you are. It varies with so much. But what alpha brain provides is all the nutrients, all the building blocks for human truth. What are you writing, fuckhead? I read my dreams, man. I was totally fucking my cause. Are you putting that up online? Fuck my cause? So what you're doing is you're putting in a fake comment while we're doing a show. You're putting in a fake comment, which you shouldn't do anyway. This website, whoever made this website, Joe, you need to make, have them make your website because this is like breakthrough website development. Really? This is amazing. This is fun. What's so amazing? Is it really, uh, like, look at that. Did you just see that thing I was scrolling through? That's so cool. Yeah, it's pretty interesting. You draw a dick. I just aren't. Did you check out this? We also that's a fucking monster of a circumcision scar. I saw him that someone was trying to stab your dick. One hair. Okay, stop. We also have kettlebells, battle robes, all sorts of strength and fitness equipment that we sell in there now. Reviews the coding, Rogan, you'll save 10% of any and all supplements. So that's it, you fox. Did you see that Yahoo knew it was brought up on it today? No, what did they say? They did that. These articles about Wayne Ludwig and he was saying out here, he reviews the fight tapes natural than his mocks with and then he instead you'll have a review of the fight tapes when he's taking alpha brain. And they were saying basically how he, he feel like each time he, each state of consciousness that you've, reviews the fight tapes and gives him a little bit different info from the one before. And of course Yahoo knew it was being you know, Sinicol and whatever, they're like, yeah, this product that they say makes you smarter and more acute, whatever. You know, that's it. Very funny, in your voice, shitty paraphrase with your accent, like, Jesus Christ, those strange conversations. Yeah, you know, things like alpha brain, of course, anything that claims to make you smarter, sounds stupid. I mean, ironically, but there's absolutely been proven there's certain nutrients that enhance the way your brain functions. I've tried a bunch of different ones. I can't say enough. I don't give a fuck if you buy this. This is my best way to try to describe anything that we sell it on it. It's all shit I buy. It's all shit I would buy. It's all shit that I endorse because I've tried and I've had a positive benefit from it. All the neutropics, the fitness supplements, all the food, like hemp force protein powder, it's all shit that I would use. It's all great stuff. We try to give you the best shit we can find at reasonable prices. And again, if you use a code name Rogan, you save 10% off any supplements. You can fly. And you can fly, bitch. Yeah, I got to check into this lucid dream, solve problems. Wow, we're starting to call. How do we run? How do we run? How do we done? How do we done? Calls out there, they're making any sense. It can be done correctly, folks. Okay. On it.com, code name Rogan. And go fuck yourself. All right. Danielle Ebelelli is here. And just the name, the way it rolls off the tongue, it makes for stimulating conversation. You're one of the three people in the United States who can actually pronounce it. I've moved every time. Please, my friend. It's easy. I'm a professional talker. Hit it, son. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night. All day. 10 yelling, Ebelelli. My man. Nice job to be back. Hey, there we go. The, that, that, that, that, that sound of the Italian language, man. The Italians really figured out how to make shit sound good. Like, as they were saying it, like I was at Disneyland today and there was a couple that was talking next to us that was like, clearly Italian. Like they were the bottom of the aisle, no, jump in the aisle. But another, like it's like, they're singing like a little song. Like it sounds good. No, it's awesome because what I think about it is like I've been here 20 years and they still speak like a pho but because it's Italian pho but then it's like, ooh, it's all to European. It's cool. I just sadly door open for me whereas either if I was Bulgaria on our some sheds, I would be. We would be not trusting you. Yeah, you sound. We're not finding your problem. Learn how to speak English right or ready. You sound like a beautiful classicist or something. I'm dude from a bygone time when a man who are elegant. And the number of times that I see I say something in the classroom when I realize my students are just looking at each other. What did you say? Like I did this forever. Nobody ever told me that. I would always use the word, you know, when I say sovereignty, I used to say sovereignty. Oh no, really? I never heard it. I always said it's the reddit. Oh right. And so I was like, plus be sovereignty. It sound about right. So I used it over and over again. Nobody ever said anything. Right? So clearly nobody understood what I was saying. And what they were like, are you trying to say sover? Yeah, so for regularity as I was saying. It's like, it's fucking bad for men. That's interesting. When you're learning a language and you never, you've never said words that are like fairly common red. Like sovereignty. Like I have a few, there's a few that occasionally, like I can't think of any of the cough but I know there's some where I've only read them. I've never said them. And then when someone says them, I'm like, which one is that? Is that the silent G1? Huh? Is that how it sounds? Wow. It does a few like, wala. I remember I read it on a software script. I was like, Viola, like VWa, Wala, you know? It's V-O-I-A. French is not right. French is not right. Yeah, but I mean, it's somehow another is in English script stuff. Right. Sometimes you have to say it on a TV show. Right. I didn't know how, I didn't know. And I was like, oh, it's Wala. Right. I thought it was a W. Travelosity. I always get that right. Velocity. No, it's even worse. That's fairly simple. You should go to the doctor. You should be very careful. But Italian, man, what is it about the Italian culture? Because Italians are known for, first of all, very delicious foods. You know, like delicious rich, fatty, incredibly good food. It's only one. I know for great ones. Art and for being very passionate, and they all have that crazy way of talking. But everybody has a job. There's like an art to even communicate, and it's more. Yeah. When I go back, I have to retrain myself, because people, first nobody ever, finish a conversation, let the other person begin to speak. You're constantly going to interrupt each other. So it's like, just the more. You know, you're not used to it anymore. Oh, I guess it's your tour that is like there's those such as Asian tour and my time. And then is you literally see people who begin to talk taking this gigantic deep breath. They go, I don't know, I don't know. And then we went this way and they gone for 10 minutes straight. They're like Jesus Christ really? Do you have all those many words in you? That's insane. Yes. I got this photo on my wall. It's from the American girl in Italy. It's like 1950 something and this chick is walked on the street and these dudes grabbing their dicks and like it's like like what you didn't I didn't expect this people did that in 1950. I thought that was like more of a you know Jersey Shore type thing. You know more of a more recent thing but no no no that creepy dudes have been around since the beginning. Since dudes were created. This picture from Italy in 1950 something. I heard somewhere they were seen in particular in northern Europeans who you know they do many things right but definitely the romance department is not the one that they are most renowned for. No. It's a lot of them known for romance. Exactly. So a lot of the women come down for vacation in Italy to hook up for random summer flings with exotic romantic Italian story and then they go back to their regular life. So who would be the boring like dudes from? They're not boring is a bad word and I've got to have lots of people to fly but you know they get the reputation for being a little bit on the cool their end. The more way yeah yeah yeah yeah. The more way sweet and even Germany. Yeah. Yeah. Cold people that are very disciplined. And from my mind to be so good at it and positive. Basically they are going to do you know they're going to make awesome cars. They're going to run the economy great. They are going to do all the things that Italian can't even begin to know where to start. No they do the cars okay but not definitely not the economy part. Yeah. But when it comes to romance yeah not quite that much less than being in the middle of the world. Yeah man in order to have a certain amount of fun in a conversation there has to be that I don't give a fuck out. And there's very few like really conservative people that know how to turn that part on. Right. They never know how to not give a fuck. They never know when it's important to not give a fuck. But it's often important to not give a fuck. For fun. For passion. For for partying. For you know just to laugh with your friends. And if you can't do that if you can't let that go you're tightly knit and figuring out how to fucking use gears and levers in order to make the car work better. That's old right. The time is work you know after a while man. Yeah even the language I mean you try to say something. Most sweet and lovable in Germany. Yeah. It's the neat side. That was the craziest things about Hitler's speech. It wasn't just what he was saying was fucked up. Right. It was that crazy ass language you were saying it. It's like really alien angry you know to be an American in the 1940s like when all this was going on and to see that guy I guess they saw him in movie theaters right. That's how they would see that. See that guy screaming at the top of his lungs that crazy fucking mustache in that weird language that you didn't understand. Then how to be god damn terrifying. Seriously man. Cause you see the videos and you see these thousands of people standing totally discipling leastening complete silence to the guy going crazy and finish the sentence that you will jump up with one shout. Wow you know the same freaking. It's insane. The men that get to that position that crazy position where they can talk a whole gang of people doing something really really bad and everybody is disciplined and everybody is along with them. That's one of those are some of the scariest moments in all of history. Yeah. And when some group or leader with you know in the Ferris intentions is like super charismatic super driven and super insane altogether and in control. That's the most possible. Just coming over here I was listening to a Dunkarlins episode to the latest hardcore history and he was going off about this story about what was happening in Germany in the 1500s. Yes. It has like the three-piest weirdest story ever. It's amazing. Yeah. I guess it's the origins of Lutherism and what he's talking about was I did not know this and this is one of the amazing things about that podcast. I did not know that most people couldn't read the Bible. It's recently 1500. That penalty of fence in most countries. If you read the Bible, if you own your own Bible, you read the Bible by yourself not in a Latin through the priest but instead you had your own thing, you could be put to death. That's insane. That's because if you read it on your own, you may get weird ideas and then you would water down the truth and miss the construing of the sword. That's not that long ago. No. That's not even a thousand years ago. Yeah. That's so crazy. But that's the thing that makes you wonder about human beings that the vast majority of human beings just go with the program of whatever they are told in those times. When you look at that, even if you look back 70 years and you look at racism in the United States, anybody went along with the norm of a typical in American society. 70 years ago would be seen as like, batshit crazy today. And yet back then, you know, there were plenty of people against it but they were the minority. You know, the majority of people were like, yeah, of course, those damn people of color and that's like, it's weird. It's like people are donkey's been trained with the carrot and the sticks since they are born and they just go with the, they don't question shit. Well people, it's super easy for people to believe some crazy shit. As long as the people around you believe crazy shit as well. Exactly. We have a real problem like that where we can get sucked into our atmosphere. And especially if you are an easily led person or a person who doesn't have like a really fully formed opinion of the world. I mean, that's one of the things they do to people when they torture them. They take away your view of the world. Take away your ability to look at things rationally. And then when they start talking to you, it's like now they are your friends. Like it's that Stockholm syndrome, right? When they kidnap people. The kidnapper becomes someone who you love. You give in, you relent. You know, and that's why they, that's why that in that homeland show like that concept works. That they kidnap these guys and turn them into suicide by all these American JIs, which is pretty creepy fucking premise and scary premise. But the idea is that like people change if you change their environment like back time. The thing, that's why to me the healthiest thing anybody can do about anything is question everything your thoughts. Not because you are like a pain in the ass teenager, we just want to be different for the hell of being different. Just because precisely if you value something, you should question it. It's the same thing as like when you say on-net products, you try them. You check it out for yourself. If it works, you go for it. If it doesn't, you don't. It has to be by direct experience. Otherwise you should start going by the shit that other people tell you and it's about belief and going on faith almost. How the fuck do you know anyway? Well, the real problem with that is that should be the way we do it. We should go on other people. The problem is there's too many dummies out there. There's too many people out there that don't know what the fuck was going on in their own life. And right, they can't give you advice and they can't give you an honest assessment whether something works or doesn't work as good or it's not good. Right. But that should be the way we go on it. And it should be that we can completely trust everybody. If we could figure out how to eliminate deception, that would be one of the best things ever for the human race. If we could figure out how to eliminate the need to steal and deception. Just to those two things alone. I get lucky. Burned. I know. It's right. Burn what you deserve. Right. And don't deceive to get there. Don't lie. Right. Whether it's in business or in your personal life, your friendships. And when we figure that out, that's going to be gigantic. Because it's really, that's one of the beauties when people start talking about psychedelics, helping people. One of the beautiful things is that it eliminates the ego. And the ego is the one that's locking you in to all that stupid shit. The ego is locking you into your past experiences. The ego is locking you into your idea who you are. And that's the kind of shit that allows people to do creepy things. That's what allows people to steal and deceive. And you know, use trickery. And that's someone who's like your ego is allowing you to do that. Like your sense of humanity and justice. What would you, how would you want the world to behave? What if everyone's like that? By doing it yourself. Are you giving a green light for everyone to just go straight pirate? Right. Do you know how hard human beings have worked for so fucking long to get ourselves to a position where we can walk down the street in almost every city in a country and be reasonably safe when you're driving and you could be reasonably safe. Even despite the fact that you're dealing with millions and millions and millions of people. When you go rogue, you know, you, you cut up this whole awesome system that everybody's been bust in their ass. Yep. To me, it's weird because my relationship with the law, I guess, is I break the law. That's the law for fucking folks. Thanks for the translation. Very good. The law as I was saying, the, yeah, there's so many fucking words I can say. There are a lot of laws I break on a fairly regular basis. But my, I guess moral standpoint on that is anything, anything I do, whether legal or illegal, the end result can't be hurting another human being. If anybody walk home crying because of something I did, it's fucked up. If I'm breaking laws that don't really hurt another human being, there's no one person who's gonna shut a tear over it, then I have no problem with it. You know, well, I agree with that. I feel like running a red light three in the morning when there's no one around. I agree with that. Right. But I think even if, if certain laws, like, like financial laws, there's a reason why people are willing to steal things from their job and people willing to lie about their taxes and people. And one of the reasons is that regular people, people who are worried about their money and scratch and scrape and save for vacations if they ever get a vacation, regular people see the type of shit that goes on in Wall Street. They see, like, those houses on the Hamptons, on those TV shows, and those crazy places in Greenwich, Connecticut, where these people have fucking airports in their backyard and helicopter landing pads in the middle of their polo field, you know, it's insane money. You're talking about people who have hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars, so many of them. And what do they offer? What do they do? Well, they're in the financial business. They move numbers around. They figure out a way to extract money from the system. That's what they do. They get really good at extracting money from the system. And the best piece of evidence is what's in front of them. What exactly do you do? You move numbers, you buy, you sell, you do this, you sell. How the fuck have you acquired the amount of wealth that you need to own a gigantic compound in Greenwich, Connecticut? What benefit have you given? What have you done there? What have you done? You've extracted money from the system. That's what you've done. Whether it's legal or illegal, the, it's the same shit because you know the laws that are in place are only in place because somebody bribes somebody. And that's the fact. They use special interest money to make something happen somewhere that somebody liked, that somebody passed that law and got things through. And that's how the system is set up the way it is. That's why I mean, if you're going to be in the game anyway, then I have no problem breaking certain laws, but I don't break my own laws. You know what I mean? Social laws, fuck it, whatever. As long as the problem is, when people, when people stop being goody goody and go buy the book, the fucking book, the, okay. They at that point, they, they just go nuts, right? So it's like, it's not just that they slightly break a few laws because they, those laws don't make sense is they go all out and use a raping pillage and whatever the fuck. Or they are these goody goody freaks who are, and both of them don't, I mean, I prefer the one that's not gonna shoot you at 3 a.m. but at the end of the day, they both are stuck in this dogmatic view of the world about how it's supposed to be. And to me, once you break laws, you have to be, there's a Bob Dylan line in one of his songs that is to live outside the law, you must be honest, which is sound like a paradox, right? Because it's the same. What the fuck do you mean? Like, are you gonna be honest by breaking laws? And it really is you need to be otherwise it turned into some fucked up criminal. But if you're gonna do it, you need to have some pretty serious moral safeguard that you have on your own, then you don't need any God or a cop to catch you to make you not do it. Is you don't do certain things because they are fucked up period and you're just not gonna do it because it's such what's inside of you. That's a very romantic notion, man, that's like fucking Clint Eastwood movie. You know, it is, right? Romantic notion, the ethics of being an outlaw. Yeah, outlaw ethics. I realized a few days ago, I was, you know, on Facebook as the thing, like inspirational people or shit like that, when you're playing, you throw down some names. I realized I put down Robin Hood twice. I was like, shit, really? Twice? That important to me? At different point in time. I'm like, okay, I see a pattern here. I didn't know that Robin Hood was initially about poaching. Yeah, yeah. It's about food, right? Because they didn't let their hands. They wouldn't let the poor hunt on the land. So they had no money, no food, and they started shooting deer and Robin Hood would shoot these deer and give them to poor people. Yep. People are so silly. The fact that Kings ever worked, that that ever worked, that anybody was ever willing to like admit your grace, royalty. That's one of the beautiful things about that. And I know it's a fantasy novel, but Game of Thrones is the way they communicate with each other, the way the royals have this secret guarded way of communicating with each other. But the actors are so good that their intention is very clear throughout everything. And they have this very proper way of handling and managing every situation. It's so fascinating. I know. That's really awesome. It's so that royal blood thing is such a trip. And again, I know that this is just a TV show that's bullshit. I think I've dragons and stuff. You know, it's not reality. It's not reality. What the fuck? But no dragons really. That idealistic way of communicating did exist, at least in small places and small pockets for quite a while. Absolutely. But the thing that's interesting out is not only how it evolves, that part is actually the cool part about it, is how it evolves the one day some guy shows up and say, you know what? I'm going to be your king. You'd call me your majesty. And it's not because God wants it to be that way. Right. And, I mean, if I go do that around today, I probably don't have such success. How the fuck did people go along with that? It's just amazing. I don't know. Do you think that being a king and that kind of thing comes from the original alpha male, primate behavior that chimps exhibit and monkeys exhibit, where there's one that's always the alpha? So almost like we have this weird broken need to have that one. So we go looking for it, whether it's a king or a priest or whatever. There's a one. It could be that way. It could also be, and one doesn't exclude the other, but could also be like in hunting and gathering societies, which is how we have lived a majority of time, we've been around. You have the kind of this informal leadership, because there's like 20, 30 people who have known each other their life. So when there's a decision to be made, everybody turn to you because you are cool. You're smart. Last time you gave us good advice. You don't have real power. But when you settle down and you start living in farming communities and the 30 people become 300 and then become 3000, there's a lot more of those little inner fights. People within the tribe will start fighting each other and you need the leader to can mediate because he's a cool guy. And it stops being, oh, you're a nice guy. You do that once in a while. It becomes a full time job and becomes so important to keep the society together. Make sure that people don't kill each other. It's like, stop planting your fields. Don't worry about that. We understand that it's a pain in the ass for you to constantly be having to worry about our little squabbles, but it's such an important job. We'll plant for you. And suddenly there's a division of social classes where suddenly somebody is a specialized job that emerged, maybe because they are cool people. He starts out, people give them that power. Hey man, you're really smart. You can always solve the problem. And then with the bigger the society gets, the more the social stratification, the more deposition become entrenched, solid, unquestionable. It passes through their kids, kings, the vying right, all of that shit. But probably the way it starts, it starts in a mental normal way. Like, oh man, you're a cool guy. You give good advice. Please help us mediate. And the more the need for mediation increases, the bigger the more important a role becomes. Until it becomes something above and separate from everybody else's. And it's not leadership by charisma anymore. It becomes leadership by birth or some shit. By right, by divine right, by enforcement of the group of people that agrees with you and then you give your power within the group. Yep. Yeah, it's madness. It's amazing that it existed as the norm though. But it's amazing is that it's not just that in one place a king was born. Right. And they had a king and wow, this is crazy. How do they do a king thing? Nobody else would agree with that. No, everybody agreed to it. They agreed to it all over the world. This is the degree to the emperor in China. They did an emperor in Japan. I mean, basically everybody was rocking that king thing at one time. I mean, that's amazing. Yeah, because you can't have a big society without central authority. It's sound awful to say because it sounds like you're defending some fascist model of the world. Like you need the strong again, I'm not going to do the purpose. My weird voice, but the that's needed for central authority to keep the society in check. And unfortunately when you put enough people together, it's not going to work unless you have some kind of central authority and decide things. That's the long chess game of the new world order. Yeah. When they, if you think about it, right, why would you ever want the world to be stable? Because if the world was stable, you wouldn't need some sort of militarized government to protect you. Right. So the militarized government that's protecting you, make sure the world stays on the stable level. It keeps the party rolling because if everybody just agrees and settle the fuck down, it's tough killing each other. Then you don't really need as many jets. You don't have as many resources as much resources going to go into war. There's all sorts of shit you can solve. Meal and industrial complex. Yeah. Locked into the grip of this constantly feeding machine. It constantly has momentum working in the same direction. And there's money to be made in it. It's not like it's just an altruistic adventure to try to fix the world and engineer it properly. No, no. Everybody's making money. It's staggering amounts. It's the best money making thing in the whole world. That's right. I mean, the whole speech by Heisenauer into 50s was a creep because he's an hour, a Republican guy was led troops in World War II. Not the most conspiracy theory in Klein. It's very straight by the book kind of guy. And yet when he announces the biggest threat facing the United States in the 50s, everybody said, well, communism, right? No. Meal and industrial complex is like, the fuck you're talking about again? And the guy is a military guy himself, a fairly conservative guy. And yet he makes the call saying, if you let certain industries that profit on war get too big, they will get to have influence over government pushing us. And they will get to fight wars when we don't really need it because of their own profit. And if he comes from some random heapy tagging you this, he's like, yeah, whatever. He comes from this straight lace, the bite of the book kind of guy. It's like, whoa, really? You know, when I first found that out, I saw that speech. I was really pissed that nobody ever showed it to me in high school. They never did? No. They didn't talk about it. No. No. Then I never came up with my high school. Nobody ever said that Eisenhower warned us about the military industrial complex, the concept of the military industrial complex being anything but good or the military being anything but good is never taught. Shit. Yeah. Never taught when I was in high school, not in my school. And I went to Newton South High School, which is a very good high school in the suburbs of Boston. It's a very good school, very smart kids. And remember any of that? No. There's no idea. There was never really, that's a really sort of, that's a very controversial subject to be teaching children. It's fun, though. That's what it's about. Yeah. They are going to pay attention to that. They are not going to pay attention if you say the president in 18. But I mean, controversial in that a lot of parents are going to think that that's like liberal programming. And then what you're doing is bullshitting these kids with your hippie ideas and you're fucking with my kids head. And I'm reporting what some Republican president was generating war war too said back off. Yeah, it's still though. It's such a, it's such a, at least it was when I was in high school. It's such a sensitive area to choose the government of doing anything nefarious. That was never done. Like when I was in high school they taught us Lee Harvey Oswald, shot fucking Canada. Really? Oh, yeah, they did. Of course they did. Oh, it was. That's exactly what it was. They showed you Lee Harvey Oswald and they showed Jack Ruby killing Lee Harvey Oswald. Go all darn it. Well never even know now why he killed the president. Like they taught us that in high school and this is like years after they had the Zapruder film shown on the hurrah all the Rivera show where Dick Gregory, the stand of comedian, brought it on the hurrah all the Rivera show and showed people the view of the assassination from essentially where this guy's Zapruder was standing which we had never seen the actual assassination before. And when people watched it, the first thing they thought was that this guy looks like he's been shot from the front. Right. Like it doesn't look like his head goes back into the left. Like he got shot by more than one person too. He got shot in his back. He got shot. There's a one wound that they turned into a trakiotomy wound. Right. Yeah. It was an entry wound from the front. There's a bullet room and do it where his neck was. And there's two different depictions of the autopsy from Bethesda, Maryland to Dallas. It's really interesting. It is. It's very interesting stuff. But I guess what you're saying puts things in perspective for me because there are a bunch of times when I'm teaching class and to me I'm saying the things that are the most normal things that everybody would know. And I see everybody kind of like Joe dropped to the ground like what the fuck really that happened. I'm like yeah doesn't everybody isn't that kind of the stuff that you normally teach and I guess no. No, no it's not at all. The normal in school you're taught no conspiracy theories. You're taught no variations of the truth. You know, you're taught nothing. I mean as the most controversial guess is Nixon was involved in a scandal and watergate. You know, they tell you Nixon that's good to know. Yeah, because they got rid of Nixon. You did a bad thing. This guy apparently Nixon had loose morals. Did you ever listen to all those Nixon tapes like there's like hundreds and hundreds of hours or tapes because they had everything might in the whole entire place. And there's like things where like he talks about abortions. I just heard this on open and the other day and there's like parts where he's talking about a abortion and stuff like that, you know, just in case of like, yeah, just listen to it. It's crazy. He said a lot of creepy shit. Creepy shit. Like he was a creep. He was a creep. And they found out about it by, you know, tapping into his fucking place. He was a president. Oh yeah, yeah. He knew they were recording all that. He was responsible for it. No, he was responsible. He had everything might because he wanted to, if anything was to happen, he wanted to have proof. So he was like the good guy. And what happened is that they just recorded everything and found, you know, I thought they bugged the campaign quarter headquarters. So that's what he did. What these guys did, they bug the democratic campaign had a right and in order to find out what they were saying. And they got busted. That was the scandal because it's like you authorized back, you know, that's totally legal. Right. And he said, no, no, wasn't me. It wasn't me. And then eventually came out that it was exactly the recording that was referring to where there's a lot of evidence of what Nixon was actually saying that he did do that shit. People need to know if there are presidents or crocs. Right. I'm not a croc. And then Nixon lately, afterwards, they would say, well, if the president does it, then it's not illegal. I just like, you don't get a bunch. Did he really say that? Yeah. Well, he was a creepy dude anyway. The weirdest thing about him being president is that is the leader of this great nation. That's the best you can do. That guy's weird, man. That guy, everything about him looks like you made it with a stamp, you know, it pressed it in a mold. It looks like you polished it up and the whole like his, everything was weird about that guy. Everything. The way walked, the way talked. Big time. I tend to trust intuition in the regard that he's on a person to person level. Like, you see somebody and before they say anything, you got to vibe before you think there's something weird to the person or not. Man, look at Nixon. You got how the fuck did he become president? That's what I'm saying. If you look at him, he's like one of the creepiest guys ever elected to like a major office. When you guys arms up in the air, he's a weird looking dude and he looks so awkward and he didn't feel warm. He didn't feel real. He didn't feel, there was nothing about him. Like with Kennedy, Kennedy had like, it was obviously with a special man. Like it was obviously with a handsome man of great lineage, you know, and he had this way of talking and this charisma. That's all you can see it right there. It's all real obvious. But you get to a guy like Nixon, you go, what the fuck was going on there, man? And he's funny because he got elected in 1968, which is, you know, in the middle of the United States, he's very, and he's precisely because the 60s were going on. The conservatives got freaked out and he started, oh my god. The country is going in this crazy wild, godless, liberal direction. We need to take it back. I got hardcore political. The organization is to try to elect and they got Nixon in office. Yeah. Yeah, man, Nixon is a brave. They said that the election of 1960 was the first election where they had the debate was on TV and they had, for, they said that people who listened on the radio to the debate think that Nixon had done pretty well, but then people who watched it on TV, they overwhelmed and they thought, can they be dominated? Because he's so handsome. Exactly. And they look good by comparison, whereas Nixon was like this weird looking troll that was scary as hell on so many ways. And so anybody watching on TV was like, fuck not that guy. He was sweating like a pig. He was doing all that. It's like, that's instinctive. It shouldn't be, but it's instinctive. I mean, it's not, it's not even an appearance thing because Rodney Dangerfield was kind of ugly dude, but he was so lovable and warm. You know what I mean? I mean, if Rodney Dangerfield had the creepy behavior of Nixon, he would be just as creepy. Of course. Like Nixon lacked any charisma. When, when you tell people, you know, you, oh, you trust first impressions, they're like, ah, that's superficial. They are only looking at somebody's good looking or not. It's not even about that. It's, there's a vibe to people. There's to me, I think believe it or that. Yeah. I don't know exactly what you see. I don't know if it's some specific body language. I don't know what is that you see, but to me is everything you've ever gone through is written on your skin. You know, it's right. In easy now you move, is it now you talk? Is it now you do everything? So it shows up. And to me is now weird that some people can't see it. It's like, what if I can't most people see it? It's like a Chihuahua can sniff you for three seconds and decide whether exactly bark at you or be all like, woo, woo, woo, woo. Yeah. It's like, if a Chihuahua can do it. Yeah, but let me tell you something. Chihuahua's wrong all the time. Those were the cons. They bark constantly. They're not the best. That's not the best. Yeah, okay. I thought, could he for a dog? Yeah, that doesn't qualify as a dog anyway. But that is true. The darkened sniff you out and learn things about you and people can too. We have a weird wave, you know, whether or not you trust it and whether or not it's tuned in, you know, you gotta have a been around plenty of crazy people and be taking a really good look at your own self. Look at yourself like really truly objectively. Your fault, all of it, to be able to recognize it in other people because if you're bullshit in yourself, it's super easy to get bullshit. Of course. Of course. Yeah. And if you're bullshit in other people, it's also easy to get bullshit because, you know, like, that was like a big thing in gambling was the double dump when a guy thought he was getting dumped, but really they were dumping on him, you know, the double dump where, you know, you're manipulating how a game goes down. Right. People are deviant, so fucks. They sure are. Well, not all of them, a lot of them. A lot of them. Good percentage. Yeah. Give you that. Once we reach out his mind, that shit's all gonna stop. Yeah. I think that's the next step. The next step of evolution is gonna be knowing whether or not someone's bullshit. Well, save so much. But to me, that's, I don't know, maybe I'm too like who psychic powers or some shit, but to me, that's not even the hard to do now. Let alone like to me most of the time. What about that Jody Areas? Well, I mean, that's what I mean is that something something something she would have got to. She would have got to. She would have changed and she would have changed and she was cute enough that you would say, you know, she wants to be with me. I might take a chance. You'll be in there with a damn. Like she doesn't look like an obvious freak. There's nothing that's cream freak, but there's some sexual freak. No, no, I mean, just like weird like a stab in the shower kind of freak, but as in she does look freakishly cold. Like there's something there that's like there's something weird going on emolence. I wouldn't be able to tell. Oh, yes, she's this weird one. I'd be, but you could tell like, huh, there's something off there. That bitch is crazy. Did you see the video, the security video of her after they arrested her? No, I didn't say it. She's doing headstands, doing headstands, singing to herself. Like they're locking her up in a cage for the rest of her life from murder and probably going to put her to death. And she's singing. And then when they ask her from jail, like they have a jailhouse interview, it's stunning how well she lies about that. And you know, it's a beautiful thing that people do so well when they lie about shit like that. Well, how will you stay calm? My faith. I love that. I love that. Just think about that statement that your faith after you stabbed a dude like 28 times, shot him in the head, slit his neck. Like this bitch did some crazy shit to this guy's body. And she's like my faith. It makes you wonder, I think she actually believes it when she say my faith. I think there's a good chunk of her actually believe what she's saying. She could be one of those people that's so crazy that they sort of reform their reality every three or four hours. There's people like that. I've seen people that have been able to justify almost anything because they just sort of put it away. And then there's a new reality. You know, I've never done anything like that. You just did it. What are you talking about? Like there's a lot of people that are like that. They could just shut parts of the brain up. And unfortunately, I think a lot of them suffered childhood abuse. Yeah. In fact, that's a thing that's some time, you know, when you got the whole background story, you almost feel bad. But then you feel bad for the five year old. You don't feel bad for the person you have become because it's like, I understand how you got there. But understanding doesn't mean justifying. Exactly. Exactly. It's too fucked up. Sorry. I can't let that slide. Absolutely. There's certain things as a race, we have to figure out how to stop from occurring. And I don't think we put any resources into that. It's amazing how much we put resources into making sure that marijuana stays illegal. Think about how much money is involved in that. What is it for being there in a year or something like that? It's crazy. Something nutty. And how much have we really put into trying to help people that are doing a shitty job of raising their children? How much, I mean, besides like what, I don't know what you can do really. I mean, besides actively going in there and taking their kids away. But just some form of education, some community center, something, I just feel like when you see like really, really poor neighborhoods that are ignored, you're just asking for problems. Of course. You're just asking for problems. You should fix that. Level that up as much as possible. Help those people as much as possible. And help them to get the fuck out of there. And the thing that drives me crazy about people, when they talk about people that are in the ghetto, like, oh, they're poor, they're lazy, that's why they're still in a welfare. If they don't want to work, you don't get it. You don't get it. They are in a shit spot. And it's super hard to have a good mentality when you're in a shit spot. It's very hard to say that they, you know, they're just fucking get off their lazy asses and stop collecting welfare. I think you're probably missing what's going on there, you know, ideology aside, right wing, rhetoric aside, you're dealing with someone who got a terrible role in the dice. And that could have been you, man. You could have been in that. And just because you could pull out a story or two or three about people who are in that situation and then Rob went on to get his PhD. And to this day he says that living in the ghetto does not hold you back. It's a prison of your own mind. Right. There's always those stories, but the reality is how much good role models those kids have, how many good role models, how much good inspiration, how much hope for the future. Student of mine, very first semester I started teaching. It was this guy was from South Central LA and we started chatting afterwards and man, the story he would tell me about what was normal part of his day today live. Be like, yeah, I just didn't got home until midnight from class because they had somebody killed right down my door and so they had locked it up at the whole and just like fuck really. And that shit would happen like three times a year. Yeah, it happens all the time. Wow. It happens all the time. It's real dangerous. Who you know running into the wrong people. Big goal. It's all real dangerous. And you know what's doing shit about it. You know, they do all they do about it is they arrest people when people do things that are bad. You know, instead of making cops lives way easier. And this is all very utopian, hippie. We need to fix it. We need to do something about the, but it's just weird to me that it never comes up. It's weird to me that if you do bring it up or social is on and people cry like that's there's a bunch of babies there man. There's like a whole community of future people that you can affect. There's a whole new generation of future people that if emphasis is put on helping, it can somehow or another we can figure out a way to like at least eliminate a certain aspect of the lowest of our lowest class society. You know, it seems like that could be done with education. It seems like at least part of it can be done. Sure. Definitely about third and it's currently at least. Way better in much. But no one is. It's just one of the most frustrating things is how far we've come as a human race and yet how far we have to go when it comes to shit like that. Absolutely. Yeah, because I mean the whole I'm fuzzy son individual initiative is like pull yourself out by your boots, draft and stuff. There's something good about that. Fuck yeah, of course, there is an element about self empowerment that regardless of circumstances, you know, you're not going to change circumstances just because you wish it. So there is an element where the individual needs to find a way because if nothing else is doing it for you, you might as well put your best to do it. But having said that, most people then use that argument to disown me so the social conditions become well, it's just up to you. So go son, we are all behind you kind of shit. But it is in the meantime, you start from 50 steps behind everyone else because you grow up in a shitty place with drug abuse all over with alcohol abuse all over with neural models with the whole thing. And it's like, but you know, you can do it. Well, yeah, sweet for sweet of you to say wasn't you know, you haven't grown up in that shit. It's such a cliche, but a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. And if we really, you know, the most patriotic thing that we could do as a country is not go fuck with some other countries overseas with dubious intentions. But strengthen our weakest link, our weakest economic link, our weakest social link. It's like, it's a weird thing that politicians don't talk about that. They don't offer that up as a plan for the future. Take, you know, give country, give companies contracts to clean up together. Right. The same kind of contracts you give to clean up fucking Iraq, give contracts to clean up together. It would be amazing. Let, let however it make money cleaning up together. Why can't they do that? I don't understand why I can't profit off of that. It seems ridiculous. It seems like it's just at this point in 2013, we're still doing the same goddamn shit. Still going over to countries, getting involved in dubious shit. Somehow or another, it can or can't be tied to resources and oil and this and that. And all that's conspiracy theory, we're over there to stop this long from taking over our underwear. Whatever the fucking is. Right. The same goddamn show game. Well, I mean, in fact, that's what's funny. I guess I keep bringing you after that, but that's because you started on him. We've done curling. I was going to be serious about the Roman Republic. Yeah. And he was hilarious because he was the same exact dynamics you see them today. Yeah. By the book. Exactly. It's unavoidable. It's unavoidable. It's like we're stupid. We're broken. We're broken little crazy animals. We don't know how to like keep it together. We get, we get it together for a certain amount of time and then we fucking spiral out of control and slamming into the rocks. It's a fucking weird because I don't know. I mean, I noticed when I look at myself and I analyze like where I'm at and I'm happy with me or no, I see so much fucking room for improvement. There are lots of times when I'm like, yeah, you know, I like. I'm glad you see it because I've been meaning to talk to you about your local problem. I see a lot of it. I kind of like myself. There are good things, but I also see like, ah, fuck, this thing is not so good. This thing. It's so weakness. Then I look at everyone else. And I'm like, fuck. Fuck. I'm a god. That's going to be a meme on the internet for sure. Then I look at everyone else and I'm like, fuck, I'm a god. That is a meme and a half son. You just fuck yourself. You just fucked yourself hard. You better hope and pray. You don't say anything stupid for the next three years because they, that's how long they remember a meme for. That's so good. Let's do it. And I look at everyone else and I'm like, fuck, I'm a god. And I'm like, the thing that's fun is that it's not that I really think like I'm all that. That's what I look at. Objectively just me. I do see so many places where I couldn't prove. But then you know, the bar is so fucking low on average. The average human being there are so many fucked up shit that people do that. I'm like, wow, okay. At least right. Right. When you think that you're a loser because you can't pay your credit card. You hear about this guy on Cleveland that has kidnapped three women for 10 years and you go, I'm not really about that. Right. I was like, okay. Yeah. But yeah, that's why it's important to surround yourself with bad motherfuckers. That's very important. You know, to surround yourself with cool people. Like one of the things that I've gotten really good at as I've become an adult is I collect cool people. I know I'm going to collect cool friends. I got a bunch of cool people that have managed to sneak into my life. That's very important because when you have questions about something, when you want to talk to something about something, like I can resource a database of cool, intelligent, level-headed, healthy egoed people. That's super important. It's so hard to find. It is. That's one of the most important things about choosing a place to live or choosing people to be around is surrounding yourself with inspirational people. People who are also healthy. People who are excited. People have good attitudes. People who aren't lazy bitches. That's probably the most comment I see when I look at your board, when I look at Duncan's board. People's emails or people who send you an email like, oh, I love the podcast. That's stuff like that. So many people say the exact same thing you're saying, which is, Jesus Christ, I can't find around me the kind of conversations that you guys have on a podcast. Man, I wish. That's why I listen because I can't find it around me. And you know, it's amazing. It's inspiring to be reminded that the not all humanity is like that. Well, you know what it is. There's a lot of people that think like us out there, but they were weren't connected by like a show. It's like they were all floating around and you sort of locked into certain ideologies and sometimes you could listen to this kind of a show or that kind of a show. But it didn't get locked into like where you could all meet up. It's almost like you need a spot where you meet up. And then everybody goes, I'm not alone. I'm not crazy. I'm not alone. Yeah, this world is fucked. Thank you. Because I get up every day and I look at my alarm clock and I go with the fuck as the point and go into my whack ass job. Well, this is a crazy fucked up world. It doesn't make any sense at all. And I'm just stuck in the system which eats up most of my time and therefore leaves with no time to really think about what I'm doing. So I'm just caught. A creature of momentum floating down the river life, trying to figure out a way to get to a lily pad. Just catch a breath. Fuck me. Fuck, man. So that's one of the best things about living in LA. And so I know so many cool people that live around here. It's one of the only things that keeps me around. So important. And so important to do it through podcasts too. When we do it, when we bring you these people, you guys out there listening, when we bring you these people like Daniela Bollelli, Joe Diaz and Duncan Trassel, when it spreads like that, like that's good for everybody. It's good for all of us. Yeah, because I mean, imagine you're the guy who lives in a town of 2,000 people in Nebraska or something. Yeah. And you are the everybody you relate to feel like they live in a parallel universe. Yeah. And feel like you're the weird before internet you would have been really fucked. With internet, you can have access to a whole other world out there where like, okay, I'm not just the crazy one in town. There really is something different. And you can share it with other people in your town too. You can say, listen, this is doonim Duncan Trassel. And you got to hear this fucking podcast and it's going to change the way you look at marriage or a flashlight or a flashlight. Yeah, that's what the internet provides that nobody had before. Yeah. You know, that's one of the things that was really fascinating about this Dan Carlin podcast as he was talking about Martin Luther and how they printed up. This is amazing stuff folks. They made these little like pamphlets and they handed out these pamphlets about religion. And people would hide them and share them with each other and they were like secret. And it spread like a wildfire. This guy, Martin Luther, he was the first guy to translate the Bible in a phonetic language. The first guy to make it so that the people who didn't understand Latin could actually read the word of the Bible. Yeah, because at that time when he started doing that, he was that penalty of fence. Yeah. He was a little bit more a little read it in, you know, Christian countries. He was bad, bad, bad, bad because he had to be a priest because only a priest can read it correctly. If you read it on your own, you're going to screw things up and pollute the word of God. And back then the Pope had bitches. Of course. The Pope had mistresses. What's the point of being a Pope for the rest? Crazy cash. The Pope was going to war with the Mongols. Yeah, yeah. No, actually, the Pope went to war with the Romans, right? Did the Pope, who went to war? The Pope would let it on me. Where are we? Of course. The Brazilian of the stories were sometimes before they became Pope, they were like general or some shit, as low-tra whole town and then eventually they become Pope. Slotter a whole town and become a Pope. Sometimes, sometimes when they were actually Pope. When did Pope and being a priest in general become so gay? Not designing wrong, that. No, I think throughout. It was the only cover that you had if you didn't have 80 sexuality where you get married and you just have kids and all of that shit. If you just wasn't in you and you couldn't fake it and it's not like you had the option of saying, no, sorry, I'm out of this because I like dudes or something. You couldn't say that. Couldn't you just teach poetry and everybody would just give you a wink and they knew it was up? Not even because everybody's expected to get married. If you're not married and you don't have kids or the fuck is wrong with you. If you become a priest, is it only cover? Or because it's the service of God? Then it's like, oh, okay, that's why you don't touch women and stuff. How many men back then must have beards? That's what beards mean wives that weren't really their wives. They had a wife just for the even fuck turned out to prying that. Of course. Really they were just out getting booty every night. Blind and deep, blind and deep, blind and deep. No, for sure. That's only 1500s. Absolutely. That Martin Luther shit was nuts. And that people that didn't think he took it far enough. They took it to another level. What was it called again? At the Wanda. At the Baptism? Yeah. Even those guys, there are so many subdivisions. That's why they think that's so crazy. Most of those guys are hard core pacifists to sort of read the New Testament in a very literal turn the other cheek, love your enemies so they wouldn't fight under any conditions. But then there were some guys who decided, well, I like some of your interpretation, which was the more pro poor semi communist interpretation of the New Testament. But this peaceful shit, yeah, I don't like that part. So we'll just go for the hardcore pro pro communist approach, but we'll just bash bastard's heads on the way. And we'll take people's things. Exactly. They decided that there would be no private property and they wanted to know, like no one should be able to own anything. It's like we all enjoy fire. We all enjoy the sun. Like they were going deep. Some of the stories are just, you can't believe that people go along with you. Well, I can't believe that in 1500, you couldn't even read a Bible. That is amazing. I didn't know that. And that gave you an idea of how much of an institution designed to control people, the Catholic Church was for them, that is. Yeah, you can't get away with it anymore. Read the Quran since the beginning of time. Yeah, no, it's crazy. It really is insane. And in that sense, that was the cool thing about Martin Luther is about pushing these everybody can make it decide for themselves, which sound very sweet and democratic. But the problem is that then when he started realizing that other people were interpreting the Bible in ways they were completely unlike his, he was just a piece that's the Catholic with them. He's like, no, I meant freedom from the Catholic interpretation. I didn't mean really make up your own, that's a weird shit that you're interpreting there. Who told you that? And Protestants started burning people at the stake just as much as Catholics were doing it. Well, that was the big time for burning people. Yeah, the guy John Calvin, like the second major figure beside Martin Luther and Martin Protestants, he was so peace with this one guy because he denied the Trinity, you know, the father song for the ghost thing that he had the in burn at the stake. And when they were bringing the wood to set him on fire, he said, no, not that wood, that's dry. He's gonna burn up quick. I want green wood. I want this motherfucker to last a long time. Oh my God. Really? That's the guy who started a huge branch of Protestantism. These green wood? Yeah, because that way it takes longer to long time. They cooked a guy to death with green wood. I could just see a slow fire cooking your feet, which is like, oh, what? What kind of a sick motherfucker do you have to beat? What a dick. Son, there he out. Yeah, there was a lot of green mountain grills. I met the owner by the way in Sacramento. Oh, did you? We went drinking and got wasted. You got wasted with the owner of green mountain grills? Yeah, it's a great grill. I think she's my other night. I love it. I cooked some of the last of my venison sausage. This is amazing. It's so, because you keep the temperature the same. We went from Martin Luther and what were we going to talk about cooking people? Well, yeah, that's the reason we thought that. There's a fucked up part about history. The cruelty that people are willing to do to follow man. You know, again, just a few years ago. In the name of ideology. Yeah, I mean, this is not even the stuff where it's like, man, you have a lot of cool gold. I wanted sorry, tough luck. I'll bash your skull in because I want to take it. It's not nice, but you can see a logic to it at least. This is about some, you don't believe in the Trinity. That's why I'm going to burn you to that. Are you fucking kidding me? Really? That's what we argue about? The father, the son, the whole ghost. The goddard's rape killer. Well, there was in the Catholic church. That's more of an Islamic approach, right? Yeah, I mean, but the thing is that what scares me to me is not even one group or the other. It's like anybody who puts ideology above a real individual around them. Anybody who goes, anybody in that sense to me ideology, any kind of ideology in that sense is a disease because rather than interpreting life by looking at what really is going on, you are trying to interpret it to this filter of your, it has to feed my preconceived notion of the universe. And if life doesn't, then there's something wrong with life. I'm going to disregard that evidence because I got it all figured out. Yeah, it can be beneficial if you follow a really positive ideology, but just following an ideology itself is so dangerous. That's like the idea that one person or one idea, one thought will prevail above all, despite rational changes in your environment, changes around you. That's what a religion really is. A religion is an ideology. That's where it really becomes a problem. We get locked into those two easy for some reason. It's like a broken circuit. You know what I mean? We have like a defect. I think life is too complex for most people to deal with. There are too many exceptions. There's too much change going on. So I was working yesterday, they may not work today. And it's too much. It's too much work. People don't want to deal with it. So one of the things that people dig is the ability to have some solid dogma to fall back on. That is reassuring. It makes them feel good about life. It makes them feel like I know what's going on as opposed to be constantly on the board of figures things out as you go. Yeah, especially folks that seem to have a little extra fear or a little less curiosity or they get tired easier. It's so easier for them to just lock on something. It's also easier for people to lock on something. That's the one of the weirdest things we see. Obviously mentally ill person screaming fire and brimstone. You're like, oh, that's... Yeah, you're right on that. And is it hilarious how people apply to every aspect of life? And when they are not that flat out crazy but just a couple of degrees lower that desire for owning the truth and for martial arts is the same. I mean, martial arts is the same crop, right? Before MMA, before Bruce Lee everybody was like, judo is the shit. F***arat it. You guys suck. And there was the same mentality that organized religions have. It's the same mentality that I got the truth. Everybody else must be wrong. And I'm going to defend it against all evidence no matter what. Yeah, martial arts are very cult like a lot of the traditional martial arts. And although I benefited a lot from that, I was definitely locked in. It's just I was lucky that it was very positive. And there was beneficial towards me, but it was all bowing. Everyone was, sir, you know, you were a special outfit when you walked into the place. Right. Certain words you would use. And, you know, there's like, there's a lot of mind control to it. It wasn't just discipline. It was also like, there were instilling a program in your mind. And if you accepted that program and make you a more efficient fighter, make you more efficient killer, make you more disciplined. And that's the beauty of MMA is when everybody was claiming this stuff. You know, they went with, they built a cult in so many ways. You know, any traditional martial arts built a cult in terms of cult of personality. And the wise master who knows everything and all these rules are designed to increase the sense of hierarchy sometime. And in things like UFC's like, well, prove it, which is almost blasphemous if you say it in a more traditional context where you're not saying it as a challenge. You're not telling somebody to fuck off by your saying, and that sounds like a cool theory showing, you know, showing that it works under pressure. Under real pressure. Right. Right. That's as close to emulating an actual fight as you can get. Yeah. And that stuff in most traditional elements like in most religions is blasphemous. You say, yeah. You're questioning the master. You're doing, and it's like, his question is the healthiest thing, man. It's like, I'm giving him a chance to prove it. Yeah, that didn't, doesn't work anymore. That's the whole idea that you can question. That's that's out. That one's out. That one's out. That's done. Anybody tells you not to question question that guy? Right. Because that's a mess. Yep. Who the fuck are you? You can't be questioned. Are you an alien? Are you from another planet? Right. Are you the perfect being? Are you Dr. Manhattan? Right. No, right. And that's exactly where I was going with the new book that I published on. The new book is called Create Your Own Religion. And what is it on what publishing company? It's disinfo. I mean, it's disinfo is a subset of why is everybody yes? Yeah. Disinfo.com. I have both original disinfo books. Yeah. You're being lied to. Yeah. That's a great book. Yeah. That's a awesome stuff. You read that book and you're like, what the fuck? That was like sort of almost pre-internet. You know, I mean, it was part of the internet movement. But having that book around was like, if you went over someone's house and you saw that you're being lied to, you're like, all right, man. You fucking do it. You're being like me, brother. You know how the man's been lying to you as well. Daniela Lebole. So Create Your Own Religion is what is the concept behind it's just to add all the best parts to all the different ideologies you've ever found and just sort of Bruce Lee at all. That's exactly what it is. It's the MMA approach to religion is what the way MMA stands to traditional martial arts is like these approaches, what stands to regular religions, which is not not all the good stuff come from the same place. You need to look at multiple places. You need to test it. You need to see what works or doesn't. And the reader then being like, Christianity sucks. So it's like, try, try some things, maybe 80% of it you think this crazy bullshit, the make no sense, but you find a couple of gems that you can help you in life that use them. Why not? Doesn't mean I'm marrying the ideology, but I'm going to take whatever I can use to make life to me the only thing that matters is elevating the quality of life. If you're elevating the quality of life, I don't give a fuck where you got the sourcing formation from. That's not what it's about. It's where it's leading. What kind of a result does it create? Yeah. It's interesting. Which is exactly the MMA mentality. It doesn't matter whether the technique is judo or karate or boxing or whatever the fuck if it works, it works. Yeah. That's one of the things about human beings. Ultimately is that we need someone to lead by example. You can't just get up and tell us how to do things. You can't just get up and tell us. That's why people, especially, especially should be really distrusting of politicians in 2013, the way human beings should talk should be explaining what they've learned from their own experiences. It should not be telling people what they should do. Exactly. It should be learning from your own experiences, telling you, and if you don't have any experiences, if you don't have any really unique experiences or really unique thoughts and experiences, why the fuck would you think that you should be able to lead? Yep. You're trying to lead because you're saying the words the right way and you're saying the things that the polls say people want to hear but as far as like unique individual thoughts, this shit like I have a dream that you could hear today and you go, that motherfucker just nailed it. He just nailed it. Martin Luther King nailed it or Kennedy's speech about secret societies or any of his speeches. He has about a bunch of brilliant speeches where the guy just made sense. You're dealing with a unique individual. You're dealing with a person with great intelligence. You're dealing with a person that you should be paying attention to. And those people are usually they are both cocky and hambole at the same time because you know there's a certain cocky and it's a lot of the rosy that comes from you are a bad motherfucker and you know it's because you're doing things that no one else is doing but at the same time, you know your limits real well. You see all the times when stuff that you do and say it doesn't work. It boils down to be honest with oneself, which means neither pumping yourself up or faking modesty because it's like this is how it is. This is the stuff that I do. Well, this is the stuff where my experience stops right there and I don't know anything beyond that or in even experience, people get into this trip of like making perfect sense of it, right? This is the event and I'm going to derive 12 lessons from it and say, sometimes you can, sometimes it's just like that's my experience and it's fucking my blowing and I don't know exactly what to make of it. And that's honest. You know, it's like looking at what seems that happened and right there they're running with it beyond what experience warrants. That you just acknowledge what happened, you acknowledge what you derive from it and keep an open mind of fact that there's probably more to it. Now your idea about this book is this just to pick out all the cool shit that you've learned all the cool shit that you've found and you're studying and you've studied religion for how long? Yeah, for a bunch. And to me, at the end of the day, it doesn't matter what I'm teaching. I always end up talking about the same stuff whether I'm talking about, I start from American, Indian history or religion or martial arts, end up talking about the same things because they are the stuff that life is made of. The cool topics, sex, gender roles, talk about, yeah, to the about sex and gender roles. Yeah, all good stuff. Is there a one up way to the truth? Is there multiple ways? Is like, relationship with death and dying. How do you deal with that? How do you deal with the physical world with your own body? I mean, the big topics are always the same. They don't change. The specific examples that you get there from may differ. So to me, I pick like, etch up the reach on some of the big things for me, the things that in my mind, any human being need to find, need to decide where they stand on some of these issues. And I look at what's out there. Some answers make no sense to me and they seem to lead down really unhealthy path. So thank you, but no thanks. Other answers make more sense, or maybe they don't, and I come up with my own. But it really is boiled down to the barusly, you know, research your own experience, reject what is useless, absorb what is useful and add what's specific a year on. You know, his basic methodology for how to approach knowledge. I mean, he applied it to martial arts, but really is a brilliant way of approach, just any kind of knowledge, whether it's really, it's about life, you know. Yeah. I talk for people to accept that, right? It's much easier to follow the pattern that your family's followed. I'm a Lutheran because of grandmiles, a Lutheran, a grandpa always said, no matter what, we'll be Lutherans. I remember talking to his girl and she said that she was going to get a tattoo of a cross. And I said, I said, oh, I go, you're really religious. She was not really, but you know what? I was born Catholic and I figured no matter what, that's the one thing that'll be for the rest of my life. What the fuck? I did, and I remember saying, I'm like, you know, I didn't know very well. So I was like, okay. How do you know? Like, how do you know you won't change your mind about that? She's like, oh my god, my family would kill me. And I was like, oh, okay, good luck with that. Good luck with that. Wow. My family is like, yeah, at war war two gone different. There would be people today. He's like, no, I'm not really Nazi. But, you know, if I don't put the trusty count, my grandma would, her feelings will get really hurt. So it's, I don't hate to choose, but grandma fucking hates you. I love grandma. Yeah, exactly, you know, it's like, I don't want to make them sad. You know what, it's hilarious that she was going to get a Catholic tattoo in the first place because like, in the Bible, it very specifically says, you know, it's supposed to. Yeah. So like, getting a religious tattoo is like, well, you're not listening to me. Yeah. No, only what I listen when it's convenient, but across tattoo is so sexy. It makes me look spiritual and it thins out my back. And that's the other point of like the people got peace when you are. You create your own is like, what do you mean create your own? It's not there are some absolute truths that fall from heaven and they stop. All of the people are making up their own shit anyway. I mean, when people say they follow something, it's bullshit. Really, they are making up their own thing because they will edit some parts that they don't like. They will focus on the parts they like and pretend that it's the one and all interpretation and say, if you're going to do that, might as well be honest and just pick from any source, if you're going to be confused. I think the religion in general in the future is much more likely to be studied and less likely to be practiced. Right. Because I think in, especially in like a really hardcore fundamentalist form, yeah, it's much less likely that people can accept that as time goes on and information gets distributed broader and faster. But then again, people will always be afraid of dying. Yeah. We'll always be afraid of where do we come from? Is there any meaning in the universe? Right. Pure rationality doesn't give you very satisfactory answers. No, it does not. So when you want answers and you can get them through reason, in that case, it's like, well, fuck reason then, just give me any answer because I can't deal with not having some and living that way. I need some solid basis. I just have a whole bit about that. That I would really like to join a cult. If anybody could like fucking write one that doesn't make me throw up when I write it. Just when you guys, it's not like a smart guy out there that can write like some much more believable shit than Scientology or Mormonism or any of the newcomers. You know, like those are the two latest, greatest newcomers that really stuck Mormonism and Scientology. And they're both fucking Kuku Pukagopovs. You read both of them. They're hilarious. They are. There's planets and shit. They both have extra planets. They both have planets where they know some shit's going down. Both of them. Scientology and Mormonism. Like Kola, right? Isn't that the Mormon planet? Yeah. In their story, or some real. My favorite Mormon story is the out pre 1970s. Most Mormons believe that dark skin is a sign that God hates your gods. Basically, that is a bunch. So it was pretty 1970. You know, in the 1930s, that was fairly mainstream view. I wonder what made them change their mind. Exactly. In the 1970s, suddenly, gods and the memos saying, you guys got it wrong. Dark skin is totally cool. I have nothing against it. You just made a mistake. It's like the civil rights movement managed to convince not just millions of Americans, but God himself. The racism is no longer cool. Yeah, God didn't understand. And so he saw a man with king give that speech. That's how strong that I have a dream's speech is. That's why to read a whole threat, I guess, that it's the violently revealed the false from the sky one day. It's so funny because people when it doesn't make sense anymore, people will change it. Because it's like, I can't really go around saying this shit anymore. It doesn't. So way we got it wrong. God man, this other way, really all along. Everything we've been saying for the last 100 years is just a missing interpret, you know, we missing interpretant thing is God was right. We were wrong. Yeah. Of course. Yeah. Whoopsies. Isn't that like what when Martin Luther translated the Bible into a phonetic form? And then the people started interpreting it and then like going, well, how come no one's practicing any of this shit? How come you guys are all, we're, why the fuck do you have so much money? What's going on? Why are we peasants forever? It doesn't say that here. Like this is, you guys made this shit up. Like you made all this shit up about being a peasant and ordained a peasant forever. But then you'll be rewarded for your toils in heaven. That's not in here. Definitely. You know, it doesn't say in here you're a peasant for life. That's the part that I have always the most fun in regards to people making up their own stuff to me with Christianity. It's like, you want to be Christian? Hey, there's good stuff. Hold for it. But then how are you capitalists at the same time? Right. Because there are so many passages where they are so hardcore. I mean, you have the the Jesus, it's easier for a camel to go through the eye of an needle than for a rich man to get into heaven, which is like something that Jesus said that. Yeah. Which damn Jesus said to the car marks would blush. You know what I mean? It's like really fucking bad. That far. Wow. That shows up over and over again. A bunch of passages are anti-accumulation of wealth. Yeah. And so you're going to be Christian by you're going to be hardcore capitalists. It's like, yeah, because I'm down with Jesus. That part about money. I'll just keep over those passages and I'll focus on some weird interpretation on one passage that may seem to say, seem that he say something else and I'm going to ignore the other 19 where he's clearly stating fuck accumulation of wealth. Yeah. The other thing that they had found in the translations was that Jesus hung out with people like them. Yep. Jesus hung out with the poor and the downtrodden and the prostitutes and that's who Jesus was paneled around with. Like, what the fuck have you guys been teaching us? And so the people that wanted to go even further than Martin Luther, these anabaptists. I guess that is that anarchy, Baptist? Is that a combination of baptism? No, it's a baptism for a second time because that's the idea right? That's the infant baptism because they said, baby, it doesn't have a fucking choice. It needs to be an adult choice. So they would baptize us an adult when you want to. Right. And then the third baptism was when they drowned you. Yes. If they were to be captured. If they were to be captured and either Lutheran or Catholics, if they were to be captured, then they would decide their way of being found was to drown you. As soon as you say, you like to baptism will give you a third one. And anabaptism, anabaptist thinking that just that does sound like anarchistic. And they were really radical, huh? They wanted no private property. They wanted free education, free healthcare. Those damn communists. Well, meanwhile, why is that bad? Right. You know, this is what drives me crazy. It's not that I don't think that people should be able to have land. I definitely think that you should be able to have land. But why is it so bad to say that you shouldn't? Like why is everybody so committed to hanging on to it? It's like, let's hear this out. Okay, what if we don't have land? Let's have it this way. What if the world consists of Jamie, Brian, you and me? Okay, we're the only four people left in the world. No one left. No one left. Okay. So, what's the news is we're on Catalina Island. That's all there is. Can we just share it? What the fuck? I'll put my house over here. You put your house over there. I'll say hi in the morning. We got a house on this spot of dirt. That gets problematic when you get into the 300 million people range. That's the fucking problem. The problem is there's two goddamn many of us. And everybody would want a house right by the lake. Like you're put by the lake. There's too many of us, dude. You can't have a house by the lake. Right. But come on, man. Well, we were here first. So listen, this is our land now. Man, that's fucked up. This is our world. We're all in this together. 80s all in this together. But I was born in 1947 and I've had this house by the lake. And I'm going to give it out my fucking house by the lake. Can I use your house by the lake? No, you can't. Bitch, I'll shoot you. The problem is there's too many of us and there's not enough cool spots. That's the real fucking problem. It's not private property. Because really it would be perfect if we all had use of everything. That would be amazing. You don't have, it's not my laptop or my table. It's the table. It's the laptop. Because they're a laptop I can use. Yeah, you can use that laptop. You know, it's like, that would be beautiful if that worked. Right. Exactly. In utopia land. It's perfect. In utopia land. It's ideal. That's the way you would live in utopia land. Yeah. That's one of the things that I've always wondered. Like, will we see a utopia? Will we see a working utopia in our time? A working community where no one's a cut. Community I might on his scale. Sure. But it would have to start as a community. It would have to, the best you could do I think is probably a couple of thousand people. Yeah. Yeah. Before it started getting wacky. Yeah. And you would have to like have meetings and everybody would have to really talk about, let's uh, make sure we avoid all the pitfalls that have fallen all societies before us. Yeah. It's not easy. It's serious. That's some serious end of the world type shit though. It's the only way that would ever happen. Right. And I guess today there's a better way to go about it because we're as in the past if you do that, you know, you're enough into the mountains, create your one community where all the other bastards can today, you can have an element where you have your local community. At the same time you're interconnected to a wider world in a way that doesn't isolate you, doesn't make you weird and cultish and cut you off from everything else. Because that was always the downside of the small community. Danieli, Polelli, party, pooper, that's what I just heard out of your statement. No, the other way around. They started to code the poop. Okay. I was just kidding. That's how it for the mountains. That's what I'm saying. That's the way. Dude, let's do it. On elk with spears and shit, nobody could say a word, start our own families. You don't want to separate from society. Society's pretty fucking awesome. It's just we need to figure out a way to fix society in less than the amount of shitty people, shitty products. Our product of creating human beings. We need to figure out a way to make less of those guys in Cleveland that kidnapped girls and keeping them locked in their basement for 10 years. That should be our number one priority, not curing lack of boners. Not arresting people for fucking selling boner pills at 7-11 either party. Do you get about that? They need to cut it out. They came in and they busted all those and it was exactly as Aubrey had said. Aubrey told us that the reason one of those dick pills work is because they're filling up with psialis and viagra and shit. It's exactly what it was. It was all psialis and viagra. Oh, okay, okay. It sucks because it's getting harder to find the good ones now. Why is it going to be? It's going to be a prescription for psialis. Because they don't really need it. It's just fun to do it. You can get it. You don't need it. But I don't get it. Yeah. You can get one. You say, hey, my dick's not working that good. There's a lot of unscrupulous doctors. They would write you out for prescription. Then when you don't have to fuck around with something, you don't even know what it is. You take a viagra. You know that's a viagra. So you're going crazy. You're playing Russian roulette with your health with some 7-11 fucking stuff that looks like pop rocks. You throw it into your drink and shake it up. This is a real sex enhancer. Meanwhile, it's like seven times the normal level of psialis you're supposed to take. And you're going to break your dick one day. You're going to get that prio-pism. It's fun to drain your dick with a needle. It's funny. It's the one that's the psialis one. The pills have gotten bigger on some of them. And this is now, it's like last up to seven days. And then on the back, it says only take one every 24 hours. So I've taken like three of the seven, seven day ones. That's like, three and a week. That's a week's worth of boners. So that's like 49 boners and one boner. You should not do that. You're going to break your dick. Your dick's not going to work without them. This is going to happen. And you're going to also confidence wise. You're going to rely on that one to dick. I tell you how am I going to fuck girl with my regular dick? My regular dick just doesn't get that hard. But when I get it, when I'm on wonder dick, I mean, I masturbate every day though. So I would know immediately. Well, you're on tape every day. You're constantly masturbating. No, no, no. You take masturbating while you're on Viagra. I take breaks. Oh, good. But you cycle on off. I took one on stage in Sacramento because I had one. On me, it was called Gold Rilla. And it's this gold gorilla on the front. And I was showing everybody. And somebody's like, take it. I'm like, all right, I'll take it. I opened it up and I put it on my mouth. And I broke, I'd accidentally break some of my mouth. You know how the capsule was just boner. Like, yeah, I couldn't talk because it was so much powder. It just exploded in my mouth. And it was the most disgusting thing ever. But then I had like a crazy boner for like three days. Isn't it amazing that they're still killing rhinos to give Chinese dudes boners? Did they not know about the boner pills? Did they not know about Viagra? Is that possible? What's that horny goat seed all about? They killed goat weed. I don't know. I think that's a mood enhancer. Let's go with that. I'm going to read that. I've never taken the horny goat weed in any mass quantities. Maybe I'll take it on once or twice as an ingredient and something else. Right. Yeah, they've been knocking them down a lot lately. There's been at least 10 different companies. I've been hit by that thing where they made them pull the pills because they're always Viagra. So what is it? Threadamaric infragement or something? No, they're selling prescription drugs mixed with like apples. Oh, you know, they weren't sold as a condom. Yeah, and calling it a supplement. It's called epa medium. Where do you get the horny goat weed is? Yeah, it's called epa epi and e medium. And it's also known as barrenwort. Bishop's hat, fairy wings, horny goat weed, rowdy lamb, herb, Randy beef grass. It's all about like bone orific stuff. Yeah, you see what that's said. It's a genus of 60 and more species of flowering plants and the family of burr, burr, burr. Who, who wouldn't even know answer that? Burr, burr. I'm not the only one. I see. This is a hard one. Well, let's just try this. B-E-R-B-E-R-I-D-A-C-E-A-E. Where do Burr. Burr-B-B-I-D-A-C. Burr-B-B-E-D-A-D-C-E-C. Largement on. He learned demic to Southern China. B-B-B-B-B-B-B-B-B-B-B-B-B. What is it supposed to do? Aphrodisiac. Bam, son. Let's hear Bryan. So it does many species. The quality is associated with content of eye caarin. According to legend, this property was discovered by a Chinese goat herder who noticed the sexual activity in his flox. see, same story as the fucking the course of mushrooms. It's probably a bullshit story. Right. Probably some marketing shit from the 1400s, both with the mushroom and with this horny goat weed. Totally. I even know the goat that mushroom stuff does fucking work. I had mixed it in my mind when you were telling earlier, Brian about, hey, why are you taking those pills? You don't know what's in it. I was picturing your early story about the zombie ants and I was imagining like that mushroom going into the field that Brian takes and this dick exploding and exploding. Oh, yeah. Sorry about that. By the way, that could be meant on the inside of his little body. Well, he dies and his dick becomes like a fireworks display. A lot of these supplements that you take, these boner pills are actually ants. Tons of African, I think it's African black ants. Yeah, we've talked about this before in the podcast where the boner pills. Yeah. A lot of them because if you just type in boner pill and you don't have a bunch of that. Oh, that's right. We did talk about that, but I think we got a sidetracked and never came to a rational conclusion. Yeah, because we think it was one of those one of the pills. I see that was pulled by whatever the FDA last week was even called something like boner ants or something like this is I'll give you the rundown scientifically if anybody gives a shit. It actually apparently does have a similar effect to nitric oxide supplements, which also give you boners, which is also one of the reasons why Viagra is a performance enhancing supplement. A lot of athletes, I think it's banned from the Olympics. I think you can't use Viagra anymore because it gives you a boost, an athletic boost. I think it's an endurance boost. The same thing it does when it gives you a dick, this crazy fucking wonder dick. It also does that for the rest of your body. It increases blood flow or something. Yeah, you're recycling your blood in more parts of your body. Some around what he said, but with some science, none of us really know. So this stuff likes a death and out. It's a still denafel. So that's Viagra. Viagra is still the naffel. I'm probably butchering it, but it's S-I-L-D-E-N-A-F-I-L. That's what's called that Viagra. This stuff that it produces is called IKER and I-C-A-R-I-I and the active compound in epidemium rather. It inhibits the activity of PDE5. This PDE5 is works the same with horny goat weed, inhibiting it as it does with Viagra. So probably would work, but it probably wouldn't work as good because I think that Viagra shit is like nuclear. I think they've got to tell me that this is like, hmm, I think my dick's got a little harder, but you take a Viagra and your dick just slam. Just fucking gets like body slammed against your zippers. It's like, where are we party tonight? Your dick is just really rowdy. I think we have not just unrealistic. You can feel your heartbeat on the very bottom of it. I love that. And your heartbeat on the bottom of your dick. Yeah, like the vein that goes down the bottom. Yeah, and don't measure your heart rate then because that's not your resting heart rate. You're not resting right there. No. Your dick is going crazy. Your dick's turning into a zombie. Yeah, even like old dudes that are like barely alive, they can take a couple of Viagras and stick a finger up their ass and bam. It is so fun. I'm going to massage Farley's on Viagra because he can't stop it. What is it? It's just like what is going on? You do that on purpose. You're just pretending. You're the super freak. Like baby, I'm just a super freak. I don't even know what's up. I'm trying not to think about sex, but you have it in the room. I'm starting to think about it. While I'm on 7,000 milligrams of the napkin, or so different of an owl or whatever the fuck this stuff is called. I'm starting to think that in the 70s, I would have a raincoat, you know? Oh, you probably would. Well, if you didn't have a podcast, you'd have a raincoat. How about that? You fuck now. I've just turned into this. Well, the problem is it's more fun than not doing it. Oh, yeah. Why you're liking it? You like and doing it? People are like, why would you like to have heart bronze? Go to massage powers? You get jerked off? Why wouldn't you? Yeah, I say about jerking off. Look, that was I added that in for comic relief. Of course. I'm just displaying my boner for this poor girl. I only added that in for the lighten up the moment. So it doesn't seem as much like sexual assault. Right. This one girl had a tan line from the rope the other day. It was a rope. What do you mean? What? What rope? When she was carried into this country, I think. Oh, I mean, it's ever since good. Those are fresh. Son of a bitch. There's no fresh. I was like, I was like, Divers, she had a watch and she went tanning and she took off her watch where that's from rope. That's ridiculous. Yeah. You know what? Why? What's my little girl? Too much of a, it's a scary subject. Well, that website that I always talk about that. Yeah, I feel like I shouldn't talk about it. You shouldn't talk about it. You shouldn't get that. That would take away. It's going to get taken away and you're going to get monitored by the government because there's a boner police out there. And they don't like people getting their boners taken care of in illegal manners. That's what's going on. And that's some of the lamest ways to spend tax dollars of all time. Stop and dudes from getting jerked off at like handy massage powers. You might really sucks. That shit. Oh, sorry. Good. I don't know. They have undercover sting operations. Well, I went in there at 3 p.m. with my boner. I took boner pills just to be sure. I told her I won a full service. She said, oh, or did I tap their leg twice? She grabbed my cock and I threw on the ground. I think there's two things I wouldn't mind getting arrested for. Warren is having weed on me or selling or smoking weed, you know, or prostitution. I don't like both of those who care. Like what? Oh, you like the fuck? You like weed? Who cares? Well, officer, when I threw her to the ground to make the arrest, I came all over her face completely coincidentally. What can I say? I'm a red blooded American man. The fact that prostitution is still illegal in 49 and the NAF State, in US is I fucking insane. It seems like a mistake. It seems like a mistake to tell people that they can fuck people as much as they like, but they can't get paid for it. But you can marry a guy that you don't really love and you can fuck him and then you can divorce him and make money off it. And then they'll write songs about you. Right. That's okay. You're allowed to be a gold digger, but you can't be a whore. That is fucking fascinating. And you're not even allowed to be a gold digger because women will like, look at that bitch. You know, she's about him. He's fucking old as shit. Right. Bitch, she is 40 years younger than him. What the fuck they haven't common? It's prostitution. What does it have in common? She came from Thailand. He's got a billion dollars. Right. Shut your hole. You know exactly what it is. Let it happen. Yeah. I mean, how does that fit in adults? How's it affect you, you know? Exactly. It's to me is like, you're not hurting anybody else. No. As long as there's no nobody's forged, there's no underage shit, there's none of that. As long as it's consenting adults back in the fuck off, let people live out they want. Yeah, who cares? And there's you know, there's a there's an argument that there's nothing wrong with sex. So why should there be anything wrong with paying for sex? And the reason why it seems like such a terrible thing to us now is that it's frowned upon. It's looked down upon. But if you look at what it actually is, like it's just sex, like it's weird to massage people, right? You got to pay someone to massage you. So you go to a place where they guarantee everybody wants to fuck. Okay. Guys want to fuck girls want to fuck. That makes sense to me. But nobody wants to give you a fucking massage. Okay. They don't either want to give you a goddamn massage. Girls don't want to give you. They'll do it for a little while. They'll do it if they love you. Right. You know, I'll give them such someone I love. But the reality is I don't want to do it. Right. Shits a lot of work. But sex is not a lot of work. But yet you can pay for the massage and you can't pay for sex. That is purely pure it in values because it is essentially the same thing. 90% of us will never get paid to massage someone and 90% of us will never get paid to have sex with someone. Those numbers I fucking made up. Okay. I'm just doing the math here. Help me. But but the reality is they're the same goddamn thing. It's the same goddamn thing. Absolutely. I agree it should be your choice. Right. If you're fucking skived out by feet and you go to massage people but you don't mind giving head. Right. That's you. That's you man. Absolutely. That's okay. And to me is more honest than you know, a lot of people than you fleshlights. How about that? We have those for two fucking years. It's way more honest to pay a person to it. And you know, line and hook enough just really because you want to fuck somebody. Although fleshlights are doing are very good. No more for that. That's very good. Oh and by the way, people have been emailing me 17 other times saying tell Joe to get your flashlight. He's still a semi-discloser. I'm sure probably prefer to get you a flashlight. You want to want to. Well, you should have emailed me before I got here. I still have a date in the closet. I ate them. I fed them to my chickens. I'm not. But the thing is like the stuff you're saying about how people perceive sex is really not okay in some way. Yeah. Or it's pure tongue vibe. Mostly American. Yeah. I mean, that's where my weird phobish thing came in because when I came to US and I was just trying to ask, you know, you're learning new language or picking up new words. And so I heard the word is a lot. I'm like slapped. What the fuck does it mean? Well, a woman was kind of indiscriminately having sex, left and right, blah, blah, blotch. And I was like, well, if sex is a good thing, then as lots and bad you freely give sex away indiscriminately, left and right. It's kind of like a humanitarian, like a philanthropist, some sort of sexual mother-tear-isa. That's a beautiful thing, right? No, it's really, really bad. I'm like, wait, why? Let me try again. That shit doesn't make sense. Wasn't there a woman in Italy that made it to the parliament? Oh, yeah. Poornstar? Yeah. Of course. Of course. What a great name for a dirty bitch. Chechulina. That's Italy for you, right? Good kid. Poornstar. I actually have been multiple times that she was the first and then a few others done the same thing and they all got elected because it's like, it is like, I'm going to vote for these annoying ol' guy or these annoyed ol' guy. Hey, that's the Poornstar. The brainer. Absolutely. We want to vote for her. The place up north with the tan line girl. I think it was a G-F-E place which is the girlfriend experiment or experience. It sucked because when she was down, like she didn't want to massage me at all. She just was kind of just like crawling on me, like tapping. She was like bullshit. But then at the end of it, she just wanted it to lay down next to me. So we were both like laying down and then she fell asleep and it was so sad. I'm like, all right, I'm just going to stay here for a bit. I guess. She's sleeping. That's going to happen. And then like, a door slams. I don't know if like somebody else was coming in or if it was like the madam wanted it. What the fuck? You know, and she gets up real quick and goes, oh, thank you. I'll be right back with Tee. And I'm like, oh my god, this poor girl just fell asleep, aren't we? That's so sad. No. It's the saddest thing in the world. She's probably blacked out from shame. Yeah. From trying to deal with this Viagra induced direction. The brain just three and a half hours. Yeah, it's probably just shock. Like when you corner a little mouse, scream at it. It's like a fainting goat. Hornie goat. We the fainting hornie goat. We had a fainting hornie goat. It is a weird, weird aspect that we have this thing. We're weirded out about sex. But that's how this country got started. You know, it's got started by Puritans. People forget that. The echoes of the retards that fucking founded this place, they're still here. They were religious fanatics. The Puritans left. You were about this stuff about the Puritans coming here for religious freedom. It's not all bullshit. They didn't come here for religious freedom. It's they came here for the freedom not to be persecuted. It's a whole different game. Doesn't mean we don't want to persecute somebody else. We just don't want to be persecuted. Right. It's not religious freedom. It's a poor drone freedom. Yeah, it's like I don't like to be in that place. I don't like my place in the game. I have nothing against the game itself as long as I get to be on top. And the. The. The. The. The. The. The. Transformation. Just. Fuckin Native Americans. Piling them up and stacking them and whacking them. And those are the guys who consider the church in England. Oh, that's crazy liberals. You know, they were the Puritans who are the hardcore fundamentalists of their day. The match like fundamentalists today, back then there was no Hollywood. So they were pissed about the theater of London. They're like there's all the sex and spectacle and decent that exactly the same arguments that you hear today about fundamentalists again, entertainment industry. Exactly the same thing is in the 1516 hundreds. You would hear with the Puritans. It's amazing. So what happened? They came over first. They were one of the first to come over here. Yeah. No, they were the. Well, no, the right. Because first they had these other settlements in Jamestown and Virginia. And then like 13 years later, not that long later, they had one Plymouth Rock, the famous one, which is the Puritans and all of that. And these were guys that England was more than happy to get rid of. Because it's like they are weird. They are crazy. They are annoying. They are too much. So please go. Yeah, go settle the new world. That's a great idea. These guys were happy to leave because they felt that they could start their own society where Puritans values with the rule right there. Right. And having to deal with more male visions of Christianity. How much different would America have turned out if people landed on the West Coast instead of the East Coast? How much different would America have turned out if England was on the other side of the world. And then they came over and landed in LA and were like, oh shit. Oh shit bitches. We ain't never going back. There's no winter. Right. Winter doesn't happen. Like they landed in fucking Massachusetts, man. That's a, that is with no heat. Oh my God. No heat. No cars. You have a few animals to. Oh Jesus. You're going to try to collect food in the four months that everything's not frozen. Right. No, and it's funny because when they first came, they usually would didn't really know how to make a living here. So they were fucsing sap and a year or two they would start eating each other in this cool, kind of a lot of things. Stories and they say that's some weird, sick shit that was going on. What's not what else they could do? It was pure survival. Yeah. That happened in England too. Right. Wasn't there, they reconstructed a girl that they had eaten and she was 14 years old. That was in St. John. That was the very first America. The first first British column in America has to stay. And she was 14. Yeah, because they've been pissed off the Indians. So they are not going to have much help from them. They don't know how to make a living throughout the year in a new harsh environment. So soon enough you start eating your friends. That's always a good idea. That's fucking amazing that we've made it this far. Yeah. That's amazing. Yeah. As a person who knows as much as history, but as a person who knows as much about history as you do, does it? It must be really shocking when you know that this shit was just a couple of years away. Yeah. You know, that's the, that to me is what's mind blowing is the stuff that has been considered normal throughout much of human history. It blows your mind to think like probably 75% of people work totally cool with these ideas that today they would land the straight in like a psychiatric hospital in Macdan, totally normal. And again, it boils down to the same thing. It's people too lazy to question what they are told and just going with the program and just not really why am I burning people at the stake because they believe in a different idea. Well, it's what my grandpa did and she's cool. So I must, you know, it's like not really stopping to think is these are really healthiest. These are good ideas. These are what I want to live. How did people find out about the pilgrims whether or not they were doing good enough that people decided to just join these crazy bitches? How did all that happen? They did go back and forth and then we're telling how great it was. Well, we're eating each other. There were some people also put money as an investment in this. A lot of these weren't just random individuals coming in. They were sponsored by corporations as an idea and investment. So these guys had the economic interest in keeping the thing going and there were plenty of people who had a shitty life in England. So even going to the crazy wild place across the world was better than what they knew back in England. And so they were willing to take chances. I mean, one of the things that people don't know a lot of the time or don't emphasize enough is the idea that a huge chunk of people look in here where basically slaves, white people, you know, British, they were in danger servants, which technically meant you only serve for seven years, but most of them were worked so hard by their owners that they killed them before the seven years were up. So really, if you were in in danger servants, you're pretty much fucked because you're going to be in conditions that are semi-slavery. They are not going to survive to live see the day when you are freed. So it doesn't really matter whether it's interior, it only lasts so long because you're never going to leave that time. So a lot of these guys would run off the second they arrive here. They would try to show their best face when they show up at an Indian encampment saying, hey man, I mean, I think those guys are free. Can you please take me in? And a bunch of tribes would take them in. And so you would have these communities where sometimes you would have a lot of British people who escaped the settlement to go live with Indians because otherwise they would get work to that back in the settlements. And it's a trippy story. The colonies would pass these laws preventing anybody from living the settlements and going to live with Indians because otherwise your labor force just left. And now you have to work on your own. Yeah, how many white dudes went dancing with Wolves style? Quite a bit. There's a really cool story. I forget the guy's name right now, but there was back at the very beginning of the Puritan days. There was this one community of sort of crazy unconventional guys that left the main Puritan towns and started their own thing with a bunch of local Indians. They would have basically had an interracial community where they would party a lot. They would drink their dances. Sounded like sort of hippie heaven except that because it was a little too hippie heaven, these guys didn't make plans for the Puritan wanting to kick the rest because their community was actually growing at a faster rate than the Puritan's. More people wanted to live there, but the Puritan and military massacres so they went to kick their ass and squash them. Those motherfucking Puritans and that's us. If those hippies had planned, yeah, fuck, I mean, I'm all for having fun, but put two hours a day into planning that maybe you want to know what to do when people start shooting at you. These crazy religious foxes dressed up like Johnny Cash and live right down the road. Exactly. Those guys are the cooks. You know, another cooks. They're all just the same. Okay, listen, we know the cooks. But listen, they spend a lot of time praying that we need to spend that exact amount of time making arrows. Yep, that's the idea. And instead of the choice for happy, stupid, hippies who don't make plans or crazy religious fundamentalists who are well armed and know how to use their guns. It's like, wow. Well, not exactly the greatest alternatives, but I mean, one is nicer than the other, but it doesn't make any, you know, they can't leave in reality because they don't make plans, they don't set things up for when shit goes wrong. And so the other guys who are way worse win because they are more disciplined. Those motherfuckers. So they absorb them. Yeah, some of them, they send them back, you know, some of them are killed, some of them are reabsorbed and they're close to watch some of the, you know, bunch of options there. But one of the weirdest things about history for me is I get older is realizing how short-appeared a time that was ago, where things were so banana mass. Yep. 1492 Columbus, a old ocean blue. 1492. That ain't shit. Yep. That's hard to believe. There was no buildings here just that long ago, especially when you look at England and the shit that's up in London, I mean, you can go visit things in London. Yeah, they're a thousand years old. America itself, so like 200 fucking years old. It's been only a bit around. I mean, someone landed in the Bahamas, you know, a little over 400 years ago. Right. That's crazy. It is. It is. And in that sense, yeah, living in Europe is a dream because you go down the street to meet your friend and you're next to a building that's like 2000 years old. Yes. That's fucked. Yeah, it's really nuts. Uh-huh. To think that those people just lived in that one spot forever. Yep. You know, that's one of the really cool things this Dan Carlin thing on the history of the Mongols. Oh, yeah. It's realizing how much these guys affected Asia. And how much they would have affected Europe and the affected Russia. Yep. You know, like Europe got really lucky there. Seriously. Well, or on the banding on Pointo Vioca, yeah. What they had wasn't exactly like that. Yeah. Well, what they had was horrible, but the Mongols, they they dodged a crazy bullet with those motherfuckers. Sure they did. And then what the one of the craziest things that Dan Carlin was talking about was when they took over Baghdad and killed everybody that it literally hasn't ever recovered. No, they say it was like 600 years before the population was at the same level as before. They wiped that. I mean, the Mongols. They took it all around. Yeah, they really were genocide 101. You know, is they yeah, those guys and they played a very rare. They've been very rare. Progress. They ruined cultures. They've ruined everything they learned. See you light on fire. They didn't want to take it with them. It's if it's not useful in a felt tent or running around with my horses, then the fuck do I care? That's the nuttiest things that they never really they captured the city's, but they they were no mass. They didn't have a country. They just had this gigantic huge mass of people making the way across the world killing everybody. Yeah, my favorite on that one is when the when they do enter Baghdad and the whole story, there was this thing of this one guy. He was a local governor where killed the Mongol traders early on. So the Mongols were peace. They sent an ambassador. This guy chopped off the head of the ambassadors to send their spies. He banked on the fact that it was a big desert separating in front of the Mongols so they wouldn't be able to invade. He didn't make his calculations right because the Mongols got through the desert. They show up at his door and after mass wiping out everyone else, they grabbed this guy and said, you are a greedy motherfucker. Because of that, you on gold will give you all the gold you want. They melt a bunch of gold and pour molten gold down his throat to kill him. Those guys poured into his eyes and his ears as well. Yeah, exactly. Those guys are not playing around. Yeah. And then they probably chopped his head open and get that gold back. Exactly. They said, okay, now, sorry. Now we need it back if you don't mind. It's just amazing that that again, 1200 B&O AD, 1200. That's not the long. No, no. None of this is that long ago. And that was like a couple hundred years before Martin Luther. And that's just a few hundred years before people came to America. That's a few hundred years for slavery. It was abolished and it's all of it is so recent. It's really weird. So, I mean, right here in California, where we stand back in the 1850s, more than half of the American Indian population, something like 80 percent was wiped out. Not because of diseases, not because of stuff, but what they had in a lot of California towns were the Indian hands, which was the local on the local newspaper. They would publish this scene that if you, you know, you're broke, you have no money, go kill some Indians, scalp them. And if you come back into town, the local government will pay you a certain amount for the scalp of an adult male, a little bit less for the scalp of an adult female, and a little bit less for the scalp of a child because it's good for the health of the community to wipe out Indians. 1850s. Not a million years ago, right? You know, under our feet. That's a trip. Wow. You know, I always wondered what that whole scalp thing where that came from. I thought it was the Indians that did the scalping. You know, although actually they do stuff like that in a bunch of days around the world because it got tiresome to just carry around people's heads to prove that you killed them. So, it's like, do I really have to carry this big fucking thing? Could you imagine like chopping off the head of somebody like T-Torty's big giant head? It's like, really? I have to carry around to prove that I killed it. Can I just scalp even be dilated? It's like, so people around the world, they did it in a bunch of places. Well, then you know, you could scalp two butt cheeks and say, ah, I killed a couple of bald guys too. I mean, you get three for the price of one if you're unscrupulous. This motherfucker's always scalp them bald Indian. That's one of the beautiful things about the Native Americans. They actually go bald. Right. There wasn't one of their genetics. So that genetic posture sort of only got introduced to them after a week came around. I tell you, these Indians sure do smell though. It's about nevermind. Oh. But cheeks don't smell that bad, do they? Back then they did. Yeah. Back then the whole package, right? Everything below the pout was just a mess. Right. They used to cool us. They probably never really painted their face. There's just from butts. Yeah. Oh, the easiest goes there. This bad ass thing that they would do were a lot of Indian tribes there. They would shave every other part of their head, but they would leave these really long strand of hair in the middle, that was like the scalp knot that you leave it out there for other, as a challenge to other warriors of saying, hey, it is my scalp. You want to take it, come take it, it makes it even easier for you to grasp it and pull it out. Yeah. So it was a, it was a That's why he was kind of thinking. He's like, I'll leave it on. You leave your son. Let's see what gets to take home was first. That's ridiculous. That's his begging for the gun to be invented. He's silly bitches out there shooting point rocks at each other. The fucking doing man, grabbing each other's hair, cutting each other's heads off. You see that guy on that video the other day that was like walking across, I think, to like a waterfall or something. And he was doing like the balancing thing. And he fell and he held on. And then he was like trying to climb across it and he had that long ponytail and his ponytail got stuck in it. And he let go and he scalped himself. Oh my god. Jesus son, he died from that? Yeah. Because he fell. Oh my god. His ponytail stayed on the line. Oh, right. That's when you know. Yeah, that can't be good. That's a shit choice in hair wear. Either that or God hates you. Yeah, you fucked up son. You definitely fucked up. There was a woman in France who was recently who died. She fell like 900 feet to her death off a cliff. And by the time they got to her, the vultures that are already eating her. There was nothing left but bones. That is also how you know you fucked up. Yeah. First of all, if you're in a place where they're not killing the vultures, everybody's like, well, we need these vultures. Well, you know what the problem is now? They have laws in this part of Europe where you have to kill livestock when they die. You have to burn them. So because of that, the vultures don't get to naturally play off the livestock. So vultures are actually going down and attacking live things because they're starving to death. Because the government cleans up the dead animals and burns them. It doesn't allow the vultures to eat them. So now you have vultures that are carrying away dogs. Right. And they're going after pets. They're getting livestock and shit. Vultures are scary. Vultures are scary. That's as much as, oh sweet, cool nature. Well, yeah. To what point? Nature's nice and cool as long as you're in your car. Yeah. Or you're in your house or you have a gun. Right. Or there's slow people behind you in front of you that will get eaten first. I see it exactly. I had a dream last night that a friend of mine had an animal snuck into his house and we couldn't get it out. And it was in a big animal. It was like a raccoon or something. But it was terrifying in his dream. The raccoon was behind a TV and we're trying to chase it out with sticks. And it's like, making the fuck shit. You know, like think about how little a guy named raccoon is. And I thought it was terrifying as fucker. Get about your house, man. We're trying to stick a fucking broomstick back there. Get rid of this raccoon. And in my dream, it was horrific. Because I was thinking if this raccoon just goes for it and just jumps on my face, I am fucked. My face is made in a toilet paper. It's just like soft, mushy shit. Right. You know, your face is barely more durable than a flesh light. Yep. Buzzie cut it. Raccoons and skunk both scare me because in my backyard, somehow they get in there once in a while and have like a fenced-in yard. Do you need cat food out there? No, no. But somehow they just do it. Like there's it's weird. And I'll just be sitting outside, you know, whatever on the porch and out of nowhere, I'll just see like this skunk or a raccoon like running towards me because it's like, it doesn't realize that I'm sitting there. And I'll be like, hey, get away from here. And then it just stops and I'm like, okay. Hopefully it just turns around, walks away, nothing happens. Most of the time they won't engage you unless they're rabid. Right, right. But they will engage you if they're rabid. Yep. You know, there's that thing that you're really fucked if you get bitten. Oh yeah. Because if you get rabies, you get bit by someone's rabies, you gotta get like 10 gigantic needles and you're asking for it. And they're stomach, right? Doesn't it go right in your stomach? Oh, fucking Christ. And they're huge needles. Yeah. It's apparently like really bad to get rabies. I got bit by a dog once and you know, they were telling me the doctor was like, yeah, we're not gonna give you shit because take your chances. He's better than taking a rabid shot. You don't wanna have a rabid shot. Unless you're really convinced that you have rabies, you don't wanna take it. Oh, it's a hurt beyond belief. Yeah, I guess there's a lot of bats here in Los Angeles that been being found with rabies. Oh, fucking Christ. Rabid bats. Yeah. I'm wearing a bat country t-shirt son. Yeah. Hey, dude, he gave me this New Jersey. Thank you very much. Some fellow Hunter S. Thompson fan. Yeah, there's a great story about these guys from Harvard who went to Africa to study these bats that migrate out of this cave. And they sat in the front of the cave and every night at a certain time when it became dusk, these bats would fly out and mass. It's this massive number of bats. This is an enormous cave. And they would be like millions and millions of bats. Well, these guys, they sat down in front of this like filament and record things whatever the fuck they're gonna do scientifically. And what they didn't anticipate is the assault of batshit that hit them. As they came out of this cave, they just shit all at once. So they were literally in the firing path of a wave of shit, a hundred miles high. Millions of bats shitting on their face. Okay, so they get back to America and they're horribly ill. They're bleeding from their eyes, they're deadly sick, and they die. They both die. They both die. They both die. Yeah, it's insanely toxic. They just got toxic levels of nitrogen and batshit. It goes in your eyes and it's in your face and your skin. It's going through your fucking skin. No, it's toxic shit. It's about fucking. It's about a story like what happened to him? What a bunch of familial bats, took a shit on him and that's why he died. It's like, yeah. And he must have realized somewhere in the middle of that shit storm that probably lasted an hour. You know, it's probably an hour of batshit. I mean, there's, this is insanely big cave apparently. And there's just millions of bats there. Bat guano is, I know they use it for shit. I think they use it for fertilizer and stuff. Grow in weeds. Is it big? Oh yeah. Powerful, Daniela Balelli. He's got the knowledge that story that we talked about a couple of weeks ago about the couple that used to be in the CIA and they'd retired and we're making plants in their basement. They were growing tomatoes and stuff like that. And the fucking DEA kicks down their door, guns blazing, rifles in their face, and finds their tomatoes in the basement. Boy. This boy is at a silly goddamn story. What turns out, these people, the reason why the CIA did this or the DEA did this is they followed their car. Their car had been parked at a hydroponic store and they took a photo of the car, the license plate. They ran the plates and that's how they find where the houses are where people are growing. That's this genius fucking group of ass fucks called the DEA. That think that everyone growing anything indoors, my sister's ex-husband used to grow tomatoes and shit because they lived in Boston. They had a full set up in the basement. He didn't even smoke weed. They had a full set up. But that guy would be like under suspicion. Of course. They're allowed to pass by your fucking house. This is how stupid this situation is. All they're doing is growing plants, by the way, I might add, they're not making math, okay? They're allowed to go by the places where they teach you how to grow plants. Take pictures of your fucking license plate and then run them on the suspicion of you doing drugs. Find out where the fuck you live, stake out your house, yep, for sure they're growing plants. We're going in boys. Go in guns blazing with dogs and shoot your dog if you've got one. They shoot your fucking dog. Almost every time they go into these people's houses, they shoot puppies, they'll shoot colleagues. They don't care if your dogs are threat, they shoot dogs. And then they find out you're making tomatoes. I mean, that's the dumbest shit. That's why to me, piece me off when I hear people who are all like, I love freedom, but I'm pro-drag or, I'm against legal prostitution, I'm against, it's like, you're not pro-freedom, motherfucker. You're only pro-freedom of the stuff you like. That's just it, it is. Well, Obama said recently you had a speech in Mexico so that he didn't think that making marijuana legal was a good idea. So the most hilarious thing ever, like the idea that making anything that A benefits people, P people want to do and C, there's no victims, right? To say that, and then you're talking specifically with the people who would, in a logical scenario, benefit from being legal. The reason why all this money is being made by drug cartels is because drugs are illegal. If drugs were legal, these people wouldn't be making that money. Out of business. I mean, just that alone is impossible for some people to grasp. I mean, even when people are against it philosophically, because they are control-thricks who want some morality and force according to their standards of morality and everyone else, even those guys still look at the evidence. Is prohibition working in turn self-keeping the rates of addiction or use low? It's not. So what the fuck are you doing? It's like taking a bunch of money, putting it in the toilet and flushing because if you're not affecting demand or supply, why the fuck are you doing it? Yeah, the best example that we have about whether or not it's good to legalize drugs as Portugal. Yeah, absolutely. And they have lowered their rates of addiction, lowered their rates of crime. It's real simple, folks. People don't like being told what to do. And they're going to do whatever the fuck they want to do. But if you tell them what to do, then they're going to rebel. And that's just what they do. And when people rebel, sometimes they're not even doing what they want to do, they're just doing what you don't want them to do. So that seems like the thing to do because they don't like you fucking controlling them. When I moved here from Italy, I didn't know about the age 21 thing about drinking. I thought you were going to say about banging the chicks. There's like Italy. I don't even think it is. Maybe it doesn't have an age limit if it does nobody enforce it. So if you are 80 or old, you go to the store to buy for your mom a bottle of wine, nobody asks anything. But because it's the kind of shit that your grandparents have for lunch, it's not glamorous. It's not like cool. I got booze. I'm going to start downing it like crazy. When I saw ear people who start drinking as teenagers as a prohibited, exciting thing, they would down alcohol like crazy. Throw up all over themselves. I'm like, yeah, that's fucking disgusting. Why would you do that to yourself? It's like, you know, you learn how to drink a little bit at a time. And to me, it's like you learn how to drink as a kid. You learn how to drink with your grandparents. Where it's like, if you have a seat, you feel happy and stuff. If you have more than a seat, you got a headache. And when they you do, and you're like, oh, fuck, you're right. I got a headache. It's kind of weird that this is the most successful society ever, because it really is, right? If you had a look at it as far as like the what's been done by this society, the American society, maybe that's the only way you can really get shit done. Maybe you have to have this fucking weird button down repressed in order to work the kind of hours of people are willing to work. Whereas in Italy, they take like what, two hours a day off, just to take a shit. Yeah, nobody does that. I have a shit to break. It does an awesome place to retire in, but to get anything done. Yeah, good luck. Well, I know Marvelous Marvin Hagler did it. Yeah. Marvin Hagler, when he retired from being, you know, the fucking man, was one of the best boxers ever, went to Italy and just said, fuck it. I'm just chilling here forever. It may come up. Time movie star. Yeah, he lives in my town. Doesn't he really? Yeah. He's a friend of mine, Tom. He runs into it. He's the G-Mole at the time. And they're hilarious. He's the weirdest case ever for a boxer, because he still has his wits. Yeah. And man, what a good boxer. He was amazing. He was one of the all-time greats. But he's still like, he's lucid when he talks. And he lost to Sugar Ray Leonard. And he said, that's it. I'm done. But he really meant it. He's the only guy that I can never recall. Everybody out like Sugar Ray Leonard broke everybody's heart, came back, won a couple fights, and then lost a couple fights very bad. The Terry Norris fight for a classic example. That was a brutal beat down. Terry Norris beat the shit out of him. That was scary. The fight with Hector Kammache. I went Hector Kammache stopped him. He was like, oh, Jesus. He was at the end. He broke everybody's heart just like everybody else. Right. No, I was there with Mark, man. He made the call. He didn't really take that much abuse. Actually, he actually took more abuse in some of the fights he won, like there was the fight with Mugabe, where they beat the shit out of each other. Or even the one with Tom Meers. That was the most intense round I've ever seen in combat sports. Yeah, you want to watch a great fight first. First, on Hagler Hearns. On YouTube, somebody put it up on an Android soundtrack. They have like Voodoo Chai. Oh, yeah. They're going on the Marvin Agler highlight. It's like the coolest thing ever. Yeah, I tweeted that a while back. That's an amazing highlight. Yeah, he was a beast, man. He was, when I was a kid, he was a big inspiration for me. That was living in Boston. Because I remember he was supposed to fight Mustafa Hampshire. And they had some TV special that was following him training. And he would go to the Cape in the wintertime, where it's nobody in the Cape. It's horrible. For freezing. Many, many degrees below zero, windshield factor. Wind coming off the wall or ripping your fucking skin apart. And he's out there running screaming war. He was just screaming war as he was running up sand dunes and shit. Like, if you're a fool and you just look at the video, they're like, yeah, no, thanks. He beat the fuck out of some people, man. Marvin Agler was a beast. If you look at the Mugabifite, is a great example of that. You couldn't hurt him. He had a chin like nobody. He had, they did this weird thing with him, where they scanned his head. And they found out that his mandible muscles, the muscles on the sides of his head, were much larger than a normal person. And they were like, literally, the man has built-in headgear. And you're like, I guess you get that from biting down. Maybe you're something or biting down a mouthpiece. Or fucking... Could be genetics. Well, whatever it was, the dude was just really hard to hurt. That was one of the big things about him. You could never, like Tommy Hurons couldn't hurt him. And Bobby couldn't hurt him. They would nail him, but he would just keep coming forward. Don't you ever stop Marvin Agler. Nobody ever stop Marvin Agler. Not even close. Nobody even fucking came close to stop in that guy. Yeah, there's been a few guys like that throughout history that just for whatever reason, just had that just extra motivation, above and beyond everyone else. And he was marital colliquizio when he did, because I mean, you do see those guys a la noguera with these ungodly jeans who can take so much of it was. But after a while, you hit a spot where he's like, okay, you clock the ax amount of punches you could take in your life is done. And now every other punch you take is gonna drop you. Yeah, that's, that's, gets really sad to see old great fighters. That, that, that's what the saddest aspects of fighting and wanna be amazing if they figured out how to fix that with like stem cell research, like they figured out a reverse pugilistic dimension and, and cure brain damage from fighting, that would be beautiful. Yeah, because it makes you think twice about training stand-up spirit for real because you know, your grappled, it's all leaps, right? Yeah, sucks, but he's not. Listen, I know people have gotten bad concussions from grappling. Yeah, that's true. They're all funny and, you know, and, and a lot of, you know, a lot of heads collied with knees and accidental things happen where you get knocked unconscious. You're taking a chance no matter what you do, but it's the sub-concussive blows from boxing, the continual process of getting hit. Yeah, because that's not an accident in training. That's the name of the game. He's continuing to have them. You take it over and over and over and over after a while, you know, they're all, there's, can be a good thing for your brain. Especially if you're training with some fucking animal who hits hard. If you're in there with like some kind of a basis, and he likes to beat up sparring partners. Great. You just got a little stupider every day. Exactly. Every day, I feel a little stupider. That's what I do. How do you do it? Like, when you spark, because when you grapple is easy, you know, as long as you're not at the, you're not going to hurt people. Well, it accidents happen. Yeah, just fine. Really good training partners. When's the most important thing. Because I mean, don't you find some time when you are done with the sparring session in Strykin that sometimes you're not entirely sure how well you did, because it's like you didn't really go full out. Right. Like, that shot that I hit him with was it's some, what did it have the juice really behind it, or he would have just shrugged it off, and that's it. You know, it's like, does it ever happen to you? Or you feel like you know what's up by the end? Well, I think you have to, like, ego wise, you have to realize that like, when you're sparring, you're both pulling back. So shots that you got hit with, you maybe would have got hurt in a real situation and shots that you got hit with your response, maybe you wouldn't have been able to even deliver it. Right. So it can get unrealistic for guys who like to spar light, but they take shots on the chin and then keep moving forward as if in real life, they would be okay. Right. Like that becomes a real problem for sure. And that's one of the problems with developing techniques under minimal stress. But if you're doing it correctly, if you're being well trained, they won't allow you to develop those really bad habits, because those really bad habits, like you can, you can fundamentally alter the thinking that allows you to spar like that. Right. Number one, most important thing, it's two important things, but number one is great trainers. You have to have a trainer that trains you in a technical way and makes the class move in a technical way as well. And number two, trained partners that you could trust. So you're not gonna blast each other. And then you gotta make sure that you go full out on the mitts and the bag so that in a real scenario, you can deliver those shots with full impact. But it's a tricky game. Striking is a tricky game. It's a very, very dangerous endeavor. But it's awesome to get good at. Ooh. It feels great, but it's that line, right? If you do a little too little, it's unrealistic, because it's like, come on, you're barely touching each other. If you go a little too hard, it does a role brain cells saying goodbye. Yeah, my young days when I was a young man, one of the things that I was concerned most with was the potential of brain damage. Yeah, I've known too many people that I'd seen slowly slip away from the gym wars and boxing and boxing training and stuff like that. But on the other hand, it's fucking exciting to watch. If people are gonna keep doing it. Like did you see the Mayweather fight this weekend? No, Mayweather, I just can't take it. Why? Why is that? He's fucking brilliant. He is, but he's brilliant. I mean, beautiful to watch. If I was fighting at this level, I would probably do the same thing. He's like, I'm not gonna get the hurt. I'm gonna get paid a shithead of money. I win. Why the fuck should I take chances? Well, he took chances. He does take some, you know. In this fight, he fought a very different kind of fight. He stood right in front of this dude. Robert Guerrero was a tough guy, but he outtuffed him. He outmoveed him. He outangled him. He clinched a hold of him. Didn't let him manipulate him and bully him and rip shots on him. And then he just counter punched the fucking shit out of him, man. He just was brilliant. I mean, it wasn't the most exciting fight in the world, but as someone who appreciates technique, I appreciate the shit out how he did it. He's just an awesome boxer. He talks crazy mad shit, but that's also why people buy his favorite. Of course. I don't know the dude. I know the dude's a bad motherfucker, though, right? As far as when it comes to boxing, he's made some crazy claims about MMA, which I always find hilarious, but I don't fault him for that, because he's in the business of promoting. Yeah. That's like part of his stick is, look, he knows there's a lot of people that are paying attention to MMA. If he starts talking mad shit about MMA fighters, people who don't even watch boxing will pay attention to his fight, and even buy it to see him lose. Absolutely. Like, I saw some people that I know they were like tweeting, you know, I think, maybe they're losing this weekend. I was like, what are you even saying? What are you even talking about? Do you know what you're watching when you watch that guy? You're watching an all-time hall of fame. And Robert Carrero is a good fighter. He's a very good fighter. It'll be an interesting fight. But maybe he's going to box his fucking face off. That's what he's going to do, because he's one of the best ever. I made 80 bucks on him, so I was pretty special. What was the odds? They were really bad. I just fight too bad to lot, but I was so sure that it was like, there's no way in hell. It's got to lose. He could hurt his hand. Yeah, that's the only way. And he did, in fact, he hurt his right hand, somehow in the fight, but he kept throwing it. Or the John-John thing. You know what's all this nonsense going to mean? But he's like, well, shit can happen. You know what I was like? Yeah, active god type shit. You know, John-John's foot wasn't even broken. The toe wasn't even broken. This location was? Just dislocated it. And twisted it and broke the skin. Crazy. That wasn't even broken. And there's like, he'll be back training in six weeks. Like, what? Six fucking weeks. That looked like a six-month injury. They're apparently no problem. As soon as they set it, they stitched up the cut, set it, and they're like, he'd be all right. It was funny how he barely even, I don't think he noticed the empty, he was doing cartwheels. Who's doing cartwheels, or fucked up toe? And you were like, hey, look at your foot. No, no, he noticed it. Oh, he not? Yeah, we were talking, and he was standing like, I think he noticed that when he's stepping, then he's stepping in something wet. OK. So he looked down and realized it was blood. Like, where's this blood? Oh my goodness, I have a broken toe. That's when he realized there's something wrong with his foot. It was totally him looking down at it. Yeah. It was like a crazy moment. Because nobody knew what to do because I was interviewing him and it was all on teak. So nobody acted. So I had to kind of like grab the stool, fall in the doctor, sit down. You still want to do this. I still want to talk. I'm like, OK, it was a weird moment. I know you went through that with somebody if we got the chair for it. Well, I got a chair for him. I'm going to get him and chair myself. I was like, can we get him a chair? And then I'm like, no one's moving. Everybody was like, oh shit. No one wanted to get in the way on TV either. Right. One of those things, you're probably like strict rules as to who can enjoy the octagon. And that's the situation. But that was probably one of the weirdest injuries that I've ever seen. And who saw that coming? Be some guy up. You hurt your own self. Yeah, you are at least close to losing the fight when you have dominator. He wouldn't have lost. They would have taped that fucking foot together. He would have gone. Yeah. If they could, even if he didn't have to tape it together, chair would have had to come close enough to clinch him. And he beat chair up so bad in that first round. The chair was in a lot of trouble doing anything in that second round. I mean, the fight was almost over. The round was almost over. I think there was like 30 seconds to go. Maybe less. But beating that he put on chair was ferocious, man. Those elbows. He's a motherfucker, dude. He's a kid, man. He's a motherfucker and he's getting better all the time. It's so cool to watch what is like a real exceptional athlete, exceptionally gifted person, come along in MMA. Yep. He, to me, is like Roy Jones, junior type character, like a guy who's coming out of nowhere who is just so athletically talented as well as all the other things, as well as discipline, as well as he's got the whole package. And he's creative. He's fun to watch. This is not going to do just the same fucking thing that he does well and he wins by whatever. He actually pulls off this crazy move is that you never know what he's going to do. And he's like, that spinning elbow he does when he gets up against the cage is like a tornado of bones. It's just, whoosh. You're just getting smashed. That is just, and it's amazing. The kid's only like 25. What the fuck, what's he going to be like in these 35? Yeah, because he's not really taking damage. So at these rate, he can go on forever. Yeah, now how's he going to take damage? He's like, who's going to be able to solve that fucking puzzle? What is, sometimes you look at a guy's style and say, you know what that guy needs? If you find a guy who does this and that, he might be in trouble. The closest is a veto bell for catch him in an arm bar. Yeah, but I mean, that's sure. Everybody can lose one mistake happens. Anybody can, there's always that percentage where you can lose any fight, no matter what. But he's like, the odds are so low. Right. And you know what, what freaks me out about that arm bar? He let that do fuck his arm up. Yeah. He let that do way hyper extent his arm. He never tapped. He did not tap and then he beat him up and then he tapped him. He tapped him with the fucked up arm. It's like, so he's gotten this mental game down as well. Yeah, because he's like, he got this arm popping the first round and he won what in the fort. So he's like, he's not even like he won right away and then he was like, could pay attention to that. That was a nasty arm bar, too. He did. Vitor did that. That was some real black belt shit. Perfect. Yeah. That's, whoo. Most guys were tapped. I would have tapped. I mean, that's certainly like, how do you feel if you're a best or do you pull it off the perfect move? Yeah. You pop it his arm. You got to run to rouse it out of bitch. You got to run to rouse it. It runs at breaks arms. He doesn't wait for you to tap. She's not even trying to get you to tap. She's trying to break your shit. Her mentality is not the tap. You will tap and then win. Her mentality is break it. Right. And then they got to tap. Then the game's over. Yeah, it's a crazy way to make a living. See it as easy as this. So your podcast, you call your podcast Drunken Dallas. Yep. You're fairly sober. Well, sometimes. What do you call it, Drunken Dallas? Drunk. I like wine and I like Taoism. No, I guess I mean to me, there's always in like kung fu movies or something in the figure of the old dude, looks like cold drunk and stuff. But he takes it off. This amazing thing. It's like, how the fuck did it happen? I dig the idea of figuring out ways. Whether it's applied to martial art or applied to life, to nobody can figure out how you did it, but you pull it off. And to not think along the same lines, like everybody else is going through the plan. There's an obvious A to B, B to C to get the results. But to have an alternate way to get shit done, I like it. So that's why you came up with Drunken Dallas. Again, that's the high-minded version. The low-minded version is I like Taoism and I like wine. Did you draw this picture that's on your t-shirt? No, I asked this artist. I told her what I wanted. And she worked with me a little. She was really cool. She was awesome. So what is it? Is a dude punching a guy who's getting kissed? Yeah, this guy was making out with this hot, shapely woman. And while he's making out with their jet, he's putting wine over the two of them as they are another guy punching them. Another guy is punching him. And so while he's leaning backward kissing the woman, he managed to use a leg to kick him in the balls. That is one of the worst shirts that I've ever seen in my life. I need to burn it and never wear it again. And you need a question of sanity for mass producing his fucking back. You love it. I love it. It's so multi-dimensional. I'm a lover and a fighter. It's a very strange shirt, dude. You send it a really confusing message. And you're also a cartoonist. You should have the drunken, doused adventures. This guy just running around, drinking, and making out with checks and kicking random bullies in the balls. That's not a bad plan. You've only been in America a short amount of time, folks. We need to season him. We need to get Danielle E. Bollelli just a custom to our way of life where this is ridiculous. We don't allow you to. The other interpretation, people are like, no, but wait, he's doing his punch in game. And he's leaning back. I'm like, well, in that case, if he still managed to make out with the woman and drink after getting punched, I dig that message to him. I would think he really needs to stop being cocky and let go of the girl and deal with this dude trying to kick his ass. Because this is silly. I've always your coach. I'll be very mad at you. You've got to address the situation. We need to be serious about it, right? What are you, how often are you doing your podcast? I do twice a month. I do once a month with the guests. And then once a month is like random rants and chat with my friends, each and they have an award helping me put together. Do you do it at your house? No, we record. Well, actually, we started doing a few at my house. We were doing it in a studio first. And then now we decided to move a boat studio. So a few times we did it at my house was cool. Yeah, it's cool to be able to do it wherever the fuck you want, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it's cool to have a central location, but I like when sometimes when people do, like, already does a lot of them on the road. It just starts, you know, brings, brings microphone sets up. And that way if he's in weird places, he can get strange people, right? All right, it's gone. All right, he's gone. All right, move to New York City. He did? Yep. Oh, he gives you this silly bitch. And he's all jued out. I think he can go to the motherland. He can't go to Israel. So he thinks he's just going to go to New York and ask the other Jew motherland. And then he'll accept him with open, open sandwiches. We had a going away podcast where he brought this huge box. And inside the box was just shit that he was going to throw away. And he's like, you know, if you come to the show, I might give away presents the whole night. So he had like all this random shit that he like bought when he was really stoned and never used or never even opened the boxes, like, you know, random things, like raid air bombs, you know, for cockroaches. And like, just weird shit. And then at one point, he's like, all right, who here, you know, the next five people who hear those drugs, you know, raise your hand. And he's just throwing out prescription medicine to people. He's like, he like, he grabs this one thing. And he goes, oh, they better not do that. Like, because I think it was like acid or something. He just puts it in his pocket. But it was just ridiculous. And then he hands out. He opens like this thing of joints. And he gives a joint to every single person in the audience. And then he's like, how many people in the audience? Probably like 30, 40, something like that. He gave 40 joints away. He said, yeah, he gave a lie. I mean, it was just a huge thing of joints. And then he's just like, all right, everybody's smoking it. And so we, everyone's smoking it. And just in the comedy show, you can't even see anything. And there's like this Boston thing going on downstairs for like all the, you know, like a tribute or a marathon show where they're making the raising money for. Yeah, charity show. There's this charity show going on. And you just seeing the smoke just gushing down that back hallway, like going into this. Oh, so that was in the main room, which is right below. Right below the, the, the, the, the belly room. Oh, that's hilarious. So funny though. That's ridiculous. Yeah. Yeah, he literally burned his bridge. Exactly. Yeah, you can't do that indoors. He can lose their license for that show. And that's supposed to do that. You're fuck. Allegulate that all happened. Yeah, allegedly because if people were smoking in the audience, I think you used to be able to smoke on stage as a part of an artistic performance. I think you could still do that. Still do that. Yeah. Because Stan helped you to do it. He used to smoke on stage and make fun of how it was a part of an artistic performance. He'll have to smoke on stage some stupid loophole. Yeah. I remember that because he smoked in Ohio. He went and played this like building that's owned by the campus. It's just like a building for speech and, you know, speakers and stuff like that. But it had a bar and it was really weird. And I think they tore it down since then. Ohio State and Doug played and he wanted to smoke so bad. But this is like owned by the school. And there's like definitely no smoking allowed in it. And he goes, I don't care. Everyone can smoke. And he just started smoking. The bartender lady who was just like this older lady that, you know, probably was retired and just work at the old college. But she's like, oh, stop it, please. She's just kidding up six. You didn't have to do. And the whole campus was just like cigarettes. Everyone was smoking cigarettes on in that little room. Because Stan helped did it on stage. So were they allowed to tell him to stop doing it on stage there? Was it an artistic performance thing? Exception. I don't know. He didn't. Anyway, he just didn't care. He told everyone in the audience to do it all. The problem with cigarettes is it fucks with other people. That's the problem with that stinky drug. And it doesn't. That's the one thing that Stan hopes says that if he could stop, he did this opineant, anything recently, where they were talking about addiction. Because Jim Norton is like real clean. And it made some new source. It was because it was an interesting conversation. Where Stan Hope was advocating that, you know, he's a shitty comic if he's not drunk. And that's why he stays drunk. And that comics like Mitch Hedberg, the only way he would have gotten those guys with the drugs. Hunter has Thompson. The only way he would have got him is with the drugs and the alcohol. That's how you create something like that. You know, it's just a weird sort of conversation to get into with people. But he said the one thing that he regrets is the cigarettes. Yeah. He said it doesn't give you any benefit. And he's completely hooked on them. Right. But they say it does give you a benefit. Like synapses, like Stephen King claims that when he stops smoking, that he noticed a difference in his ability to fire. That like his mind fired slower. These are just right after he stopped or like after a while. I don't know. He made a comment on it. I don't think it's right after. I think it's the effect of it. I think when people are on nicotine all the time, nicotine is some kind of a stimulant. Yeah. It relaxes. I tell you the idea. It doesn't really relax. That's sort of a, it does. It relaxes your nerves and everything. Right. But the reason why it relaxes is because it feeds your addiction. That's the way it relaxes. Just that. Yeah, that's absolutely right. No, no. That's what you, when you get an addiction and you become a junkie, you need it, you need it, you need it. God damn it. I'm stressed out. I need it. I need it. I need it. I need it. Oh, I got it. Well, cigarettes relax me. But they also got you to the point where you needed them, where you're fucking crazy. And he looks cool. It's like, but it is a stimulant. Meaning it is a drug that. It's a stimulant. But that's not a relaxing. It's the exact opposite of something that relaxes you. It stimulant is the opposite of something that relaxes you. Right. Exactly. That's why when you, you, you, you definitely do get that feeling of relaxation. But that feeling of relaxation is the same thing that heroin users get when they shoot up. Right. Boom, boom. They see those little white glowing butterflies float out of their soul as they lay back on the pillow and let go of the rubber band. Not that hot heroin just raced through your body. I think you just cause about 17 people, at least any right now, to fold back into heroin. People that have done it, man, that's the problem with heroin. They say it's fucking awesome. People that have even take those pills have said it's awesome. Oxycontin. Oxycontin. Oxycontin issues. Yeah. Some, some guy posted a thread about it on a message board. He's talking about opiates. How amazing they are. It's just terrible that they're so bad for you and that you can't care for them, but the feeling apparently is just amazing. I read somebody a while ago saying, yeah, it's fucked up because he messes you up or that. Yeah. So we should leave it legal for people who have like a few months left to leave because it's like, what are you going to fuck up anyway? You know, you're dying anyway, but you feel like a god for the last three months and I agree with that. Well, that's what we're doing anyway. We give him morphine. That's what we're doing when we're giving them oxycontin. So we're basically giving him opiates, right? It's morphine is weird. I mean, when you think about the whole thing is like how, yeah, speaking of freedoms is like people, I'm pro-freedom, except that you can't kill yourself the way you want to. You're just low painful disease. You need to die slowly and painfully because otherwise, otherwise what other gods are angry? Exactly. It's like the life is not to choose how you stay or leave. But then we have the hospice which it really, I mean, you can't really do it, but we'll just give you morphine for comfort. Wait, you said you need more morphine. Okay, we'll need to give you a little more. You said you're still in pain. You know, of course you just keep shooting up until you die, but rather than doing it in a humane, cool way where you shoot up and you're done in 15 minutes like you do with a dog, you'll do it over a period of days or a week or something just... How dare you compare grandma to a dog? She's so much. Goddamn crazy Italians. But other thing is like people are all pissed about, it's terrible. It's like, well, you don't fucking do it. How about that? You died the way you want to. How about you let other people die the way they want? The problem is that someone can get it and then give it to you. That's the worry. The worry about having shit that could fuck you up is obviously people doing it to people against their will or... Yeah, that's... Of course, but then that's what you work on, on like anything that you don't do, you know, you don't tell to those sums in just because it can be used against their will. You work on the fact on those cases when it's used against somebody's will. Which is the argument for not worrying about how many guns are out there, but worrying about the mental health of a nation that allows a certain percentage of people to go on gun-fueled rampages. But who were those people and why are they doing it? Exactly. But nobody concentrates on that. It constantly guns. Yeah, there's like too many guns. Right. It's like... No, that's exactly... That's missing the point because it's about... It boils down to... In your hand or... Well, I don't know about you, but in somebody's hand having a fucking atomic weapon wouldn't be a problem because you're not nuts and you're not gonna use it because you're not... Are you saying that I would be a problem with this? Fucking idiot. But you know what I mean? The war thing... It really boils down to individual to individual. It's not the same thing. The problem comes in because it's who's gonna decide who's the sane individual and which one is and you know the state. Yeah, that always works really well. But then if you don't do it, that means every psycho in the world can get easily their hands on some messed up stuff. If you do do it, it's clearly an imperfect system because it's done through the state where there are always enormous loopholes, things that doesn't work. Right. So it's tricky. I can see why people argue passionately both ways. You can see there's kind of a logic both ways in that. Yeah, there's definitely a logic both ways. I mean the idea that people are smart enough to figure out what to do and not to do is been proven false time and time again. People are stupid. It was a shitload of us that are stupid as fuck. But then the argument is the reason why they're stupid as fuck is that we allow them to survive or being stupid and don't allow these dumb mistakes to happen. They die off. We're just so attached to every single precious life that we're not allowing stupid people to die from being stupid. So stupidity is no longer a negative like factor in evolution. You're allowed to be stupid and live. That's stupid fucks. That's fucking scary at the same time. That's fucking stupid. It's a... Right. It says Lippur is low from that to like, well, good you drainage program. Yeah. That's not good enough. Yeah. You can't do that either. Yeah, that's a problem. There's no way to do it right. There's no way. We're just... We're stuck in the middle. We're on a stage of developing and one day we'll be way better than this. But right now, it's kind of fucked. Way better than me. What the fuck? It's possible even better than the God that is Daniela Bollelli. Jesus. Blasphemy. The future is going to be amazing. We'll have even better gods. I don't know if I can deal with that. Are you still teaching? Yeah. I'm teaching a few courses at Cal State Long Beach, a few courses at San Tomahawk. Do they ever give you a hard time for your controversial viewpoints? No, I think they decide it's easier to just not deal with it, because if they come after you then, you can open a shulshit storm of wire, you're firing him and all of that. Right. So it's like, you know, whatever. It doesn't matter anyway, because we'll do things the way we want anyway. Say whatever the fuck you want, go into the classroom. Does anybody ever take an ombridge with some of the things that you say? I'm sure they do not face to face. Nobody says anything. That's kind of cool. So you teach all this crazy shit in your classes and everybody's like, well, it's fucking historically accurate. Yeah, I mean, it's not, it's like, sure, argue to me about the specific event, because I don't in the class. I don't really try to sell viewpoint. So I'll say something really radical, but I'll also show all the exception to what I just said. So it doesn't sound like I'm trying to sell you something. The reason why I asked you is because you went on like some Twitter rampage a while back about space. Yeah. That was based. You wrote like a whole essay about education system. Yeah, then open letter to academia that closes with the immortal arts of Tupac, fuck you on your mother, fucking mama. So, yes, that I'm sure they go so well. That's how you make account. Yeah. You got to speak their language. Yeah. Well, man, listen, I wish I had a fucking teacher like I had a dama rara used to be a teacher. I wish he was one of my teachers and I wish you were one of my teachers too. That would have been an amazing time in school. Instead, I got caught with a bunch of people that made teaching or made school boring. That's the majority. I didn't know that history was interesting. I was in a damn carlin. Yeah, but that's what I mean. That's what drive me insane. A guy like Dan Carlin was fucking amazing in case we haven't made a clear already. He is not a historian and that's why he's fucking amazing. His most historians, by the time they got through their PhD, all the creativity, all the juice has been squeezed out of them and there's nothing left because they have been made to conform to this really boring, prudent, careful way of telling stories where they can't say a sentence without 17 exceptions to what they say. And the evidence here on paragraph 17 is like, nobody want to listen to it. Fucking boring. Dan Carlin goes on, put on a historical podcast and becomes something that people around the world want to listen to because he's a storyteller because he makes it exciting. Being boring is a fucking real curse. Don't worry about it. It's almost like there's something wrong with you if you're boring. It's almost like you can't figure out a better way to express this information. This information that you're giving, you're giving it in a really fucking shitty way. You need to work on your presentation, son. And that's the thing that eats some way, it sucks because you can tell to somebody, look, this sucks because it's so boring and it doesn't have the juice. But the reality is that they, I think they can only improve it 10% because it's not just a technique. It's who you are. Right. These are people who are boring when they step when they are not teaching and you're talking to them down the street. It's just their personality that comes through. It's like that song, Daniela Bollelli. It takes every kind of people. I could see Daniel Bollelli sitting around his house, a little incense lit, smoking a joint, listening to some 70s music. And maybe some Jim Croci. 70s music. You don't turn on Superman's cape. You don't spit in a little man. You don't pull. No. 70s more like, well, only 70s, like Hendrix, Led Zeppelin kind of stuff. You shit. Did you do air guitar around the house and you're underwear? No, I haven't, I'm sure I'm gonna get to that level, but I haven't quite got to the point yet. If you do do it, please make a YouTube video. Of course. So you students know what the fuck they're dealing with. Oh, the sound up to your course. Happy lunch. You probably have full glass. Have you just played Voodoo Child and just fully lipped all the lyrics? Right. New all of it. And went around with it. Yeah. There's every other type now because through online you can find out a lot of things about people. A bunch of students ask, he's like, is that you in the speaker where you're holding a key then you have your middle finger out? What's that about? I'm like, oh yeah, about that. Yes. I was rebellious. It was before I realized the ultimate expression of rebellion is the drunken towel teacher. Before then, I was holding a baby and giving the middle finger. I said no. I love my drunken towel. It's too short to go to the limit. Some brother, I'm sorry. I talked shit about your t-shirt. I had to. I had to make a comedian. I got to do what I got to do. I got to do what I got to do. And how do they get your podcasts on iTunes? I do. iTunes, yes. And if somebody wants to take your class, can they take your class without signing up for anything else at the school? Can you just pay to take your class? Officially. Clearly not. But yeah. What are. So how would someone make that happen? Long Beach, I'm actually not teaching a whole lot because I'm there mainly. I think I teach just one class and the rest of the online, which is actually awake as well, in any case. The main thing, so I teach mostly Santa Monica College live in person. And it depends on the class. Some classes are, they enroll them to the limit. Other classes, they enroll it and then they leave a bunch of empty chairs. So not a thing. Somebody might be able to show up. Totally. Wow. And Daniele Bollelli. Thank you for joining us, my brother. So the Drunken Dauas is available on iTunes. You have a website for it? Yeah. Yeah, there's drunkentauis.com. I actually did drunkentauis.com. And then there's just my own website that's linked to that, just my name. Then you have one on your little phone. That's it, pitches. And if you look for him on Twitter, it's D. Bollelli, B-O-L-L-L-E-L-I. Right? No. L-E-L-I. L-E-L-I. I tried the free ball. I failed. Literally. Thank you to audible.com for sponsoring this podcast. Go to audible.com, forward slash Joe. Get yourself a free audio book. My friends. Book. We're also brought to you by stamps.com. Click on the microphone. Use the code word J-R-E for a little special treat and an excellent deal on a great service. And on it. Use O-N-N-I-T. Use the code name Rogan and save yourself 10% off any and all supplements. Brian and I, along with the lovely and talented Ari Shafir, we'll see you dirty bitches in Canada this weekend. We will tomorrow night be at, what's the name of the theater we're doing? He doesn't know. It's from the fucker. It doesn't know. I think it's called the Vogue. Yes. The Vogue theater in Vancouver tomorrow night for two shows. So we can't wait. And we're doing something different this time because you fucking people take too long with your goddamn phones. You don't know how to work. The camera on. So I'm going to take all the photos. I'm going to have someone take them with my camera. So we'll get a perfect picture every time and then we'll upload it to the website. You can take it from there. So it'll also drive traffic to my website. And don't go, dude, that's fucked up because I don't want to hear it. You bitches need to learn how to use your 1967 fucking whack ass cellphone and I have to wait for it. Damn it. I shut it off by accident. Hold on. There's a line of a thousand people taking pictures. That's just ridiculous. The people that work at the theaters. So they've requested I stream on the process. So that is the only solution. Alright, you folks. So we love the shit out of you. And we will see you on Monday. And that's a wrap. Peace, love, happiness, and good luck in your search for a big foot. We'll see you for a few.