Joe Roman reagan the Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day Gentlemen life What's happening good to see you what is on my man? I enjoy your show your shows excellent you guys have a really good Amma may show it's really thank you Thank you. I kind of blew that We could talk about that You know I got to talk to you guys are not doing it anymore I step back away when I when I started Refering again. God damn it. You got to go back to doing it. You guys are great. You guys are a great combination I think about my what we did is we did is we started doing McCarthy Mondays Because when he went back to refereeing he's not a lot of talk about promotions not a lot of talk about fighters and what's wrong and End the things it possibly you know can make some changes in so we just started McCarthy Monday Where we just talk about like the Joe Shilling situation that's something we could talk about right? So I just I created a show for him to just only do on Mondays he created He's I was just trying to find ways to keep him involved. I love that you're refereeing again We need great referees, but I wish you were out there doing both It doesn't make sense to me that you can't do both like it's not like you're not gonna be a great referee Well also still being able to comment objectively about promotions. It's important. Yeah, it is important like transparency Where's ever the problem with that exactly but you get these people that oh no because you might say something that is Gonna create a problem and it's like it's not a problem if it's the truth. It's ridiculous I mean if that was the case why how come I can do it as a commentator How come all these guys can do you're the best? Yeah, but I mean Everyone should it be able to have a voice especially referees you shouldn't like if something happens and you're a referee and you could say Here's my perspective this what this is why I did what I did and you have it on a podcast on a regular basis That's a benefit to everybody so that is what I'm trying to cry to believe you're right But what you what you run into is you run into some issues where the referee says too much and then people come back at him and then the commissions have to answer for it and the and the fight and then the fighters dig on them and then good People are talking yeah good. It's how shit gets solved. That's how you don't have like two one-hand down does not in the Down to Poland anymore. Why because we fucking complain forever 12 to six elbows. They're legit again except in New Jersey Did you see the problem? They got their problem, but we're in New Jersey You got to be kidding. How the fuck do you guys not have 12 to six? You can't make any more complicated for the referees and the fighters so dumb. It's the dumbest fucking thing It's so unfair to the fighters themselves because you when we went like I was part I wrote those things out and they were passed by the ABC, but we gave six months Six months because you got to give the fighters time to train to make sure that they get it right okay and so It's put it in it works great and now you expect them to go back to one In the middle of a fight exactly one location and now they're gonna Automatically go back to the old rules. It's like you you realize what you're doing to him It doesn't make any sense either the old the old rules are fucking stupid. We all agreed Nobody knows like no no Those are two jay, oh, yes, there was was there people. Oh, yeah, you're not my broadcast partner shut the fuck up Which one damn core me a nice word of God he says he crazy shit. That's the damn I Think that rule should absolutely that's danger I swear if we're gonna ban anything and I don't think we should ban anything, but if we're gonna ban anything side kicks the knees See that right there Right, we should okay. No, you shouldn't we should but I'm saying if we should there's an argument You're gonna blow out of guys need. Yeah, it's career And they'll be the same we should then we should absolutely ban kicks to the head and knees to the head and we should Yes, because yeah, I switch a blow down knee or the blow down brain. I'm agreeing with that I don't think we should ban anything there There's one thing that does bother me like the clear round tree Modestus because Kne went sideways He's fucked for a year What's the difference between that and we'll say you know as in Barbosa Terry Adam Terry Adam and that kicked to the head. You don't think that that was more than a year Come on. You know it was really was never the same exactly that's my point. Oh, yeah I mean that was like getting hit by a meteor. Oh, that was just crazy. I mean it was Absolutely perfectly executed beautiful technique that it absolutely altered and we time the way it was first wheel kick KO and you absolutely It was yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, but you look and you go There are those fights and we say it all the time and you know as the as a referee as a fighter You know with him period is right here. We go and watch this thing. Oh, I mean That one was just insane, but you the fighters themselves they get paid to get damaged I hate to say that but it's the truth That's part of their pay is they go in and they're gonna accept some damage, but you don't want them to have unnecessary damage, right? No, I would you you take we go rise and rules Because there's something to be said for that. I do I look at I've I've advocated for knees on the ground for a long time It's never gonna happen my position is it's better in a ring because you can avoid them a little bit if you're mobile Right and if you're still conscious and you have defensive capability you can move around knees and kicks When the cage happens and you're butted up and someone stomps you that's a totally different First off the stop. I don't ever agree with and the reason why is this name me the fight that you saw that a stop Was an effective technique when the fighter was not already seriously hurt doesn't happen Sockaraba Sockaraba used to do it all the time after he hurt people every time he tried to do it when they weren't hurt They just moved and he was Mongolian stomping on nothing Go ahead take a look at him. Yeah, I'd have to go back and watch. Yeah, there was there was a Minnowall and Phil Baroni he did that a couple times with him when Minnowall couldn't get the take down Because that was their corn rim for that fight there was that fight then there was um and then Shogun and Ninja Remember when they used to like do the stall? No, no, no, show stop ninja and show them to brothers together those guys were Phenomenal Adam. Oh, and we people that only saw Shogun and pride missed it. Oh, yeah, you missed it. Excuse me under you Quit in rampage Jackson Was I mean because a lot of people didn't you know going into that fight, you know, that's rampage You know this this guy's young he absolutely just An highlighted rampage in that fight and it was like oh my god He's way better than I ever gave him credit for before that fight that fight was That was a coming out party for for Shogun. Yeah, he was a lethal striker I'll leave those and so all those kiratee bu guys were so hyper aggressive His brother was just as nasty. Yeah, you know, he's target a little chinese Big guys Alexander didn't he who did he fight fought some heavyweight right? Yeah, he fought quite a few crushed. Yeah, but he fought one guy where it was like what is this? Why is he fighting this guy? Yeah, I can't remember who it was a million. I said Alexander a million Yeah, that's what I'm saying. Yeah, think it was that I think it was and it was like one of those fights like no No, no, no, no, no, no, this is a real fucking heavyweight a big one with nasty striking. Yeah You know, I mean he was fucking He was good. Yeah, he had some smooth people drinking people don't give the milling equals As a whole Alexander was a little bit off a little bit crazy. Oh a lot. Okay. I'm just I'm just a little bit on his back Like the fucking death holding a baby. That's on his back. Like that's a choice That's a fucking You can find Alexander a million ankles back You like that you like what is going on in your mind that you like this should be on my back permanent That's the brother and then you have paid or as the guy who was even better. Yeah, look it fade or is He was such a good What is it saying in Russian Jamie Jesus? That's the craziest thing the baby's got a fucking sword in a crown. Oh, yeah And then death is like gas. Let's kill every one there It's not even a good drawing It's like that's some Russian prison. Yeah, she is the Russian person 100% he's 100% committed That's a ballpoint pen and a fucking sewing needle. Yep. Yeah, they did that in a Russian prison. Yeah, 100% you're in a dash Bro, but that's a lot of time. God is with us. Are you sure? Based on And then you got his brother's brother has no tattoo no tattoos you can find it Small little wooden cross on his chest Yeah, it's right now, right? He's so stoked. Oh, he's awesome Alexander a million-inko James Thompson fight with James Oh, yeah, animal build like fucking Greek God. Yeah, comes out Fucking you The best is the look on Alexander's face throughout all of the I'm going through fall asleep. Yeah, I'm just completely stow it. Look at Thompson so worked up Sucks pounding his chest No flexing Doesn't even let's just hand up all the way. Hey everybody got the Billy hanging out a little bit It's awesome look how chilly looks. Yeah, I'm gonna go chill feed or looks too like no worries at all Look at James. He's so fucking hyped up Alexander's like He's like all of Swiss cheese and mustard Sam which is Is vicious the way he rocks him to you right off the back. Oh, James comes charging at him put some down But he wasn't hurt and there's like he fell down Bopping that hurt that hurt James that hurt Once he starts connecting oh, yeah, yeah, that Soviet style fluid boxing that they just whip punches I'll tell you what I worked out with Theodore and it was it was a great moment in my life If you're gonna sit there and say well, I'm gonna get your ass kicked. It's a great moment But the one thing I always thought you know before you know watching him Ruffing him I go he's got to have some kind of you know like just Tard strength, you know right right. No, he's fast and I mean Super fat when he explodes in his hands are down kind of so it's hard to see when the shots are coming and Everything he does he just explodes into and you go oh, I get it Because you got to work really hard to try to stay up with his speed when he all certain is exploding and then it's like Oh, he doesn't get tired and you're starting to get tired because you're having to match that RPM that he's at right And he's on a big heavy way. No, he's not I think it's a real benefit. I think it is I didn't do you're frightened the guy like in Ghana. Yeah, and I'm like Yeah, there's a problem there. Oh, yeah, I could be patient 265 naturally nuclear power and God and God will hit you anywhere in the head. It's a problem. You're in trouble. Yeah It's a real problem. Yeah, he had Philip, you know, Lindsey hit him on the basic almost that you wouldn't even say the temple Hit him on the top of the head and look he was out He means not being able to control his body that guy's got the ability to hurt you know when he fought Kane Yeah, you know take a look. Yeah, it wasn't a great shot Right, but it hurt him. Yeah, he's got crazy power. Yeah Just not but Fador was a different thing because Fador had that like that Russian style of movement They see like Dimitri bevall has with a real Exactly, yeah, and the footwork in a little bit of a bounce. He's got that little bit of a bounce in out Just in way and he waits for your motion to come where he wants it to be and then he changes that distance and just Crater did a really good job of coming around your guard as well So wasn't just a big straight right all the time You know, Rich Franklin used to do that as well He'd come around your guard. He put your hands up and Fador had a he did a great job with that coming around and landing the big Overhand right and then you come up upper cut then he'd take you down or hit toss you bodylock you and if you took him to the ground Off his back. He's got one of the quickest fucking arm bars in the game, which is nuts transist Man, Troy. Oh, yeah, you are barks. He's like a little kid. He's all stretched out He's on the ground completely He was great everywhere and in you know, you think about him as being this overall picture of like one of the greatest If not the greatest MMA fighter of all time, but people forget like his stand-up was so good that the crow cop fight was mostly stand-up He wrote he wrote the blueprint on how to beat crow cop. Exactly. You got to be him to do it though Yeah, I mean he first of all his his stand-up has always been real dangerous on but also It's like the way he was able to check that left kick He was doing a lot of like lifting the knee up and catching it like a pie Yeah, how many people had you seen that would back crow cop onto his back foot and March forward no, but crook exactly And that was his prime that was the difference is when you looked at it He's he told himself. Nope. I'm gonna I'm gonna make you go backwards And it took a lot of what crow cop did in it It just nullified a lot of it was a lot of it was the threat of the grappling. Oh, yeah That was a true part of it. It's not over that because then fader didn't have to worry about if he did slip and fall If he threw if he threw a big shot and he got cut from underneath if he did fall on the ground If the crow cop was gonna fall into the ground he could just hop back up Yeah, so there was that and then on top of it too when you fought him in the foam booth You know, you're not worried as much for that headkick to get there. I'm within in inches of view that left kick was There's this picture of heat herring where the shin is like halfway into Heath's ribs. Oh, it's I know exactly right. You know that picture. It's crazy. You see pro cops. Shit is just so deep You just feel your own liver. I've seen the van really ones because van really has his ribs were just Pull up from there. Look at that picture. Look at that picture. Yeah, bro. That's crazy. You know how much that hurts I mean that is actually idea The part where you look people and you go, you know, do you realize what they know? Yeah, that would hurt a look no no No, no, you're entire body is going I quit He had such explosive power and he to me he was like the first guy to figure out how to transition from kickboxing to MMA Because he did it with explosiveness More Easter I got a good trip. That's true. That's true. Maurice Maurice was the first But crocop was in that same era. I was doing it in pride Yeah, and all those other guys like Ernesto who's it didn't really work out for them when they like he only fought Bob Sap in a kickboxing fight, but even when they were fighting like bigger cray like crock up fucked up Bob Sap like same era yeah same time not yeah Same same same same was that it was a lot of Whereas like guys like Peter air it's that wouldn't translate as well in MMA elite strikers But they wanted to get into a rhythm they wanted to like get into situations and exchanges and with crocop It was as with these one shots were coming at you like nuclear missiles and it was a different threat Was a completely different threat than a lot of other guys because he was so explosive. Yeah Yeah, he's crocop was what a great guy. Oh, he's also as far as you know and but His left kick has to be the best left kick there's ever been ever in the sport of MMA Yeah, I don't think you could even think of a second place like who's got a better left kick than croc up Maybe it's in Barbosa switchy kick yeah, that's which Quick so accurate do in his prime He would kick and I'd be like it's something wrong with my It was just like a hundred twenty pound. Yeah. It was so fast. Yeah. They Dana called me a couple of times to fight him and I was like ranked number three He was like just like hit number 15. I'm like no Give me a higher record. It's not that it's not that I did Yeah, give me a higher record make it make sense Yeah, help me help me help me help me. It's this time in my life make it make sense That when he came in though you got to look at Barbosa He's been there a long time now when you think about it still going on but when he came in It was like dude this is a next level of Stand-up ability with what this guy can do. Yeah, and it was like man. It's mostly kicks Yeah, yeah, because boxing wasn't threatening like his kicks were no not equal. No, it was mostly kicks Right no if he could develop something along the Jose Aldo level of boxing where you Came back at the head and take me on those kicks. I mean Aldo's take down the fence is not like probably the best I think probably the best in the sport that we've seen I mean honestly then BJ and his prime Yeah, right with the one leg hop I think his prime was ridiculous his balance was fucking insane. Yeah, but I think he's the only guy that didn't get taken down by Marab when Marab and him fought three crazy rounds. I think Marab went for like 90 fucking take down And I don't think he took Marab I don't think Marab took him down. Yeah, he Marab mostly won that fight up against the cage hitting with punches work of for take downs cage damage Extremely underestimated. Oh, it's the fun. You take a look and Aldo doesn't now all of a sudden it's kind of like the Anderson still with it all sudden it's like you know Well, let's talk about the very best in the hundred forty-five pound and look at Alexander Volcanovskis right there He's phenomenal. I'm not saying don't forget what Jose Aldo did absolutely I mean through the wc end up being the UFC champion all those fights man. I tell you what that guy Was absolutely nuts as far as how good he was at one time Well, I think it was also because he was an elite soccer player and the ability to like if you're watching a live soccer Forget a professional soccer match. You're like oh Jesus like these guys elite. They don't get to slow down They don't have a like a there's no halftime There's no like big break for commercials. There's no bullshit. They just go there's no timeouts giant fucking legs They all have insane leg power because they're just sprinting all day long and you go Oh, well, that would translate perfectly to MMA for kicking for moving for footwork Think about all it's not just that right? It's it's the stopping go stop and go like in a real fight Right I get a take down and get to rest for a second then he postures back up and gets back to speed I had to go again and sprint again get the take down and soccer same thing you run hard down the line Oh, ball gets turned back now. You kind of jog back a little bit another ball gets played to you It's the stopping go of sprinting. Yeah, real fight. This episode is brought to you by the farmer's dog Here's a fun fact research shows that dogs who maintain a healthy weight can live up to two and a half years longer on Average than dogs who are overweight Isn't that wild and also kind of obvious at the same time? So why is feeding vague scoops of ultra process kibble still the status quo for most dog owners? Healthy alternatives exist and trust me. I know I buy one the farmer's dog. I use it for both my dogs They love it. They eat it up quick. It smells good to them. It smells good to me. It's human-grade food The farmer's dog makes fresh food for dogs and my dogs love it Their recipes are made with real meat and fresh vegetables that are gently cooked to retain vital nutrients They also portion out the meals to your dog's nutritional needs Which helps avoid overfeeding and makes weight management easier and isn't getting more time with our four-legged best friends Something every dog owner wants the answer to that is yes Obviously so try the farmer's dog today and get 50% off your first box of fresh healthy food Plus get free shipping just go to the farmers dog dot com slash rogan this offers for new customers only Yeah, it's interesting. There's a bunch of different bases that if you come from them They have a big advantage in different sports. Yeah, soccer and wrestling Yeah, the grinding of the wrestling and just the cardio fatigue and understanding that I can push through when I get tired Because there's nothing more satisfying In terms of when you run down the line the guy plays the ball in the corner You got to beat that defender there and you cross it across and you're it's that sprinting down there to beat them But then also too in wrestling knowing that you can break another human being like I need to break you mentally Grimely you and hang on you those two sports and think are huge for the sport of me and getting used to suffering dehydrated Right? That's a big factor. Yeah, the way the men used to suffering. Yeah But the weight cuts and having to compete on the same day as weight cuts is a big difference And for people that have never done that before and don't know it's fucking hard Even 24 hours this hard weight cutting is the grossest thing in MMA. It is they should figure the way to stop it I totally I don't know what you're gonna Yeah, there is no one of the most there is no one of the most dangerous things that you do with it Like think about this Joe every every sport soccer football baseball basketball they all have team chefs They all have all these things as far as we want our athletes to be as physically ready and have the right Nutrition and all these things. What's the sports that we go and we starve our athletes and dehydrate them 24 hours before the most demanding most dangerous sport in the world. Yep, but Joe even if we did it the same day Fighters will still cut weight to try and make that weight It was still that to myself the question is I wonder if there's a way to prevent that like the way to prevent that I would say is everybody here's your mandate no one's getting out of shape anymore because we're gonna have random weigh-ins So we're gonna just show up at your fucking gym. Can't do it, but but you could you like let's say you fight it 170 You cannot weigh more than one. See here. Here's you can do it. I'll show up at your fucking house at seven in the morning Josh get on the scale 175. This is not good. You could do it as a promotion You can't do it as an industry within the sport and the reason why I'm telling saying that is First off you have all these fighters will say they're all everywhere Okay all over the world and For a for an athletic commission. We'll say the state of California state of Texas. They have to have that particular fighter licensed for them to say we want to weigh you If they're not licensed in that state on that year, they can't There you go. No, but you if he got it we got adopted by the UFC I bet most of the organizations would adopt it again. That's the UFC as a promotion The UFC talked about and the UFC has the money To actually do that. It's gonna cost them a lot of money and you know look it I understand why the promotion doesn't want to lose money. I think wait I think better guys have been way better Absolutely, we've seen and it's exactly what you're talking about stop cutting as much way You could sit there and you know the only way an athletic commission could kind of do it and but this is bad on promotions Is an athletic commission could sit there and say you're allowed to weigh no more than five pounds more than that way and wait? Okay, but here's your problems with it first off the promotion can lose fights the promotion doesn't want to fight true Okay, and the second part is What's saying that the the fighter themselves is not keeping themselves dehydrated to make that five pound and now they're going in even more Dehydrated into the fight which could cause them more problems well They couldn't be dehydrated through their entire camp, and that's where you institute Bad thumbs. That's why your random's would work if the promotion was doing it Yeah, but it would have to do a sport wide it'd be almost impossible It would have to take a long time to figure out how to do it properly and not lose fights Yeah, because there's too many guys that fuck around oh, you know There's right there's too many guys that like look how many times John Jones not really trained Oh, yeah, you know like the gust of sin fight the first one. They said he didn't really train 10 days Showed up a little bit here and there didn't really train So if there's a guy like that, what are you gonna not let him fight like what are you gonna do like? Yeah, but then you asked you 26 You like not too much you also guys like Michael Morales right now 170 pounds walking 210 12 205 I mean there's a few of those guys where I'm standing next to him like Gregory Rodriguez I'm like how yeah, how how are you ever? 180 how was how how was Alex? 185 I stand next to him and go you got to be shit in me That's nuts. It's unbelievable and at 185 pounds nuclear power But I don't think he took a shot as well. It didn't there's no doubt about it Look at yeah, you can go back and look at his fights He got hurt by shots that were not as hard as ones he's taken at 205 right based upon yeah, that way cut It's the point of diminishing returns It's like there's a place where you're just doing it too much and you know You kind of love to see freaks you love to see a guy like Alex weighing it 185 you're like good luck with that Good luck with his 226 pound Fucking Amazon warrior that pretended to be 185 for five minutes for five minutes But take a look at him so surprised how he can make the weight when you pass by him You see how tall he is now big he is and you see him with the face off with cereal gone right now You're like how would this guy ever make 185? He's too big now. Oh, yeah, which is crazy. I saw him last week and it's like Gee do 250 means that's almost 70 pounds different from his UFC debut You know in the case we believe that we're gonna see a better Alex's because he doesn't have to cut his kill himself Yeah, but he also put on muscle. Yeah, and there's an issue, but they're exactly there again diminishing returns How much is that muscle gonna do this is where you try to you try to tell all fighters and you know it's Joe if you when you were fighting in Taekwondo did you care about the strong guy or did you care about the fast guy? The difference is MMA with grappling The the difference is with weight like if you get a big heavy guy and he gets on top of you You're all your speed is gone absolutely you're gone within the first three or four minutes problem with being the bigger Stronger guy in the lighter weight class is you're never the faster guy and so you've got to be able to Mall that that person to be effective and it only lasts for a certain amount of time if you had to dehydrate yourself to that point Where speed is always there when someone has it to a point unless they get tired and that speed is hard for you to handle but there's guys that were big for the weight class in that ridiculous speed like Conor McGregor's a perfect example Yeah, Connor at 145 was fast as fuck Connor was absolutely Dehydrated to the point of being a concentration camp victim. Oh, yeah, look like death. I mean it was unbelievable However once you got in there. Yeah, he was oh fast as fuck. Oh unless you look it He used to he used to lose so much at 145 He was he looked like that. He was killing. Yeah I remember the way ins like interview him at weigh ins like this is Scaller Oh my god, but then you see in the next day off Oh, I know you look good, but he fucking good. I'm good He was also what was his age back then 26 27 right? Right do that now no you can't do that now no it gets a certain point in time We have to realize you're cutting too much weight and it's actually ruining your career But I think the evidence has been pretty clear What you see guys go up and wait after killing themselves for so long if that's success a lot of guys have looking max What man say I just got to bring him up I just had Dustin Poir on the podcast yesterday and we were just talking about how he's like look max The first time he came up to 55 didn't put the weight on properly second time put it on properly He's like significant difference in power. Oh, yeah Movement and we have fight with gauging. Yeah. Oh come on. That's yeah That guy should never went down to 45 again to fight to a boy. It's too much loss What what no Because we as we had that argument about that that exact thing of he would Josh was saying look He should never it was a championship fight. Yeah He was getting a world title fight at 145. Yeah, right and I said look It's a world title fight. I understand why he's going back down He's making a huge mistake. It should never take it. He should stay at 155 You know working yourself into a title fight and I go I Understand why he's taking it. It's a dad made him the number one contender. He beat Justin He couldn't find I understand why he took the fight so what you thought might maybe he would have favored That fight with Iliya because Iliya is a smaller guy than Islam because if you think about it Islam He fucking smothers everybody. Yeah, yeah, I know striking is dangerous as fuck. Of course 100,000 but it's like that guy's he's so fucking terrifying once he gets a hold of you Yeah, but everybody he's a whole lot better in the stand-up than people give him credit Oh, he is his stand-up is actually really You're fucking off skiing. I don't care if we'll canowski took it on 11 days notice He's still headkick. He's got a sneaky left headkick. I kick it's nasty He fucks people up standing up and that's part of the problem is that like you get a custom to Thinking about this guy's about to take down and then all sudden boom Yeah, my point was though was that there was no where he put the weight on properly He looked fantastic. He has just engaged and then to go back down there to fight Iliya I was like doesn't make sense. You're the number one guy in order to go out It is you kill yourself to give it down back down and then he it's knocked out which we had never seen before Well, that's why Jones Jr. 2 right number one Roy Jones Jr. went up and fought Ruiz and then he went all the way down to 75 and got knocked out by Tarver. Yep. It's like I don't think your body wants to go back down again You put on all that weight over like a year and lift and weights you'll get max had a like a Ridiculous strength the conditioning program. He put real weight on he looked very good in 55 when Max fought Aldo the first time for the title he uh He weighed you know obviously weight in it championship weight 145 the night of the fight Joe now he was in Aldo the first time for the title he uh He weighed you know obviously weighed in at championship weight 145 the night of the fight Joe Now he was in street clothes, but they put him on a scale 178 One Sunday now he's still he was still clothed. That's cool. I don't want to see wearing rocks in his pockets Frank Shamrock with quarters in his pockets. Let's let's just be real charitable and say his clothes weigh 10 pounds Exactly that's crazy. You're looking at more than 20 pounds, but that's The show that just happened in California, they know it doing with that the MVP the one guy I can't you know the 27 pound difference in weight at 170 pounds came in 27 1.97 who was it I want to say his name Was the guys right before Saladin yeah, Parnas. I can't free ma free Three months starts with a Z I want to say okay, I can't think about but 27 pounds well obviously the biggest one was rumble Johnson Oh, I remember Johnson was the craziest crazy. He would wait 230 and make it all the way But basically what murals is doing right now MVP event on Netflix Fazil there. Namo Fazil. Yep. Of course the highest weight gain 27.2 pounds That's insane That's insane. That's so much He got into cage at 198 for 170 pound fight. I would love to get morale on the scales like right before he fought Sean Brady Oh, yeah, excuse me. Sean Brady is yeah, Sean Brady is a Thick he's not not super tall, but he's thick. Oh, yeah, he has put together and Morales made him look like him Like the lightweight like using the wrong division. Yeah, I was trying to make sense of it watching it on TV Yeah, I thought maybe was the camera angle and then they shifted. I was like no, he's still bigger than when he's further away It was further away. He's still better. He's way better than him. Yeah It was a that's a crazy situation where a guy can do that and it's like the prayer situation at 85, too When a guy can do that How long can you do it? That's you know because you're basically killing your kidneys every time you do it You just taking a little bit out of them. That was the problem with AJ, you know Yeah, like I used to coach in corner AJ early in his career when he's first came to the UFC And that was his problem. He'd make weight sometimes he make it sometimes he would he missed weight a lot to the point where he got affected God, that's fucking horrible. Yeah, that's for fucking horrible again You're leaving small bits and pieces of yourself of course in that damn cage every time when I put it when you win He died. I was like no There's a true science to cut away and he just he didn't have it out He he wrestled, you know, NC2A and he wrestled division two Like he was a really good wrestler. He knew how to make weight But then trying to kill himself to get to 70 every single time which he never had to be a Yeah, he never had to be out of me. He had massive power He did great at heavyweight every chance he beat our lobster yet heavyweight in the world series of fun I was long time ago. He was jalosky was still super legit broke our lobster's job Not he's a lobster not stupid super legit now fucking guy wins bare knuckle heavyweight championship at like a hundred years old Dude, yeah, I thought it's smart. Yeah, look at there's a you take a look at under our lobster People say whatever they want about his careers a mate since UFC 28 Was his first show not okay when all the way into today's day basically and But he changed his style You know our last he was a big power puncher for one time and then was getting hit with big shots and said you know what I'm gonna be a volume guy and he was successful with it Yeah, and didn't take near as much damage. Yeah, he fought a lot more technical lots liquor. Yeah, didn't take big chances A lot of good guys, too. Yes, beep Travis Brown and Travis. Oh, yeah Oh, that's that fight with Travis Brown amazing was a Frickin awesome fight awesome awesome awesome fight. Yeah, look at here. He beat Rothwell He tore Rothwell up which is a lot of people were super surprised by that. Oh, yeah A lot of people thought you know Ross was a tank of a man Yeah, and he's a fucking scary big puncher and he just looks hairy like a fucking bear He's scary Rothwell's close to 400 pounds Yeah, he's real he's a bad base that big that big unbelievable But meanwhile he's the one getting busted up in this fight and it was because you know our Lowski was just fighting very clever And there's just so tough You watch this fight right now They think that this fight gets stopped for that cut on his forehead that is not why he has a cut On his eye running up into his tear duct. That's why it guy was it wasn't that big of a cut But anytime it goes to the tear duct the ball right there. There's a doctor saying. Oh, no, it's over Yeah, the touch on to touch on what John was saying though is it really just comes down to how he changed his style of fighting He either fight you all the way in or all the way out He fought you in that phone booth So you couldn't get off big power shots to avoid being knocked out because he went through a phase where he was getting clipped a lot You know, yeah, so you made that adjustment. That's good on him and all those years in the game Never lost his enthusiasm. No, you know he's a character He's fighting influencers at shows All right, little bit around trying to get him. I was like, what are you guys doing? Are you crazy? Do you know that is the best part was the the the finplers are kegos hey, you can fight my bodyguard Bodyguards in the background going. Sure. Yeah, I'll do it I'm fine. That's a good idea. Yeah, your bodyguard doesn't do her lofs gives you need to get a new bodyguard He's telling of my bodyguard will fight him. I was like, oh Jesus Christ did you guys watch the reek over whoven oosick fine? Oh, yes, I was in and yeah Oh, yeah, that was a I was a robbery cuz it I guess apparently Oosick was up on the score cards two to one that that's robbery. That's the robbery. Yeah, that's the robbery if that's the case Yeah, he was up. I guess I thought for first off Rico over for a hoven. You know We know what he's been in kickboxing and he's been fantastic Unbelievable time. Yeah, and you can look back on certain people in your Ernesto who's how great he was Batterheart was a bad ass all of them were awesome, but we could accomplish more than anybody Absolutely he's been undefeated for like more than ten years in kickboxing. That's nuts. Yes, it is That's especially with the amount of rounds Comparatively in stuff because you can have a bad round and it can really affect your fight just like MMA But this fight I really thought going in I go look Rico will do okay for the for the first couple rounds and then it's gonna start to get to him I was shocked by it. He fought very clever and he didn't fight he didn't fight big He actually be creative the problems of closing that distance Every time you look how close he could he kept on getting into the phone with and he would do work and it was causing Usyk nothing but problems also Rico is known for his discipline in his fitness Yes, like he's a guy who always has tremendous conditioning and I think there's a lot of heavy weights That would be surprised at the work that this guy does and the pace that he could put on So a lot of people like oh, he's gonna get tired. You know fights three minutes and that's honestly what I was thinking It gets past five rounds. I'm wondering how he's gonna be able to hold that pace The guy's such a cardio fiend and he's always shredded And it's just he's so used to combat to that like getting in there Just fighting Usyk. It's not big. That right hand right there was I mean beautiful bro He was winning eight to two in my eyes. Okay. I thought he was winning eight to two going into the 11th round when the fight was stopped Now the fight shouldn't have been stopped the way it was stopped but also That was in eight seconds after the knockdown so after he gets knocked down He doesn't have his mouthpiece so they have to go over the corner. They rinse off that's in the stakes right there Yeah, the whole thing's a mistake. It takes like 30 seconds Yeah, and then the referee stops it when he's still standing moving around look if there's one One of the things that changed in boxing since I like I referee boxing now so here it is right here This is the end we could watch it real quick So this is the look at all this time. So he's up and he goes over This is mistake right here. I'm bringing over to his corner. Hey come on over Watch the first thing that happens and this is what we'll talk about. Oh, oh, it dropped. That's on purpose Of course I would any second counts But then look at this so he swarms him with some punches, but Rico's moving He's covering up. He's moving. What is he supposed to do? Yeah, what is he supposed to do? That's a bad stop it I agree so if you're gonna stop it because you felt like the first knockdown was too much Why would you let him rinse and glove off and he didn't take significant damage after that? That's a bad stop. No, that's well, and it's also the end of the round second It's the end of the round. It's literally you know the round And you actually stops it when the rounds over But you at look as the referee Joe, you know all of this and if you don't you're not doing your job first off You know he's got a full minute If I let this go one second He's got a full minute to recover here Even if I did think he was a little bit hurt now But I think that if that was a legitimate eight count and they went right back to fighting he would have stopped him there Maybe I think he was really rocked when you see him go back to his corner Maybe he's the key word See one of the things that used to be though in boxing It was always that you would if a mouthpiece hit the ground You had to take it to the corner Have it rinsed with water and have it place back in the fighter's mouth Right Okay, that's not the way it is anymore because of MMA And the fact that we take a we take a mouthpiece off of the ground and shoot stuff it right back in the fighter's mouth They have now changed to the point of they do the same thing and the difference is many times we'll hand the mouthpiece to the To the MMA fighter because they have you know, gloveless fingers right right and they put it back in sometimes We'll put it back in depending upon situations, but in boxing now you take it I'll put it back in his mouth. I'll say is that good Boom fight right you don't Is that you have one how does that in Egypt as well? Do you think that's possible? You're talking about you know with under the unified rules of boxing now which is North America. Okay, okay That's you know most of the time you go to Egypt. They're still fighting under the unified rules But the refereeing is always going to be different when you get a referee from England or somewhere It's a little bit different But I wonder if the referee rules are different over there If you're supposed to rinse off the mouthpiece before you put it back No, what it means is you have not advanced as a referee to understand what we do now Right, but what I'm saying is do they have different rules over there? This is one thing Definitely not not advanced as a referee. So every understand what we do now mouthpiece goes down You pick it up you were right back in the case. Oh, yes So it's like when the UFC goes to a country doesn't have a commission They sometimes they'll bring her B. And they'll bring referees with them So they know the rules to make sure that something like this doesn't happen The referee hasn't followed up with the rules In the big-time fight so it comes not he's not gone and and advanced is you know training to understand This is what we do now and this is why because we don't want I don't want to take that time from Usyk because Usyk did his job Right, he hit him with an uppercut that absolutely blasted and puts him on that You go and he gets up you give him the mandatory Now his mouthpiece comes out Am I going to walk it over to a corner And have that mouthpiece washed out with water which does what for it Right does a disjoint It's exactly okay, and that's the real thing So it doesn't do anything Obviously if there's something in the mouthpiece we remove the thing from the mouthpiece But normally it's just Bit and blood if that's what's there Put it back in boom bring him back in as Abruptly as you can to make it fair for Usyk who gained an advantage in the fight You don't want to give the advantage to bro. Also his mouthpiece came out earlier in the fight as well It's like that's a bad mouthpiece A world-class kickbox or a world champion that could be so hard for you to pull out Yeah, it's odd that he kept falling out of his mouth Have we got Rico with a boiling bite is nuts Right in the heavyweight device nuts. Do you remember Carl Parisian? Sure, he would wear a boiling bite that wasn't boiled Oh, dude straight out of the packaging that This is why people are though That's wild to me Boiling bites are nuts. Well, it's also nuts Here's we talk about this on the the U.S. e broadcast all the time But I think it's nuts that you're still allowed to wear a tie steel cup. I think it's fucking crazy I would wear you have a I would too. Yeah, that's all I ever wore I can't believe I can't wrap my head around how fighters don't wear them 100% I agree with you 100% however It should be illegal. Yes. Look at crazy. You have a piece of metal. Oh, yeah, dick. You have actual iron over your cock And if a guy kicks it with his toe, it's gonna shatter I've always wondered the north out of this and you just start humping their head, right? Oh, dude, just jimbing them the business. There was one that did that. Do you ever be a rent of already? Do you remember that guy got a boss rootin? Yeah, I trained with him at legends and he mounted me once and he almost made me tap right Yeah, by just digging his dick into my sternum So rude and great fine man. I'm like bro you fucking killing me like this like a shoulder Shoney cotter. Shoney cotter. Oh, shoney cotter. He's the word oversized Also awesome for arm balls. Yes, that's how Frank Mir broke Tim Silvia's arm. Oh, yeah That's not completely makes sense. Yeah, but I think we'd have broken and it was just as nuts. Well this strong as Frank Strong as he was how good his arm arm was in that position. That was a crazy situation. Oh, yes It was crazy because I don't think the people in the audience had any idea Oh, what had happened? Are you if you go back to that? You know cuz Herb Dean was the referee and and Herb did a great job But it was I was actually in the corner of Tim Silvia You know where I was sitting and I had Jeremy Horne and Matt Hughes and Pat Milletitcher in his corner, right? And they had this I had the same view that they had and what you saw was Tim Silvia But you saw his elbow out from that arm bar yeah away from the hip and all of a sudden Herb's stopping it and they Are going crazy. They're going what are you doing? You're you know, and they're calling him every Name the book and I go right inside the octagon and I go. I heard what did you have and he goes John His arm broke. I go his arm broke and he goes I heard it and I saw it. Yeah, you can see the vibration and he goes his arm broke And so at the time the The person who was in charge of the medical staff for the Nevada state athletic mission since it was in Nevada They're looking at Tim and Tim is like going, you know, but you saw Tim slowly stop doing using that one arm Started going down to the side as as reality started setting in and the pain started coming But they they basically said there's nothing wrong with his arm Right I swear to you Herb Herb's greatest response. I've ever heard He goes X-ray that motherfucker Because Herb never causes right he goes X-ray that motherfucker. It's broken right and sure enough Straight across both bones. Well, we can see it in the And you called it out or arm. Yeah because everybody was booing. I'm like you got to watch this watch this That what's that right there? That's what I saw them first I'm on TV. I thought I just shifted off of the cup because sometimes you'll see that the bone will shift off Then you Two two mistake pops pull pull had like that highlight where something bends like a piece of plastic Horrible man. That was all he's broken more arms like he broke no gares arm. That's viral fragile with a comerra. Yeah He's nasty man. That's you know, it's funny because if you're around, you know, Frank and you're talking He'll always say oh here it is. Oh, I don't want to watch it again. Oh watch it. Oh Here it comes right right here. Pop Oh God And it's the forearm. Yeah, it's just like super unusual and everyone's wondering why'd you stop it? Why'd you stop? Oh dude. Herb was getting booed out of the arena there. I remember So I remember the Tim was complaining. Oh, yeah, come on bro. Like you know, which is he has to know It just how he knows he's just such an animal you wanted to fight with a broken arm But just Which you know literally you might have to get it amputated if you did that. Oh like look When I was a kind of damage you would have after that you could lose your arm. Yeah You literally that's you know, this is where you but you'll get people all the time You know, I mean some of the commentators and some of the shows, you know, oh if you want to fight let them fight it's like shot Oh, okay. Yeah This is you know, this is not fighter from itself exactly this is not life in death Yeah, if you lose a fight, I know it sucks, but it just sucks and it's not life in death You're it's okay crazy situations like carvos oldberg who knocks out your perhorska with a clearly blown out Oh, yeah, well you're like if that went to the round at the end of the round They would probably stop to fight well. Think about what Santos right here in a fight and John Jones with two torn out ACL right yeah, that's John Jones. Yeah, I mean I gave him a good fight. Yeah, I think that was a split decision It was which is nuts. Yeah, it's nuts like he could have won the food. Yeah, like one more incompetent judge Now we're going to incompetent judges now we're gonna have problems Well whoever was judging the oocyte fight was incompetent those those people were ridiculous The fact that they didn't have Rico ahead. It's crazy. Yeah, I think when you got a guy like oocyte Who's arguably the greatest heavyweight boxer of all time? He's definitely in the conversation and then you have so much money involved in him being undefeated and so and whether the referees corrupt or not They know whether the judges are corrupt or not They know and if they fuck things up for everybody. Yeah, you know, there's like there's some weird shenanigans that go on in boxing there you know that lady that scored It was a pack yeah fight against Tim Bradley. She scored she was one of the ones that she scored a bunch of fights I thought you were gonna talk Camelo against triple G There was a Canelo one that she scored bad. Yeah, there's a she scored a bunch of fights where you like what the fuck is this And then you have to realize about betting props Yeah, I don't know. No, it's not not only bird though. No, Adelay Burr was was the Very nice lady. She's just like it. She I'm gonna give her her props in this first She doesn't do a whole lot of boxing work, but she does do a lot of MMA does a lot of the UFC still is that That woman watches more fights Training to goes to more trainings She puts in all the time that you could imagine to always try to get better She is asking questions all the time now if you can sit there and say well That has she you know, you know, can she roll? No, she can but she knows what you know If you if you say okay, what's this she'll tell you? Yeah, what's this? She knows it. I'm sure she puts in that time, but you know you're always gonna have the their certain fights no matter what They're always gonna be there, you know as the judge you always you're trying to do your best Yeah, but there's just one lady where she was involved in quite a few like ridiculous ones and the Tim Bradley Manny Pacquiao one was a big one and then they looked at some other ones and then she stepped away from it The problem is and I'm not accusing this lady or anybody of this But I'm saying that some people have done this in the past is that all you have to do is make it a split decision All you have to do is be one shitty judge that even though it's clearly for this guy You say it's for that guy and someone's making a ton of loose. Yeah, and especially in this day and age with Betty 100% man of the UFC has a real problem. Oh, yeah There's a real problem with quite a few fights the FBI's looked into quite a few fights And there's one that they focused on the beginning because they knew that there's some improper betting But now they're focused on a bunch of other ones as well. Yeah I'm gonna say this I think that you can get away with it John to think that you're gonna be able to get away with it You're in it. It's just fucking stupid. You're an idiot as the fighter you're a fool But if you if you if you were around the judging especially in the UFC because it's it's mainly a lot of the same guys You know they though these guys are on Text links. They are consistently Every Joe every UFC fight my phone blows up it blows up with Fighters it blows up from other officials asking quite what about that? What did you see? What do you think? And it's because look it there is at times We get media and we get you know people you know talking about our fights that call robberies when there's no robbery It's a close fight, right? And if you you wanted your guy to hold on with that If robbery and I I pointed out to him. I had him sit one time Hey sit where the judge sits because you get one view you as the commentator you get that Beautiful monitor that's in front of you. There's times when you're watching the fight live and there's times when you're watching the monitor Because the angle change as the judge now they put the monitor there for the judges and the end like the UFC puts a great monitor Therefore but we didn't always have that right and you didn't always many times you had the worst seat in the house To be able to judge a fight special there's a post in front of you Yeah, and it's so different than what people think and it's When you are the one that's putting your name on that scorecard You're signing it and you know this counts. It's everything. It is everything to you to be right You want to be right but many times what you're seeing and That's why they're at the three different points and that's why something you know people get into this well It's a split decision split decision is not always bad Do you think they would benefit in having five judges instead of three? No, no I've worked with it. I've done it too many times. It hasn't changed anything. It doesn't doesn't change anything I'm just being honest If it did I would say I yeah, we should do it. But if you have two bad judges and three good ones Why do you have why do you have two bad judges? That's the question that is when you're on the road. Let's be We're on the road. We do it. Let's not even name a state But we show up. We have to use these regular local guys. There have been issues. I'm not saying they're having right I'm not saying there's there are bad judges. Yes, absolutely. I love cops. There's bad cops There are I love dentists. There's some bad dentists. There's some fucking people that do surgeries that don't have to do them You know what I mean? Oh, yeah, it's like it doesn't it's not saying that the people that do it and do a great job Shouldn't be supported and praise and they definitely should but it's also It's like it would benefit. I think everybody'd have a few more opinions like I like verdict Be seeing verdict them and man over happening I've booked them up a bunch of times. I think they're accurate like 99% of the time I look at the verdicts more I'm like most close I'm out of a hundred fights most of the time. I agree with the first score There's many times though. You can take a look at this way when I started teaching the command course and everything people Oh, you got to teach us a I'm teaching people to take my job Right, okay, right in the end. I only need a lot of referees luckily They need a lot of judges, but they also need a lot of referees for the big ones where you can't fuck this up Okay, I mean yeah like that's it's important But it's not the job that people think it is It is not as easy as people think it is. Oh, it's definitely not and it's definitely so hard It's job next to being a fighter. Yeah. Yeah, I think it's fighters number one referees number two But yes and no and you're right as far the fighting is much more difficult as far as You know what it does to your body and what you have to put out into it and all that way more difficult Also the consequences of fucking it up boom I don't have the consequences if I make a bad cause as a commentator It's like oh, Joe's it is okay. That doesn't mean anything like nobody loses money Like somebody could lose half their fucking purse which I hate by the way. Yeah, I don't like I don't like the whole wind bonus Everyone's trying to hand it can't stand it. You should get paid your price fighter You should get paid to compete. This is the number whether it's 200,000 or two It shouldn't be dependent upon judges decisions. I'm it should be dependent upon you showed up You fought your fucking ass off. You're trying to win if you win you're gonna make more money No one's trying to lose right so it's like what are we doing? I'm okay with the wind bonus, but it's got to be more skewed towards the show money So give me like let's just I'm using a round number 80 20 right and then you give me another bonus for a finishing bonus if I give a knockout you give another 20 or 50 They're doing that now. Yeah, I mean he's doing finish But I mean for yeah, exactly, but I just don't like wind bonuses. I think you you know the fact that there have been bad decisions I think guys have lost half their fucking purse when they need it and it's it's it's you got robbed That's when you really got robbed this not just a decision. Absolutely got robbed financially Which is fucking crazy to me? I think fighters should get I don't think they fight harder I don't think anybody don't they want to win they want to win that's it no one's fighting hard fighting hard because it's just something sitting out there and if they are they probably shouldn't be fighting You know I always say they're not in a elite like world-class level if they're fighting harder for a moment Top 15 you're not gonna fight harder because they're getting things are you've you've worked your way there to get there Your pride is to involve your egos involved. You want to fucking good. Yeah, I'm sure you're the ball I've always said like if you ask a fighter before the fight Hey, how much you know when if they're gonna get a 4040 or they're gonna get a 5050 they're gonna say 100,000 They've already mentally spent that money It's always they've Paul Yeah, it's fighters on the best of tape and can't know. Yeah, so yeah, it's You take a look, you know, we know that it's a good save of money though It's trickling you would think he'd be the most reckless guy now very smart. Yeah, very smart with his money Yeah, I do it by like most these guys are buying jeans and shirts and classes no, they're buying ringblers Everything every day But he saves his money, man. He's got a lot of money saved up learning how smart Smarting how to be frugal is very important especially for an athlete Especially if you're an athlete like Strickland still rides a motorcycle. That's like a best still right a motorcycle He's still you know, maybe from Frank mayor when you broke his femur like Surprise fighters Frank mayor breaking his femurs would kept me from getting a motorcycle license. Yeah That was the last one. Yeah, two friends crashed one friend wiped out and fucked up a shoulder and then Frank Mayor got T-bone and I was like I'm out it all comes down There's the old saying there's two types of motorcycle riders ones that have been down and ones that are going down Yeah, yeah, that's just the truth. That's a problem So I felt like I'm hurting myself so many days a week just doing Jiu Jitsu the like that doing that on top of that It's like I don't want to risk no Yeah, especially if you haven't been doing it because there's ways to ride and There's you you don't ride like you'll see you can watch people on the road and I go that dude doesn't out on a ride That's and it's like That's what scary get a black license figure out a ride at a bike and you fuck them You know, it's like you could go to a Card dealership right now and pick up a Corvette zero one you got a 1,000 horsepower car right? I'm like Who knows if you know how to really do it prepared to drive that that's a fighter jet on wheels Give it to somebody awesome Yeah, your parents are rich so you have a fucking fighter jet on wheels But you know what you're talking about Sean Strickland with how many cars do you need? You know I tell fighters on how many cars do you need? You know I do I've had Arguements with rampage because rampage got it eight million cars Yeah, I go dude. How many cars can you put your ass in at one time? Right and it's like you're blowing through money. You're you can't get back You can't get back. Yeah, I'm like what I'm about cars It's depending on what kind of cars you have some cars are always you can if you're gonna do your best That's fine muscle cars should like that. They're always worth money I think if you're a fighter you need to take a page out of Forest Griffin's book right with the sign on that he won for the ultimate fighter He drove that thing into the ground Door handles were off. He had to roll the window down to open the door from the outside Like he said you're character. Yeah, no, but I mean that's how you have to live You're gonna be a professional athlete a professional fighter. That's how you have to live especially early in your career You don't know how long it's gonna last yeah also There's something to be said for the comforts of Nice things and luxury is kind of slowing you down a little bit. Not everybody Not doesn't seem to do it to Arren Sarukian. No That's what you can do to come in. He breaks the whole rule book. Yeah, rich kids Fights like a demon, but like Greek guy. Yes, such a stud man constantly competing and wrestling doing doing everything I'm and wrestling this weekend here at Ross wrestling in Arlington animal. Yeah, I thought what I saw by us I said just keep doing what you're doing this killing it Just keep doing what you're doing. I think the best thing that could happen to him is not getting a title fight Yeah, guys, don't know Yeah, I mean he's capitalized on the bad situation that he does. Yeah, but it was also the headbutt with Dan Absolutely, I was fucking so because you're as you're as a promoter right you could have cost me all this money if you get If it gets cut yeah, it gets cut though they pull the fight right. Oh my god. Can you imagine that come on knucklehead? Yeah, stop But I do what he's been doing with RAF what he's been doing with his Nina drama stuff and all that stuff Hey keep on keep going He's a lot of talking about you very small and he is the most interesting contender for Elio to work Oh, yeah, without 100% other than Justin which is gonna be wild, but I think him The skills that he has the wrestling that he has and is the size he's a lot bigger than Elio You know, I asked I asked DC and Dustin both yesterday on my show Why do you think people were over over looking Justin? That's a good question. I mean When I look at Gage, I'm like he's got all the tools in the weapons Illid's poor is heavy on the lead leg. Justin Gage. He's got a heavy leg kick. He's got a great upper cut He's fighting the shorter fighter in Illid's a poor. Yeah, he's a bigger guy. He's a way bigger He's not making 145 ever now. He's a much bigger guy He's a really good wrestler and he's a nasty striker and he's also a kind of a fucking savage Like he's not kind of yeah, I mean like like a little savage not like pretending like when he fought Michael Johnson Yeah, UFC debut. He just threw himself at Michael Johnson And he did the same thing with Patty Pimblett. Yeah, the Patty Pimblett fight He could have fought that fight a lot cleaner. Yeah, and he just said Son, if UFC debut, he just threw himself at Michael Johnson. And he did the same thing with Patty Pimblitt. Yeah. The Patty Pimblitt fight, he could have fought that fight a lot cleaner. Yeah. And he just said, fuck you. I'm just going to walk you down and just blast you every chance I get and break you up. And that's what he did. And he's a fucking scary dude, man. Justin's a scary dude. When he's on, and this is the last dance, right? So you know that he's going to be hyper focused for this fight. I just can't see why people are overlooking him. like, oh, he doesn't have a chance. And he knocked out. I think they're taking away. So good. I think it has done it to everybody. All these guys that are also really good. Got three has destroyed. Yes. In a row. Three in a row. Let me, let me. That's a solid way. I was at a Volcanowski and fucking do Bronx fucking close over. That's crazy. Crazy. Three KOs. Yes. I don't hold it against him. And also is it kind of somewhere, is there an asterisk next to it a little bit? Because Volcanowski coming off the headkick, knock out. Yes. Max Holloway, Max Holloway cutting from 55 to 45 after putting all the weight on, then getting knocked out. The one, the only one I would say knows Charles, because he goes up fights, Charles, Charles, you know, Charles. That's no max Holloway, yes, because he cut the, cut the weight butt. That was his decision. That's right. And no one should have let Volcanowski take that fight. No, you got headkick four months ago into a coma. There's no fucking chance you should be taking a fight with the scariest puncher in the division. Is that a coach's corner, family decision? He isn't a fucking animal. That would take you to do it. Yeah, but see, that's when you have to have the people. Yes. Maybe in your corner, in your family, you're saying, hey, I think it's honestly in your family. I think you need like someone who loves you, someone who, someone who is just absolutely totally honest saying, you can't do this, this fast. I'm not saying you can't do it. Right. But you have to do these things to be able to make it to where you have a ability to take a shot like you used to because it's diminished at this moment. Not just that. You have to take any consideration that he gets knocked out and then he goes right into camp. Okay. So you're not going to rest your brain. No, you're just not. Even if you're just wrestling, you're not resting your brain. You can't. Anytime your body, your body temperature rises, you're damaging your brain. Especially if you haven't let it recover yet. And there's no way he let it recover. I mean, he got shined. Into the dome by one of the biggest guys that ever fought at 55 is launched huge 55. Six foot tall. Any fucking takes the fight on 11 days notice with no camp and he's eating barbecue and fucking drinking fosters. See that. But like it goes. He's a fucking all time great. No doubt about it. He's an all time great. And you know, when you go back and look at his fights with Max, like he was the first guy to figure out Max. You know, and then you look at what he did cleaning out the division. I mean, my God, I would have loved to see in a fair shake. I would have loved to see I would have never advised him to take that fight with Islam on 11 days notice. I'm like, I don't care what the fucking UFC says. No, go John Jones. What does John Jones do? John Jones had an opportunity to fight Chelsea on him with very little notice. That's right. He was already in shape. Dan Anderson fight. Nope won't fight him. Not going to fight him unless I have a full camp preparing just for him. I'm not giving anybody any fucking chances. period. See ya. Bye. I'm the champ. And if Volkonovsky had that mindset, he would have never fought in Islam unless he went to a full camp again because he almost beat him the first time. Yeah. It was a really close fight the first time. The second fight comes in. He's a little soft. He's not in shape. His mind's not right. So it was also the difference in the wake cut for Islam. Yes. Islam was on 30, 30 some hours compared to. Right. He's on Australia time the first time. The second time he's like fully rehijred. Right. I'm to recover. Yep. Much more dangerous. I think it was more of the expectation that Volk thought. I'll just do the same thing I did in the first fight. Of course, because he's an animal. Yeah. That's where you need your brother. You need someone to go dude. I love you. You're an animal. You're one of the greatest of all time. But the brain is the brain. Like there's just certain you don't want to fight with broken hand. Right? Okay. Just because you can't see it doesn't mean your head's not damaged. But see that's the damage. That's the difference though is exactly what you're saying is the brain doesn't hurt. Right. You don't have nerve endings. And so you can't sit there and say, oh man, I've got this problem. Intel, you end up concussed. Right. Intel now also in the headaches are occurring and the bright lights start to bother you and all these things start to add up and you're starting to get mad about things that you can't understand why am I getting mad right now. Those are the telltale signs of, hey, I need to step away for a while. Do you remember when Travis Luder thought, oh yeah, yeah, who was it? Eastman. Eastman. And he caught Marvin Eastman with a punch. Which is a regular punch. There's nothing Eastman clip went down. And then we found out later, oh, he got caled really bad. I think by Tito in training. Yep. And it's like that's it. He's been t killed twice. Twice in training. Oh, God. You know, you're crazy. You look and you go and that's why he went out the way he did. 100% off of something weird. Off of something he never would have been hurt by. It was weird. It was weird. It was like a straight left. And the punch. And it's like hardly moved out. Cardi move. Just fell back. Yeah, because this frame is damaged. You've got to give your time full of full time of recover. Four and five days up to up to six months, eating more fats, more avocados, things like that to help your brain recover. When Juan was a well-marked guest knocked out Paco, Freddie Roach said, you're not doing anything for a year. One year. And he got his chin back. Yeah. He took that year off and he came back actually recovered. But Freddie being a long time boxer himself and being around the game and seeing guys getting knocked out and seeing guys jumping back into quick. He knew Freddie being one himself. Yes. Freddie, you know, people don't realize Freddie was actually a good boxer. He was, he had a good amateur record. He was doing well approach. Do you remember who his trainer was? His trainer was Eddie Fudge. Eddie Fudge, who was the second trainer for Joe Frazier after he danced during him, died and Joe Frazier. He was there for the Thrillah and Manila with Ali and stuff like that. And Eddie Fudge told Freddie Roach, son, you're taking too many shots. You're getting hit with too many good ones. You're not responding the same way. You're done. You got to stop. And Freddie Roach got rid of Eddie Fudge and continued to fight his professional and just kept getting knocked out. And that was the end of his career. And then he became the trainer and you know, you can take a look at a lot of the issues that he has. But as much as you're looking at, you know, you're looking at that with Freddie, take a look at his brother, Pepper, who took a lot less, is worse than Freddie. I mean, Pepper's gone now. But I mean, headshots and trauma to the brain, especially when you don't give it the opportunity to rest and heal, it will absolutely take and burn your career and burn. No doubt. And there's no way to really tell. There's so many guys that are damaged and we don't know because you meet them backstage like, hey, how you doing? Everything's great. Come on. It's not great. These guys are struggling. They don't remember what you just said. Exactly. And then they're talking to people, they repeat things over and over again. Yeah. And you can watch, you know, I hate to say it. There was a fighter fought in the UFC, fought in bare knuckle boxing now. He's now a training guys. And it's Joey Beltran. Okay. No, I know. Had a decent career. Heavy Puncher took a lot of damage. And I'm just watching Joey Beltran walk off of stairs. And having to go one step at a time with each foot. And you look and you go, damn. And you know, hey, he's been altered. He's a great guy, but it's like, that's what all of this does in the end. No doubt. You've got to understand that you, I always, I try to tell fighters that I look you're a Ferrari. You know, you want to be a Lamborghini or a Lamborghini. But first off, it's like, you know, the whole John Jones thing is, you know, be careful of what you put in its gas tank. Okay. Same with, you know, other guys. You know, I don't mean to pick out on John, but you know, he's told the story of what he was doing. And so careful what you put in the gas tank. And realize you can only crash that car so many times before it's a piece of junk. And it's hard to get that through that this is not going to last forever. And I'm not going to be the same forever. Yeah. They just don't see it until all of a sudden it's there. Well, that's why it's a real Bummer when you see coaches that you know love the fighters and they haven't stepped in. They haven't done anything. And they're keeping training these guys. Because they'll lose them. Yeah. Exactly. And that's what's horrible. It's horrible that you have to cut the kind of relationship where you get to a fork in the road and you go, this is what this is. Yeah. Like it doesn't mean that your life is over. No, it's the start of your next life. Yeah. Because you can't identify yourself. Well, John, you could speak to this because, you know, you fought at the highest level for a long fucking time. And you stepped away healthy. Yeah. I had this conversation with Dustin yesterday. I just said, hey, like I feel like you could still do it. You're right there. Like you're one fight away from fighting for another title again. And he's like, it was just the time. And I completely respect that. Yeah. I said because he's having time now with his two kids. His wife, he's enjoying his moment. He just got them lifting. He was looking swole. And I was like, guys, I was like, it's good to see you. He came on the show's all sweaty. Little bit like, you know, he's enjoying this next chapter of his life. I like when guys go out. Oh, say we absolutely they offer him a bunch of money. He's like, nope. Yep. Good. Did it done by and I hate when people try to rag him on it. It drives me crazy. They sit there and go, oh, yeah, but you know, you know, you could have done this. You could have done that. He gives zero five. He doesn't care. He doesn't look at what he did. Yeah. That's all you need to know. He dominated people that nobody dominated. Oh, yeah. And he did it crazy way. Like, I'm speaking of Barbosa. I remember that fight where Barbosa had that thousand. yards there in the first round. He's like, he was like, oh my God, this is never going to go my way. It's not, it wasn't gonna. Hey, I actually looked something up the other day. It could be was the only guys never blood inside the UFC octagon. That's crazy. He's the only fighter to never bleed inside the hatch. What are my goals? That's why. He's the most dominant fighter in look at the John Jones being, you know, considering the John Jones is the greatest as far as you're going to say, who's done it better as far as all the championship fights and all of that stuff. John Jones is the guy. Right. The most dominant fighter I ever stepped into that cage with was a beep. Look at this. Can we never visibly bled was severely bruised or was knocked down during his professional MMA career? Who's the only person you ever saw her to Connor? Nope. No. No. Well, glisten T bow hurt. Michael Johnson. Michael Johnson has one. He gave a little bit of what I was doing that fight. That's right. Michael Johnson, you sucked it right back. I said, I go, have me. I go, have you heard? He's like, I probably come on, you know, I'm not hurt. That's what I was saying. That's so great. You talked about, you know, Michael Johnson against Gachi, you know, and after that fight, because I did that fight and I told Justin, hey, congratulations. That was a great performance. You got hurt. You went through it because I never got hurt. I go, go watch the video. That was like, I never got hurt. Oh, yeah. You heard those guys went to war. Oh, man. The crazy thing was when Kabib was on top of Michael Johnson and he was saying, come on, brother, you know, I need dessert for this shot. He was saying, I don't want to do this to you. I don't want to, and then when he almost, when he got him to come over, I was like, please, Tom. Oh, so, yeah. You're so pleased up. Yeah. What do you think I'm saying? I think the only reason why I didn't break is Kabib is probably being kind. Yeah. Like he's talking to you all the time. Now, the entire fight. You have to give up. He's saying, you have to give up. Come on, bro. You know, I need to fight for title. He's my destiny after fight for the title. Yeah, I need to fight for the title. You know this. I deserve this. You agree? He's like, you agree. He's saying this white beating is ass. You're joking. Like, huh? I mean, he was just a motherfucker, dude. So everybody agrees. Everybody agrees. Yeah. As he's beaten his ass, he's in sync. See, everybody agrees. Well, how about when he was on top of Connor and he's saying, let's talk now. Oh, yeah. It's punching me in the face. Come on, let's talk now. Let's talk now. I loved it. He was a monster, dude. Kabib was, he means he's just so relentless. But it's every thing. It's everything to do with his lifestyle. And this is where you get into, you know, you've seen it too many times. Champions. And there's been great champions. But when you become the champion, everything in your life changes. The things that come your way change, you know, you get you get offered things that you didn't get offered in the same way before you get all these opportunities and all of a sudden, instead of going to the gym, you're spending the day on a plane going to a location to do something. Sometimes it's for the promotion that you're working for. Sometimes it's for the UFC or whatever promotion there is. And because they're asking you, so you're missing that day of training and then you're getting back on the plane and you're coming back the next day. And that's another day that you're missing. He never missed training. He never changed his lifestyle. He did everything the same. And that's why he had the results he got. Well, for a super successful guy, he's still so humble. So like normal to talk to, he's so balanced. And it's that discipline that he has. The discipline is religious beliefs. Like he's just so, so rock solid. The thing about him is that he tries to make sure he puts the guys in and help get him there, tries to help them get elevated as well. And that's it kind of what I'm trying to say is that how you've done with your guys with your group of comics and friends, you guys all lift each other up. He does the same thing with the group of friends that he has. So not just like myself and DC and Islam and those guys. I mean, like when they go to travel for events, he, you know, he takes care of the house, he makes sure that it's all organized, make sure that there's enough room for everyone. There's food. You know, obviously all the guys other guys chip in, but it's like he's the one that's kind of organized and everything. He's the leader of that team. And I'd love seeing somebody that puts that much effort into guys that helped get him there as well. Yeah, no, he's a real leader. He's a real leader. And now that he's coaching, I mean, you imagine you're a kid and you need motivation. You're literally being coached by one of the greatest combat sports athletes ever walk on God's earth. And one that did it right the entire time. The entire time and is all about discipline and hard work. Like you couldn't pick a better camp, especially if you're a grappling-based guy, you know, like send him to Dagestan two, three years ago. He's the greatest meal of all time. I think what separates, you know, Islam and have even that whole group is that there's never a moment where they're not training. Like I was in Chicago at one of the events for Belator. We were there and I was headed down to the bar after the event. They were headed to the gym, passing me the elevator. It's a come up and talk to me. So I was up there for an hour to chat with them or their ride and bikes, you know, lifting weights, getting their workout in and everyone else is down at the bar drinking. Wow. And so it doesn't matter. They don't even look at it. They don't think about it. They just go right to the gym. They get their sweat on. They're up there for two hours. It's not like this intensity. But it's not a 25. Right. They're just working. Yeah. So I'll get out of shit. No. And then you see them in the morning, right? When they were living it, when they were training out of AK in the mornings, you'd see them at the track in the mornings. They would just jog, but then there was little stations where you'd sit up some pushups. They would do those. And they would do it for two or three miles. And they'd come to the gym at noon and they'd do their workouts sometimes hard, sometimes not. But they were always training, always working. And that's what separates them. They're not out at the club until two, three in the morning, then trying to recover the next day. They're not drinking. They're not smoking. They're not doing it. They're not drinking. It's huge. One thing that fucks fighters up more than anything, it's partying. Drinking, especially, I guess Coke. But I don't want to have a lot of experience with guys that I knew that we're doing Coke, but I have a lot of experience with guys that were drinkers. And you would see them in the morning on, like, they would go out Saturday night, Sunday they'd be fucked up. They show up Monday to train and they just look like shit. Because they have been partying too hard just two days ago. And you don't think that that's going to make a big difference. But if you're getting drunk on Saturday night, that's days before you're back to baseline. You know, and you can get away with it when you're 23. Yeah. A little bit kind of. But are you? Because you're probably not as good as you would have been. And then maybe you're going to get hit with some shots. He wouldn't get hit with or you've been going to get tapped when you wouldn't have got tapped. Yeah. Yeah. But and then you take a look. That's the big difference. If you go back and look at a beep screwer, go back and look at his first fight in the USA and look at how bad and I'm serious. How bad is stand up was. Yeah, I wasn't the best. Oh, no. It was probably the worst. Okay. It was. I don't think it was the worst. He did a lot of free shit. Yeah. But take a look at it. No, it's where he said it was tight. He always was improving. He was every drink. Remember he dropped. He was throughout. He cracked Connor. Yeah. With a big right hand, which was like everybody was like, holy shit. Yeah. I had several conversations with Shaw about that because I went down and did a show a couple of times in LA before that fight. And I said, look, stylistically, Connor is the better striker. I go, but the intimidation of the takedown and the threat of the takedown for Connor is going to make him hesitant. I said, don't be surprised if a beat ends up landing some good, some good, hard shots on the feet. That's a giant factor. Fear of the takedown. Not about Kevin round of only far croak hop when he knocked him out. That was what it was. I'm so weird. The fear of the takedown. The thought process. Yeah. I can't let him. Well, you get if Kevin Rennellman and croak hop fought a straight kickboxing match with no takedowns. Jesus Christ. It's a walking. I mean, it's a big one. They don't want to watch. It'd be terrible to watch. Yeah. One is this factor that keeps you from being comfortable. It keeps you from finding your flow state. That little hesitation opens up so many opportunities to catch him. Yeah. It's big. It's so big. You see it in fights all the time when a guy just has this extra element of the end one. So that's why it's so impressive when you see a guy like Pereira where there's no threat that take down. Yeah. It's no threat. It's not happening. He's not even thinking about taking down. He's just going to fuck you up. And now it's up to you to deal with that. You still have the level of wrestlers these days in the 205 and the heavyweight division. Right. To compete with him on the in the wrestling. That's where that's where you have someone like Steveson coming in. Gable coming in and the heavyweight division. Yeah. Okay. Curtis Blades can wrestle now. Josh Hokeet. Look at Josh Hokeet's the real deal. He was a he's a he's a good athlete. Yeah. He's a good all around athlete. He's a character. You can go with the stick. Oh, hey. Look at the show. He's a great. Exactly. But also he put up. in that Curtis Blades. Hello. That fight as a heavyweight fight was awesome. Awesome to watch. Terrible for you know. Oh, yes. And that's the crazy thing that he's going to fight Derek Lewis, who's the biggest knockout puncher in the history of the fucking heavyweight division. More knockouts than anyone. And he's going to fight him. What? How many weeks? Seven weeks. Seven weeks. Seven fucking weeks. Seven weeks after a war. Hello. Here's the Curtis Blades fists. The way he's. Yeah. Yeah. They're gigantic. He's a giant man. He's a big shot. Oh, big shots. And what? Look, I got to give it up for Curtis Blades. What fight he put on? Because he took some damage. He delivered some big shots. It's a mad. It's a mad heart. It's a mad heart. Crazy, crazy heart because he just did not want to lose that shit talking dude. That's funny. That's a funny thing. It's like, okay, it will drop the act we talked to him in real life. And in the ring, you know, in the cage after the fight, I said, that was a fucking amazing man. But he goes, he goes, I talk so much. Yeah. How many goes I have? I talk so much. And then he went in and again. It's a little, it's a worry. Is out there trying to pick fights with him. I know. It's great. Well, he just talked shit about so many people. He's just trying to get people upset and talk about all of this. He's just pushing buttons. Listen, that's the conner McGregor game plan. Like, I mean, Connor did it the best. The chair was the first, really, to do it in MMA. The conner took it to another level. But they kind of stayed in their lane. Like, this is my week plan. This dude doesn't care for 135, 145. Yeah. He talks it, he just wants controversy. He's basically like one of them kick streamers. He's just trying to talk shit as much as possible. He's look what he's done, no man. He can keep himself. You can fight in the UFC for a division that the UFC has. They need. They need these people. Yeah. I think Gable's the man. That's your nightmare. Mike Tyson when he was 20. You know what I mean? He's still worrying. He's got some work to do. But I'm glad they signed him early. I'm trying to develop him hopefully a little bit. Give him two or three more fights inside the UFC. The problem is the heavyweight division of the UFC is so shallow that you could see Gable fighting for a title within a year or two. Three fights. Could be. Yeah, he could be. He's going to learn a lot though in that process. He's got John in his corner. Yeah, he's got you got to give him credit though. He has shown that you know first off he's super fast. Okay, but he's also got a chin. He got kicked up into the head neck area. He ate that sucker, you know, and continued on and you go, well, he's a tank. Don't let that happen again, right? But don't happen, man. You've shown hey, he didn't let it affect him. He didn't back off. Well, he's a limp gold. Oh, he's a winner. He is a small heavyweight though like that hybrid stuff. Yeah, but that's the best. It is. Well, he's 250. He's just not tall, but he's why his legs. How about when he had that dirty boxing fight and then leapt over the top rope? That's the whole thing. Like it was a box of tissues on the back. The best he was exposed to. That's when he had the first one and he hits the guy. The guy's out going down and he's taking him down. Double double while the guy. Double cold. That's how fast he is. Yeah, he's the most impressive of the prospects. But hopefully this is going to excite that like when you have a like every division goes through his values. And when you have a law, hopefully that's when people come in and they fill that void. And with Francis out of the UFC and looks like forever, which is the shame. It's the shame. I don't I tried to negotiate that. I tried to bring them two of them back together. I tried to have a sit down. Dana was not interested. He doesn't want to have any to do with him. It's about interpersonal relationships, interpersonal exchanges that they had that I'm not. Oh, I don't know what happened exactly. I just know what Dana told me and I believe him. So it's like you have the best heavyweight in the world and he can't fight in UFC, which is to me crazy. I mean, let's do Molly together. But this is how we can do anything. I mean, that's why I'm not a promoter and why I'm not a businessman. But if I was I would I would go to dinner with him. I'd come on, man. I'm sure we could let our differences be a side. Like it's not a bad guy. It's just, you know, sometimes people get upset or say things like smooth it out. Yeah. My experiences with Francis have always been super positive. I enjoy talking to him. Francis has been nothing but kind to me and everybody I've introduced him to and stuff. He's always the best. He's the scariest fucking heavyweight on planet Earth. He's huge. People I I was having a awards thing and what me should take and Rashad Evans and I and my wife were taking a picture and all sudden there's shadow comes over the top of us. And it's Francis with his arms out like hey, right. It's like what the hell when you get a natural 265 guys and shredded cutting weight to make 265. That's yeah. I mean, he's he there's many fights where he was like 270 275. Oh, yeah. He would drop a little bit of weight to make the 260, which is also stupid. Why is there a 265 pound weight limit for the heavyweight division? That's nuts. Isn't that nuts? Yeah. I know why. That was you eat those really big guys. It was a Lorenzo. You know, Lorenzo was, you know, looking at it saying, you know, I don't want fat guys. Really. That's what, you know, because you had. Well, Roy had country. Everybody in that big country. But it was at the time in MMA, you had no weight limits to a point love Roy. Yeah. No weight limits. One was he looked and said, I don't want, you know, a bunch of fat guys that we got to cut it off at a certain point because I'm not going to have super heavy weight. You know, and he needs to never they never did. Well, not having super heavy weight is fine, but merge it. Yeah. It's ridiculous. If a guy is like value F member value F, yeah, the Russian guy was seven feet tall. I feel let him five. David. Hey, beat him. Remember that one? Oh, that's right. David. Hey, David. Hey, David. Hey, David. Hey, David. Hey, David. I think they did. I think they did. I think they did. I think they did. I might be wrong. I don't think I'm not sure Van der Fought him. David. Hey, beat him. I know that. Not be wrong. But that's there. Yeah. Oh, that's him. Yeah. 2008. Crazy. And the Van der Halleville was a cruiserweight. Never when he fought Dwight Muhammad, Khawee, who was five seven. Oh, yeah. Khawee was a five seven cruiserweight. He was a seven cruiserweight. He was like, he was a nightmare to deal with. He was a ninja or a ranger. He was a tank. That guy was, and he would pull his trunks way up to here. Oh, you're a guy. You know, he's like, wow, you'll overmarrow can do it. Okay. Listen. He is a distinct. He's a distinct Earth. Okay. This is where this whole UFO thing comes in. And here is the proof of yes, there are aliens. And you're all Romero is one of them. Yeah. He is built differently than every other human being on the faces. I told this story before. I don't know if you guys heard it, but this actually happened when the, when it was fights he had broken into his orbital. The UFC brings him to a doctor. The doctor says to him to the UFC, where did you get this guy? Yeah. And he goes, he's pretty awesome. I don't know. I've never seen a human built like this before. They said his tendon is in his eye with three times larger than a normal person. They said the orbital bone is already healing. Like this is crazy. I mean, no medicine. So then there's some questions. Yeah. You know, listen, the Cubans are very connected to the Russians who are very connected to science. Yeah. Well, it's wild. It's, I mean, you got to think if you had a kid, and you knew this kid was going to be wrestling, you know, you're like, bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, when he's coming up, you could make a totally different kind of kid. Oh, I remember my retestore about this guy, then his son started showing like, uh, androgenic effects very early on. They were freaked out. Like the kid was getting, like his dick was growing, he's getting hair. They were like, what the fuck is happening to this baby? And they realized that the dad had testosterone cream. So the dad was taking testosterone cream and he said, hold on, the kid. And, you know, bear chest to bear chest. It's transferring. It's, he's literally juicing up his fucking kid. Have you, have you seen Andre's smile? Yes. Holy jazz. Yes, Christ. Jamie, who's that guy? Huh? Who's this? Andre's smile is a, he's a, he's kind of a hybrid. He's a body builder, power lifter, strong man, arm wrestler. Yeah. He's 350 pounds. I mean, 20, 27 inch on. Yeah. He's hands, look at the hands are so big. It feels like catcher's mince. Yeah. And that's, look at his hands. Have you heard, you know what, he's 16 to 2026. Look at the difference. Yeah. 2016, look at the, look at the, look at his hands. Look at his hands difference. His hands are huge because he takes hormone. Oh yeah, he takes a thousand units of growth hormone a day. That's 10 vials. What he does? Yes. He's going to die. Well, you cannot take his out real. He's insane. Yeah. A thousand, oh my God. Look at the size of him. That's so crazy. That dude does one arm pull ups at 350 pounds. That's not. I mean, he is absolutely. And he's not, and he has a raise of 27 years old. Look at him. He looks like he's 50. Yeah, he looks at least 50. It doesn't he have a factory job? I think he has a regular job. So it's not even, he's not even doing it for money. Oh no. But it's crazy when you see him when he was young. Look at that. That's him. That's the same guy. I mean, that, that looks like a regular athlete. He is a regular athlete there. And then all of a sudden he becomes this fucking immense freak. He is. He must know why. He must know why. He just tossed her onto those all. He just did everything. He's done everything there is. Whatever you got, give me it. There's a lot of those dudes. Do you know about that guy Tom Havilland? Oh, you have an Australia. Do that. He's 6'8". That dude, you take a look at him. He is, he's unique in the fact he doesn't do the normal workouts and stuff. He does basic farm stuff. He picks up, you know, things farmer walks with stuff that's ridiculous. He does like a lot of picks up axles. Oh, yeah. Weird shit. Dude, but he's 6'8". Yeah, let's say 330 pounds more. Not more. He's trying to get to four. He was trying to get to four. So he's in the 390s. He was like, this is building up to 400 pounds. But shred it. Yeah. And, and preposterously strong. Yeah. Like farmers. That's always, he's always working out when you can't see him. Yeah, he is back and he's always wearing clothes. Which is very odd. But there's photos of him without the clothes. Yeah. And it's almost like he's building a masterpiece and he wants to reveal it once he's done painting. Yeah. See if you can find some pictures of what he actually looks like. Because there is occasionally they show his body. Yeah. He always takes all this stuff. Like that's him. Yeah. Fuckin' bro. Yeah. Look at that. Look at that. That's fuck at it. Oh, he looks young. I don't think he's that old. Okay. I think he's like maybe 30 or something. Yeah. Yeah. He is gigantic. Yeah, that's fucking it's young. Yeah, I don't think he's that old. Okay. I think he's like maybe 30 or something It's nuts. Yeah, he is gigantic dude 6 8 3 85 What the fuck now imagine if he wanted to fight MMA and like sorry if you've got to lose 110 pounds That's crazy Okay, hold on think about this look at that you're the you're the heavy weight that they want to put him against. Yes, there's a weight Listen, I think this should be a 225 and then should be chaos 225 and then chaos I agree how you You and let the freaks in let them them I sleep in like I mean some of them some of the most entertaining fights in pride right with the freak fights Yeah, well, who's the thing now that guy's gonna melt your piss cup? Oh, yeah? So just like It's just like it's right If you put that fucking guy like one of them tester machines, it would ding like one of those cartoon things The belt there there would be fireworks going off Streamers coming down that guy's on the net. Come on, but that's just like pride. You know yeah exactly like pride God pride everybody was juiced. They just had the enhanced game. I know Only one world record was broken in the yeah, yeah Yeah, really that was a 50 meter swim. But they were wearing a suit that's illegal. Yeah because it makes you slippery Yeah, so it was like guy that had already beaten the world record like I don't know a couple years back Yeah, it's beaten them since it's no one really it wasn't that successful and I talked to a friend of mine about it And he was like I think first of all they're not like monitoring everything everyone's doing They're not optimizing them if you really want to juice these people up you can't let them do it themselves Yeah, you've got to have like a whole program where you put them on this stuff But also like what are we doing did you hear what you know? Would you hear the reason why they're doing? Why they the whole thing is kind of like Red Bull You know how Red Bull does all the crazy, you know different stunt stuff and everything their whole thing is they are a They're a company that gives out or you know puts out these Monthly things of TRT and all these different, you know things with testosterone stuff So they did this whole thing as an advertisement basically for people to see that being enhanced is better and that you'll come and now sign up for it I think it's $399 a month for your whole thing to be at 39 and it's program. There you go. It's the enhanced program. Okay, so when did you Jamie? When we had them on Jamie did they bring this up? Not only did they did maybe they adopted this later because we had them on like about a year before they were gonna do the games and They were telling I was like let's go I just mopped juice everybody up Yeah, what about a enhanced fight games? Yeah, my interesting it's our bell for a day. I mean the whole question is this When you truly look at it because I look and say look as long as you oh if you open it up to everyone Then it's someone's choice you can hear all that thing well, you know you can do it if you want you don't have to do it but It's different when you're lifting a weight or you're swimming in a pool Right or doing those things and where you're beating on another human being It's just that there's a difference you're creating damage in the sport of fighting 100% do you want to enhance someone In being able to do that. You're also enhancing your ability to take damage You could take that in consideration You're gonna get hit with less shots because you're gonna have more endurance because you're gonna be on EPO you're gonna have That's always good for it too super good. Yeah the strokes that you get on EPO are the best But I mean I got to think there's a way to do all those things if you're monitoring your blood work And you're being very careful where you don't go crazy like The Russian cat yeah, you know people That's human nature. Yep. You're right one step take another. Yep. Yeah definitely Yeah, and if that guy has skills imagine that guy. Oh my god. Imagine if you got fedor. You know bro Oh, yeah, you want to keep fighting I Know I know you have 49 but this is that's only that's only biologically. I can make you 32 again We get you in a hyperbaric chamber every day for two hours and this is what we're gonna do test ostron in the morning Test ostron it one to tostron it night and a little growth after oh Growth is all day long you're taking growth from the moment you wake up We're gonna get you up to about two nine. We're gonna shred it. We're gonna peptide you Know I think part of the attraction to fade or though is his belly hundred percent, you know Yeah, I'm like I mean imagine Lorenzo saying I don't want fat guys to fight in the state or He said everything he could to get fade or yeah, well they did they really did know he I remember those days Yeah, there was it was kind of crazy like the he was negotiating with some dangerous characters Oh, yeah, and Dan is like we got up our security This is getting fucking just getting happy with these guys They wanted a piece of the promotion that was that was the whole yeah, everything everyone talks about that stuff Look, it wasn't it wasn't fade or you know fade or would have fought for anyone and it wasn't the price of what you know He wanted for money. It was M1 was associated Vadim Finklestein was Fadeor's manager he had M1 and he wanted a co promotion Yeah, with you know season. No. Yeah, we can't do that. That's the one thing we can't do and that was that was the end all right there Yeah, which is unfortunate right? Oh, we missed out on the greatest matchup of all time between prime cane and prime fadeor Prime cane and prime fadeor would have been fucking nuts. Yeah I mean absolutely nuts. Yeah, nobody had a gas tank like tank came nobody I just talked to him yesterday came and I was just talking about I said there's one fight he could come back for and he's like Ah You know, I'm really like he's not he's just he's completely checked out the fight thing But I was a big check-out if I can be doing a great job of training guys to me. He's back doing it. He's not he's not No, he's not just talking. Yeah, so he was just I was just talking about the fights No, he's he's just like no, I'm kind of like just disconnected like it's he's just trying to get his life back Well understandable, you know That's the one fight. I said if there was one fight I could pick for you it'd be fade or it'd be that'd be the one fight I want to see how to him we missed that it's funny because out the everyone talks I agree with you completely Everyone talks about you know the fight today would have put together would have been Brock Against fade or yeah, and I look and I go. Yeah, it's probably not that good of a fight Yeah, it's like Brock had had such a hard time. Yeah standing up with that guy. Yeah, Fader well The good example like the Brock fight to me that was like kind of the craziest fight was Al Star Jupybering ubering. Yeah, the most I would see ever was a juice that was horse meat. That was every day That was horse meat. He definitely needs a horse meat. Oh, yeah He was also eating pills no The lack going on, but he was a monster he was world classic boxer now. Yeah, it's like a vegan now He doesn't look anyway. He looks like he did it. Yeah, he's back to his pride days Yeah, yeah, well my supermodel this good for health. Yeah, right by the way that guy's been KOed a ton of times seems fine Like he did the commentary during the oosick fight the Ricoh fight and I'm like guy is fucking talking great He's like smooth and articulate. It's not and not everyone gets affected the same way Right, and it is you know there is you there's little factors and you can see the difference there are guys You know that are been boxers with 70 professional fights Do they talk fine and everything's good? There's also a gene It's called a PoE4 and if you have that like what is it? How does it work? If you have it? You're protected Or if you have it you have the problem So there's one gene expression that makes you more likely to get CT for whatever Yeah, what is it? Put that into perplexity and see what it says about there's a gene that you have in your body that yeah Some people haven't some people don't and if if you have the whatever it is worth is a gene expression I'm a moron. I'm not thinking I to talk about this But Dr. Rhonda Patrick talked about this and she was saying essentially that if you have this here it is APLA4 appears to increase the risk of severity of chronic traumatic and self-alopathy And people a significant repetitive head impacts but is a modifier of risk not a cause by itself so Meaning obviously if you have it and you're not taking right shots. You're okay. I wasn't doing anything right, but if you have it So go back up again, please Large post-mortem study of 364 people with RH1 294 with CTE70 without carrying APLA4 was associated with more advanced CTE stage and Higher tau protein burden in the frontal lobe The mainly in those older than 65 but that's just because they haven't been testing all the MMA fighters Yeah, or all the boxers You know because like if you really you just tested regular folks or football players Probably it's like football players is probably in the country the most People that have had trauma. Absolutely because you think about high school kids even junior high kids They're cornered. Yeah, I mean they did a study of I forget how many different people But they found that every one it was like nine out of ten had it in every group whether it was high school kids college kids Some level of CTE Which is nuts. Yeah, not just NFL not just college High school kids just everything everything that we've learned and we know today compared really I'm from here I'm going to Florida for the Association of rings high physicians they have their annual conference and they put on all these different things and we You know put together programs for down fighter things and all this stuff But we know so much more now. He Joe it used to be you know I would go in and do a presentation for him and it was you know One of the one of the first things you know when I first did it I asked him a question I would do a simple question was let me ask you this If a guy gets hit with a shot boom and he's out going down and he hits the ground and The fighter comes in and hits with a shot. Is it possible for him to hit him to shot and actually wake him back up? Everyone from back then no that's impossible all it will do is intensify the effects of the first shot all this stuff And I took a TV DS and let's watch What fight did you do that dude? I had a bunch, you know and it was a matter of it was trying to show him hey all these things that we think are Just not true Okay, when we have to we have to branch out and start to figure this stuff out a little bit more because it you know in boxing It's different because Boxing establishes time for me to make decisions MMA takes that time away because I have a fighter that is now instead of walking towards Or you know trotting towards a neutral corner or something like that. They're your trotting towards That person to do more damage to him and so you're making that quicker decision and you know We've had too many fights where we have someone that you know They're outgoing down and then hit the ground and you have to actually Wait, you know, I just had you know one in last week with Jason Jackson is fighting His opponent Jeff Great and and create me gets hit and he's going down and I'm going into stop it and I see he starts sitting up and I go I gotta wait Hmm, and it's like I don't want to wait don't sit up and he's Comes that boom. It's him goes up. I stop it, but it's like those are the ones that you look at and you go Man to understand the way the human body everyone responds differently in certain situations But we've learned more as far as the human body will do weird things in traumatic situations and it is the ability to hit someone and to take those Synapses that are connected and to separate them There is no difference in being able to hit them and putting them back That's crazy. You get snapped the same way. Yeah, be crazy in the nuts in the Hermes Franca fight in UFC 47 Don't go back to far, but I We're in the third round. I catch his leg and he throws a little loopy shot and drops me I have the leg in my hand and I'm just going I can see my face headed towards the canvas my eyes are wide open But I can't put my hands in front of my face my face bounces off the canvas. It wakes me up and then I start fishing for legs It's just I can see everything. I can hear everything I just couldn't put my hands in front of my face and my face hits the canvas I wake back up and he starts jumping on me I start trying to fish for legs and trying to get to guard and that's how that goes Yeah, first thought I didn't damage my face because I'm so good I'm so good It's a problem I told you the whole thing You violated the stereotype that good looking guys can't fight There was a little bit of a stereotype that like good guys when push comes to shove they're gonna fall apart because they're too good looking I get on a good fucked up. I don't think so Not true. I see too many good looking guys. Look at Rico. Look at Rico. Yeah, very moving to fucking model Yeah, beautiful man that guy came to AKA and trying with can and DC for a couple weeks that guy's a fucking murderer Oh, yeah, he's a murderer and like when we were talking about earlier about the fight and him the bot his boxing is really good His cardio like he has to talk about is fantastic But man, he has no fear of being taken down. There's no fear of any of these guys Can and DC didn't care he didn't he would fight them to the death on defending takedowns They were like man DC was the As soon as they got they touched gloves he would just write to the legs, you know Right? Yeah They offered him Jerrick Lewis, but then the oocyte fight came up and it was like listen this is 15 million dollars Oh, yeah 15 million dollars and look what happened I mean amazing choice because in most people's eyes he won in most of the rounds of that fight Go go back and look at some of the fights that one right there, okay? You know it's the most recent look at Francis and Gano against Tyson Fury Yep, and look at the scoring on that one go back to Conor McGregor versus Mayweather Because no matter what you want to say Connor won the first couple rounds because Mayweather didn't throw any punches You don't this whole thing about oh your general ringmanship bullshit You're not throwing punches. You're not winning a fight. Okay. It's a fight It's not a dance. It's not how pretty you look and so you can go back and and I can tell you I've talked with some of the judges offer the Mayweather McGregor. I may I made a mistake I made I gave credit where I should have given credit. It's like How interesting you know I think it's easier for the heavier weights though to go up to boxing and have a little bit more Success than it would be for the smaller guys like it's a pour into fight bud Crawford. Oh, no You don't mean like that's my point the level of boxing talent there with bud and it's not it's not even close It's not even close buds wanted the greatest to absolutely absolutely and but if you just went into boxing Yeah, I mean fucking cancer and saying bud Crawford Could go to MMA that I do can wrestle right? Okay? So I would love I mean I obviously not gonna happen just because of the money you can make boxing is not the same And also he's another guy that's like I'm done. I don't have to do this anymore I did all though. I had a boy wanted to do multiple division weight champion undefeated by Yeah, made a ton of money see that meop beat canalo and box through the break Off the ears off When he was pretty much them and then hitting him with big shots like that So you do to someone when you're playing he had canelo so Absolutely frustrated during that fight, but I remember you watch I was in New York Gleason's gym Terrence Crawford is there and he is boxing all these guys and just Playing just absolutely, you know come on. Nice one boner Mm-hmm and touch touch touch he never tried to hurt any of him never tried to throw a big punch you just looking you go How good is this guy? He is that you know, he's that guy one of the best switch hitters that ever do it Oh, yeah, in my opinion. It's like him and Hagler. Yeah, they look right there together. It's wild greatest switch hitters No, I think it box you South Paul and all sudden he's orthodox. Oh, no And do it the the funny part about him is you know You see it at mma guys will switch when they take a step and throw a punch they'll switch to a different You know he does the same thing And he does it and then takes a lateral movement that had Canelo like where the hell is he yeah, and he's going hi? Bap, you know, yeah, and you go oh my god He still got him he hit Canelo with a straight left and then Canelo went to counter and he had the hat the hand still out there And he threw it turned into a left hook. Yeah, and I was like good Lord Yeah, it was so pretty you can see canals like here I come back bang Yeah, you get dinged with the left hook like that is crazy speed and precision and technique I've said this before I've sparred with Robert goes to Robert the ghost Guerrero and because he lived in Gilroy And we would train together all time he would use me for the I'd be in fight shape ready for my UFC fight This right to the sun's fight. Yeah Literally, I'd show up. I was the first four rounds of a 12 round session He knew new new training partner every four rounds. This guy would just piece me up He just toy with me and it was embarrassing. I'm like I'm in the best shape of my life But I by round four I was exhausted and he was barely touching because you're looking touch touch move About the side oh so good and he wasn't and he wasn't at me weather's level He's fought me weather, but like he wasn't that level of right slickness But he made it look like it when I was in there with it. It's all in comparison So good I mean there's guys that look look look at Jack Dell amount of land when he fought Carl's protest You like Jack Dell amount of land is one of the scariest strikers in the sport and then he fights protest you like oh Yeah, oh there is a different level there's that's what you try to anyone to get has this idea We talk about it all the time and I go you don't understand the difference this much makes In the difference of how you compare in a fight with somebody levels Oh my god levels especially when you get a guy like protest that had so many high level more Tify that's the big difference these guys that own with only striking they develop an understanding of positions and technique That's just not available if you're training the other stuff to and so then they get to this like per era They get to this super high level at this one thing and then they incorporate the other stuff But that other lap you're not gonna catch them You're not gonna catch practice when it comes to Muay Thai that's step in fucking Tomahawk Elbow does holy shit dude and he's playing any smokes marboros Smokes marboros in the back. Oh, it's crazy. He's gonna get the guy that might be smoking blunts. What's the guy that fought? Delo here that would come out. Oh, can cigarette. Oh, yeah My hair got my hair yeah, but I mean my orga was never at the level of proton. No Pratas like is so fucking slick man Some of the shit that he was doing to JDM like JDM is a fucking killer and he had no He was drowning he was drowning and it was it's also like what is going on with his limbs Oh, he's so big. It's like crazy like he says he's six foot one the fuck out of here, bro I want to I want to measure your your height and your length because I think there's some bullshit Yeah, he's just all like was I think he did this for his reach His reach is nuts when you see him in tears like all arms And the technique is so beautiful It's so beautiful the setups when he when you think he's punching he's kicking a fuck out of your calf and he's like slowly Breaking you down slowly breaking and then the knee that fucking knee that comes out like a jab His knee is nuts man if you go back to his fight with Gary You know and you look at you know Gary was doing great that last round. Yeah, you know He's came he came back on it and you look and you go if this is five rounds it be a real problem Hello, but it also shows you how fucking good It was absolutely now that's the whole point that shows how good he is because he has gone against Geyseter a real problem as far as stylistically You know his fight against MVP Yeah, Gary didn't you know fought as smart as you could fight and did a wonderful job in showing hey I'm multifaceted. I'm not just you know this one-style fighter with protest when he when he knocked out Leon Edwards I was like oh I knew he was really elite But I'm like Leon so technical and he's so slick like if it's just and Pratha is not gonna try to take him down I'm like this is gonna be a very interesting fight. Yeah, but it wasn't it was it was Kyle's protest show He put on a fucking show the relaxation the comfort of me now up there also to Leon Understanding like I was the champion amount the champion it's hard to get back. He's had he said mindset has changed a lot It's been hard for Leon ever since he when he lost that that title fight against Muhammad and you look and everything that's happened to him since it's just you know Confidence is everything yeah, well the shot Brady fight might have been even more brutal to that cuz Shawn just mall Maldum when Shawn gets on top of people like what he did the walking buckley was bananas. Yeah, it wasn't I Look at that. I mean this is why Shawn Brady won against Craig Jones Okay, now it was an advantage as far as when but he grappled against the real Craig Jones and show that he can stay with him No in that But no in that crack was not allowed use late locks. Yeah, that's right. Yeah, that's it. Yeah, that's a great that's like That's I don't Ernesto who's and you only can kick above the waist That's that's if you're Rick Rufus. That's a smart idea. Yeah Yeah, you know, I'm saying it's like that Craig Jones like you gotta give him a little game. You can't have him thinking oh, I can't You take a 50% of his tracks, but it's a really on the ground is a really good elite But it was just the ability to hold him down was just shocking I mean, it's like gaudy and then when he was mounting him it just like he was doing drills Yeah, it wasn't it was just like staying calm and just bang bang bang bang it was like he was doing conditioning drills on a heavy bag Like it was just sitting on a heavy bag pounding on the back time What he was bro not I said this maybe I caught some flak for it a little bit But I said like look I think the Ian Gary fight and the Protest fight for Islam both those fights. I'm not saying they're easy fights because they're not But you put he put someone like a Shawn Brady against Islam and that becomes a little more different problem a little bit more But that's match up big enough for a style style make that style make matchups and they make really do when you look at someone style Comparatively it can one person is easy for someone or they're very difficult for someone else if you're gonna put someone against Islam as far as It's gonna be on the ground with him and give him difficult times. There's not a big enough There's not a big enough sample size for me with Michael Morales I think Michael Morales could be a big threat on the feet Well, you beat Shawn Brady so obviously stop them. Yeah, yeah, but the size I think Michael Morales will give Islam some problems as well and Michael Morales can put him wrestle. Yeah National champ, but think is what he was and then you know, he's obviously got power Islam doesn't do the normal wrestling nope his take downs are different yep He lot a lot of foot sweeps Lot of judo a lot of difference in the way he does things and world championship experience Yes, and also the years of training would be yeah Yes, what he does so well as he does it off a transition as soon as you punch you guys anywhere inside the clinch He's already hitting the foot sweep into the inside trip can't get it. Okay. I'll hit drop a narrow single or double No, I'm excited about it one seven. He's amisov. Oh, dude that Ukrainian cat We don't know a question. Oh, we look he is Absolutely the real deal. Yeah, he is good everywhere And his his look his wrestling and his grappling ability his submission ability is at the top of the it's right there We're Sean Brady It is it is I just there's one guy out there though, and he was just talking about him He's the one guy that he's lost who's not signed by the UFC and that's Jason Jackson He's the one guy to beat him. I'd love to see Jason Jackson in the UFC Where's Jason now he just fought in MVP one one and like 22 seconds 22 seconds I had a hard night. I had 22 seconds and 17. It was very difficult. I was exhausted But he's the only one he's the only guy to be you're all saw family. So he is wow He's fantastic on the feet. He has a wrestling background, but he chooses to stand he's got like 30 jobs of coconut stands Car was he got a business he works he works. He's a workman. He's a workman, but he's very talented I'm watching that guy fight I think him you add him against a process or get to eat and great These guys would do get out it would be a great fight. It's interesting when there's guys that are at that level that aren't known Yeah, yeah, it was a former champion. Jason's Jason's been there He was you know you got to figure he was in the UFC as far as the the ultimate fighter when they did that whole Black Zillions versus ATT. I thought that was part of that. That's right, you know And he's just always been on the cusp of being brought back in and then not you're looking you go He's got all the talent in the world and he's tough as hell. He'll fight Yes, so who is that cat that heavyweight that just knocked out hand-in-for-air In oh, that's a Sergei Billistino and he's one of eight or his boys right is he is never sure if he is now. Yeah, that dude. Yeah The other thing he's do that dude is yoked He's fast and he's got power, but then you also got neck hunk nemkov said heavy way Yeah, but even them copies another he's another guy that's the top of the heat but not in the UFC But Dean them cough is good. Yeah, and man. He's extremely athletic. He's not gonna. He's not a big heavyweight He's got great lateral movement. He's really good with his hands a two for you. You're full kicks Yeah, he was a two-o-five Now he can rest he can do everything he chooses to stand but he'll mix up the wrestling to kind of get you get you guess And he's another fade or guy. He's another fade or guy. Yeah. Yeah, yeah That's another one like me training under could be I mean if you're a Russian guy training on a fade or like good Lord Yeah, what a what a crazy opportunity. Yeah, but you got to live in starry of school. Do you really? That's where they live. Oh boy. Oh, yeah, no parties there Better of snow tires, oh, yes, you better Big snow tires and hate comfort. Oh my god. You're sleeping on a futon bitch. Yeah, there's a lot of talented guys That will come out of other promotions But I saw I'd love to see Jason Jackson and they're mixing it up with those guys Statistically the matchups are there with the protest and Gary and the one 70s right now and putting yours like When the UFC finally signed him I said thank god Thank god Yeah, he deserves to be there and they need You know that kind of and look he's gone in and proven you know dude his fighting as Joel Alvarez And Joel Alvarez is a good fighter. I mean he made him look Absolutely Like the guy didn't know hardly anything. Yeah, watch the yesterday. I watched it again I mean you just why the last take down you know the winning when he airborne. Oh my god And you look at the but look at the ease that he did it. Yep. That's the thing. It's quite a popular techno Oh my god Is teddy tightness of his grappling see and his and his his training partner is Johnny Eblin Same guy that's training partner now for Sean Strickland Johnny those guys go after each other daily and Johnny will tell you he's the one that gives him the most Fits inside the gym the one that I spar with the most the one that just gives me all the fits on the grappling the wrestling all those things Go back to his his fights to in the past when he fought Ed Ruth He hit toss at oh my god get Ruth down three times I mean he was having success against him. It was a very close fight You know and he ended up winning the fight But it was one of those fights you're like Danny walked away going Scott can wrestle this guy can stand he's got he's chasing submissions. He's trying to get finishes I mean he had takedowns against Logan's story. Yes six times state champ out of South I'm a Minnesota and in four times I'm a South Minnesota just Phenomenal phenomenal wrestler, but he's able to have exchanges with these guys chasing Anaconda's darses knee bars everything extremely talented There's a lot of guys that I would love to see to kind of mix in because every time Because when you look at the history of the sport You got like strike force when it came into to UFC Those were the best fights and you start pulling plucking. I'm not saying that a lot of these guys need to come in right now But if you could pluck one or two guys for each to all it takes It starts to bring us in this whole thing up because for a little bit before the paramount deal happened You know because I cover the I cover it every fight every week, right? And we talk about it on the pod it's just simply put everyone's like man These fights are trash or gore, but just an animal like guys are being complainers like this the cards are great You guys are just they're used to that that the next level of like the the conners and the hours It's perfect. Yeah on every car just technique and just fighting ability. There's some amazing fights Oh, they're amazing fights when you add in someone like when Michael Chandler came in There's a lot of hype around it when Patricia came in and Aaron Pico and they came in There's a lot of hype around it It kind of puts a little shot in the arm into the way class and gets everyone amped up the fighters that are there You have see they're like this guy fucking beat me. I'm all in this That's good promotion beat me and the fighters that are coming in like no, I'm here to shoot I'm here to prove that I deserve to be here So it's it kind of it gets the fans amped up it gets the promotion amped up and the the visions kind of it's the little bit of a spark so I'd love to see that happen a little bit more absolutely absolutely You know the picot thing is really interesting. It's like his last fight he looks so tight against Pitbull He looks so good everything looks so smooth like his boxing was flowing his transitions to grappling his flowing fought Intelligently like that's the picot that we needed to see yeah, but you take a look at his first fight against the wrong and I always said that was That was a picot that was pressing Yep, he was pressing that fight and making you know, look at taking chances Absolutely, he's coming and you're looking you go This is the difference between you know that first fight in the UFC and wanting to do so well and wanting to prove how good you are and stuff and then finally And you're looking you go, this is the difference between, you know, that first fight in the UFC and wanting to do so well and wanting to prove how good you are and stuff. And then finally relaxing and just hey, let the fight come to me. Let me show what I can do and taking those moments when you get them. That's what he did in his fight against Patrissio and look Patrissio is good. And and Pico, Pico could be so good. He just has to relax. He's still young. Oh yeah, he's had a bunch of pretty bad cases. Yes, he has the Borax one. And that's a problem. Yeah, yeah. The boards, you had the one against frickin, uh, Corralis. Yeah. Oh yeah. He hurt Corralis and then he got, you know, starched. He's had a couple of them. Yeah, they're not good. He was winning. Yeah, that's the thing is he was winning. He was beating, he was beating, he was beating Kraus. The fights that he lost him. So hyper aggressive. Yeah. And that's part of the problem. But it's, but it's, he's so fucking good. But he's got the best left hook to the body since Paul Bailey. Oh, it's so smooth. Oh my God. It's beautiful. I mean, his, just his left hook period, it's like such a whip. Yeah. The technique is so smooth. Yep. It's so nice. So I got to ask you about the Joe Schilling fight because, uh, there was, it was such a weird stoppage where Joe just decided that's it. I'm quitting. Yep. So it's a ponin head but some. Yeah. And then Mike Beltron is a great referee. Takes a point away. You did take a point. And then puts him right back in the same position. Okay. Stop. It says not exactly what happened in the end. It's not. No. Well, it is what happened. Yes. You're right. But when you have a situation like that, you have the headbutt. Mike Beltron calls a stop, calls timeout, right? Get some mup off of their feet and tries to put Joe, Joe's pissed. And I understand why Joe's pissed. You know, he's saying, Hey, first off, Joe's 42 years of age, he doesn't come there to be fouled. He's trying to, you know, he's going to fight. Okay. You know, and the whole thing is look at the, look where his hands are. They're over hooked right now. Right. The other guy's got his hands on the ground. Right. Okay. So you know, you don't want your hands on the ground. Okay. So Joe's in a decent part to at least if he wants to defend himself. So when he gets up, he's pissed off and everything. And then Beltron takes a point from the opponent and ask Joe, do you want to be, you want to stand up or do you want to back on the ground? And Joe picked, I want to be back on the ground. Okay. Now, why do you give your, why do you, why you allowed to make a decision? You're allowed to make the decision because you were the one that was found in a normal situation. He said, I want to be back on the ground. You said I want to be back on the ground. That seems crazy. I agree with you. It's not what you would expect out of Joe's showing. Well, class world champion. Well, exactly. Yeah. And so you know, with that, you got to, you know, he's the one. If the person on top is the one fouling, normally we're going to say they're going to lose their position, but there are many grapplers and people that have a hard time getting that person down. And so we went back to saying, all right, we're going to give the person who was fouled the opportunity to make a decision. Normally we're going to put it back on the feet. But if you want to put it back on the ground, I'll put it back there, but you're going to be in the same position as you were when the foul occurred. Right. And that's what Mike Beltron went to do. And so he puts, starts to put them back. You have, Abena is the opponent and he starts to put his hands on Joe's biceps. If you watch when they start to, when they put him back on the ground, Joe tries to do the over hook. You saw the over hook and Abena starts to put his hand on the biceps. He did it on the left bicep, right? Yeah. And so it's not a matter of, you know, Beltron wasn't there to start to fight yet. He's got to put him in that position. But Joe wants that bicep thing start to happen. He got mad and he said, I'm done. I'm, you know, stop the fight. You can't make somebody fight. If someone says, I want out of the fight, they're out of the fight. So Beltron was in a position where he says he wants out of the fight. He started, he foul me and he's that's what he's saying. And now he feels like he's not going to be put back in that same position, but he hadn't been, it's not like Beltron started it. He's trying to put him back in the same position when Joe's kind of just losing, losing his steam and getting pissed off. And so, you know, I'm looking to say, look, if you're going to be that pissed off, it's a good thing you're not fighting because you don't fight smart and you're going to end up getting hurt, but he's the one that decided that. So he has, he clearly has two over hooks at the end of the fight at the, at this time of the foul. He's got an over hook, both sides. Yeah. Well, sort of the right ones not totally, but it's just holding the back of the tricep. So you're going to say, okay, so that's where he's at. Look where the opponents hands are at. The opponents hands are under his shoulders. So that's where he should start. That's where it should be started. But he never gave Beltran the actual ability and time to say, no, no, put your hand here and you can see Beltran starts to, you know, as a beta starts to try to put him's hands on the biceps, Beltran can start to put him underneath. So it's not, it's not built to go back to the ground. So that's the real question. And you know, all I know is at 42 years of age, you know, you're looking and saying, Joe's shilling can fight. You know, Joe's shilling, he was a gangster. No doubt about it. And he at this point is, you know, is he looking to, you know, become a champion? No, he's not looking to be a champion. So I'm taking the fight for what reason for money. And so I think he just looked at it and based upon, well, this is not what I expected. I expected a fair fight. I expected us to, you know, fight like professionals. And this dipshit is now headbutting me. He just got pissed and he lost his cool with it. And when he wasn't being put back right away into that same position where he thought the guy is now trying to up again, take another advantage. It just sent him off the end and he said, I'm done. Right. He just got too emotional. You got too emotional with it. That's how bomber. Yeah, it is because Joe's a great guy. When you fought at the level he's fought at, you expect a certain level of professionalism. Yep. And when you have these young guys that come in, there's no, it feels a little disrespectful. Like, you knew where you were at. Why are you trying to game system right now? Just headbutting them. Yeah. Which is crazy. Oh, and there's a lot of people saying, well, you know, I don't think it really hit him. It hit him in the jaw. Okay. It hit him head to head. And you're not allowed to use your head as a striking instrument. It's a foul. And it's pretty clear that he was trying to do that. Yes. It wasn't as simple as like positioning his head. No, try to get a better. Look, we say you can use your head as a steering instrument, as a third arm. You can press with it. You can do a lot of uncomfortable things with it. You cannot pick it up and bring it back to strike. Right. And it was clear that that's what that's exactly what he did. I think it just very awkward for a lot of people that see Joe's showing in his past fights. He's been through it all. And then for him to get super frustrated this way. It was a lot of people question. I'm like, I don't question it at all because you expect, like I said, a certain level of professionalism. Like we know that we're both going out there to fight and knock each other out. Why do you got to cheat? Yeah. There's a certain, there's a certain set of rules that we're doing. this under, right? And now you're taking those rules and just tossing them to the side like, you know, this doesn't mean something. No, it means something to me. You know, I'm 42 years of age and I don't expect someone to be fouling me just on purpose. And look, the whole, no matter what, that was, you know, right now we use intent. Okay. That was intentional. Right. He did something. I call it malicious. It's a malicious attack on him. You're maliciously trying to inflict an injury on someone through a foul. Yeah. Yeah. No doubt. Did you watch the MVP fights? Yes. What was your takeaway on that? The overall card as well as the Gina and, you know, and Ron to fight. I mean, look, when you're coming in as your first time putting on a promotion, there's no way it's all going to be smooth. It's not possible. You know, just, there's no way. You're also, you're not dealing with the same caliber of names other than Gina and Ron to, you know, the, the, and Francis, you know, the Mike Perry Nate Diaz fight was, um, what was last time Nate fought MMA? It's been a while. Probably six years. Been a while. It was, yeah, six years. Six years. Which is kind of crazy. Yeah. Right. And Mike has been fighting bare knuckle and fucking people up for quite a while. Dude, he's an animal. Look. Yeah. He's, he's found, he's found me support though. 2022. Okay. So four years ago, four years ago, four years ago, he beat 20 Ferguson. But he's found his way. This is, this is stylistically his, the best thing he could do for his career is fight bare knuckle fight, fight boxing. And this is the best thing for him. I'm not in Mike is like uniquely talented at bare knuckle. Oh, like uniquely. He's made, look, I'll be it on it. I used him as my, my demonstrator for, you know, Andy Foster is the executive officer in California. And he didn't like bare knuckle. You know, I wrote the rules for bare knuckle long ago. And Dave Feldman came to me and said, Hey, you know, I need rules written for me. I'm trying to legalize this. You know, someone, someone that I knew hooked him up with me and I said, look, I'll write your rules and go, can I gave him two prices? And I said, I'm not doing it for free. It's too much of a pain in the ass. So here's my two prices. My one price is you don't say who wrote them and you just use them. And the other price is you say who wrote it. And it was because I knew I was going to get in trouble for doing this and, and, you know, what is John McCarthy think he's doing now he's writing rules for that. Did you write the rules for slap bites? No. I don't like the fights. I hate, I hate those. But so you can't defend yourself. That's it. It's really a strong, dumbest thing ever. So you know, have you seen the other, they just run at each other? Oh, there's even worse. They're like, oh, my beer. Yeah. You think slap bites were charted? Oh, my beer. We're just gonna run at each other. That's what it's called. Run it. Right? Those things are crazy. The whole thing with, you know, the Mike Perry thing is, you know, trying to get athletic commissions to start to understand because they're all into this thing. Joe, it's like you take a look at MMA. I'm allowed to hit you with a shin to the dome like you talked about. You know, I'm allowed to take my knee and hit it to your dome. I'm allowed to take my elbow and smash you, you know, even when your head's against the ground. I'm allowed to do all these things. But my bare fist is the big problem. You're right. You got a funny. Oh, it's ridiculous. Perception and perception is it's a real problem because people believe what they're saying. Oh, it's horrible. So, you know, Andy Foster was one of the ones that he didn't like it. And I said, Andy, you know, I tried saying, it's go through those whole things with the shin, the knee, the elbow. And he goes, yeah, I know. He says, I just don't like it. I said, Andy, I need you to look at it this way then. I go, there are people out there that are made for boxing. Floyd Mayweather, Terrence Crawford, Canelo Alvarez, they're made to be a boxer. They have all this technical skill. You know what? They're just unbelievable. I said, these guys with the same thing in MMA, there's the George St. Pierre's. You know, you got the Alexander Volcanoscys. You got all these people, you know, that are, you know, Islam Moccociciff was the last one you said. They're made for MMA. I go, Mike Perry was an MMA fighter. I said, he's not made for MMA. He's a tough guy. I go, but Baron Knuckle, he was made for. I said, and this is a guy who can make a living fighting for Baron Knuckle. He can pay his bills. He can support his family fighting Baron Knuckle and become a star. I said, yeah, and possibly get, you know, sponsors and everything. They're going to make it so you can live the rest of his life. I said, and you're going to say that you want to take that away because of a bare fist. I go, it just doesn't make sense to me. He looks at me and goes, you're right. The best thing that's going to happen to him was him leaving. Like the Indian release from the UFC. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. You've got a whole time you ring. Any foster. Yeah. That's what I put on the speaker both. You're up there. I don't want to put Andy under a spot like that. You know, and Andy's done such a great job. He does things that people don't realize. You know, he's now got a license plate that's out for retired fighters to try to get them a retirement. He's got, he's got a retirement for boxers already that was set. He's been doing things to try to get a retirement fund for, you know, Josh Thompson, who fought 15 times in California. 19. I looked it up. There's a 19. Okay. I'm wrong. 19 times in California, he can get an actual retirement. Now it's not going to be a retirement that he gets paid every month or they'll give him a large sum of money that he can then go. He can go to a trade school. He can go to, he can buy a house. He can do these things as a down payment. Andy just put in a thing. It just got turned down because of a staffer. It was Assembly Bill 2130 in California. And that Assembly Bill was no money out of the taxpayers money. Zero taxpayer money. It's about sponsorship. A dumbass like me as a referee has to wear a sponsors thing on my shirt. That will then 75% of it went to retired fighters. 75% of it went to training for upcoming and in service officials, both judges and referees. What's the negative? There is no negative, but you get these people in politics that sit there and go, oh, I don't like this. You want to know what they're negative? This is California by the way. Yeah, this is in California. California is the best state for decisions. You, but their whole thing was as we both live in Texas now. Think about this. We all, yeah. Well, I love that. But their whole thing was, well, that would allow the sponsor to say that they're basically part of California and they're running. They're doing things for California. It's like they are doing things for California. They're helping the people that fucking put on fucking entertaining fights and things for people here. It's ridiculous. There was nothing good. There's some great people in California. There are sure. You know, and there's some great Assembly people. You know, I just did a whole thing for, you know, Heath Flora who's an Assemblyman there and he's putting up a bill about you being able to, if you protect somebody other than yourself and from somebody that's trying to do something, he's trying to make it to where they can't civilly go after you. Makes sense. Yeah. You're doing the right thing. But no, there's people fighting against it. Wow. It's just politics. Politics suck. They suck in California. Yeah. My dad always used to say, think about the word politics. Holy meaning many ticks, blood sucking little insect. Yeah. It's a bummer. Yeah. It's a bummer. It's a bummer. Yeah. It's crazy. And then did you, did you see that cochre's returning to MMA? I did. Give me, give me, give me your two. I like Scott. I like that. A lot, but good luck. Yeah. You know, $60 million. Yeah. When I saw I was only $60 million, I was like, that sounds like a lot of money. Until you think about putting on an MMA promotion. And then getting television production. And then, you know, paying fighters and then securing venues and then having staff full time for like maybe, you know, you got Tony Hawk with you. Maybe. I mean, look, I'm rooting for him. I think he did great when he was running glory as well as when he was running Bellator back today. He's a really nice guy. Yeah. I think it's great for everybody if there's more competition. I think this whole MVP thing in the Netflix thing is great. It started a bunch of cash into the organization. A bunch of people got more money than they would have ever gotten anywhere else. Awesome. I'm more options, the better. Yeah. I think just, you know, I hope he could do it. Yeah. I think a lot of people do because I think it's as they do grow promotions, right? The fighters get more experience on a high level competition. Need to fight fighters from all around the world. I'm just excited for more promotions to be involved. Yeah. More promotions is good. More options is good. More money is what we really want. The fighters need to get more money. It's always going to be the UFC here, you know? And ultimately it just comes out like you need more people to build up to get to that level. Game of good XFL game that you watched. That's true. That's the wrong option. But it's the whole thing in the end of your part of it. You know, what you did with the UFC and how you made it exciting for people when you were calling fights. It's a people now, a lot of them, they don't even know the fighters that are on the card. But they'll turn it on when it says UFC because they believe in the product. Yeah. Right. And that's what you're supposed to do as the company. And for marketing. But the one problem I do think that they have right now is they're unable to market people like they did when you and I were early in it. And so they now are in a position every week. And so it's tough to market. You know, those the guys who are not well known if you're not. Fight nights, a lot of times the casuals have no idea that there's even a fight in the exact end. And some of the more fucking. Oh, some of the best show that's hard. We talk about all the time. It's like, you know, the card itself rates. If you're looking at it, honestly, it rates of five. On a five point paper. On paper. And then you'll watch it. And it's a nine point five. Yeah. It's kidding. Yeah. They're working to get to the top. Those are the whole thing. They got something to prove. They're hardcore fans. They're giving them constant food. Yeah, it's hard strokes. Yeah. Yeah. Right. But it's giving them that dope. And it's all in the thing when you look at it, it's the hardcore fan that the UFC has. But the casual ones, the one that puts it over. Yeah. And it's hard to get people to understand. You need to get the casuals, the ones that don't watch fights all the time. And that's the one thing I'll give, I'll give Ronda Rousey, man. I thought she did an amazing job of talking and putting, you know, things out there, the way she did, she made, she got people's attention. She did what was her job. Yeah. And they, you know, 17 million people are watching that. That's right. That's huge. Yeah. It's all good for everybody. It's good for the sport. It's great for the sport. It's like, that's what we need. We need more competition, more eyeballs on it. And unfortunately for the cat, you know, the people that are casuals, it has to be a name. You know, it has to like this conemoregrader fight in July is going to be fucking bananas. It's going to be bananas. I mean, people are going to go crazy for the return of conemoregrader. Yeah. It's a giant personality. But don't expect the same. How could it be? He hasn't fought in five years. Exactly. It's been five months. But that's the problem. Might be more because there's going to fall over. I think it is a little over five. It's almost six. I think it might be six at the time of the fight. It might be six at the time of the fight. I think it's five right now. Do, do, are we expecting to see a coner that look like Nate this last fight? Are we expecting to see a better coner than some of that look like Nate? Cause they did not look good. Well, but my carry did. And my carry looked like a fucking murderer. I mean, like Mike Perry is a murderer. And this is such a sad. You take a look at that. And when you're taking an older fighter, which Nate is now and 21, your five fucking years go July. So it literally will be six years. Yeah. But when you're two to be five years, five years. When you're taking a younger fighter and putting them against the old dog, and normally doesn't end well for the old dog. Well, the thing is about Max Holloway is like Max Holloway is that much younger. Yeah. Then no, honor. But the thing is Max has been in constant high level competition in our time. One, the BMF fight, you know, beat Dustin, like constant high level competition. That's right. It's a different thing. And I honestly believe him at 155 is the best thing for him. Absolutely. But he's not 155 in this fight. This is one of seven. But yeah, honestly, he made me mad at him. He might be dead. Just no way could just kind of walk around. And also knowing this is such a high profile fight. He's going to, and Max is always in his shape. And particularly in this fight, he's going to be in fucking insane shape. And his last fight, he took almost no damage. He got taken down, controlled, back taken. There was not a lot of damage to the frustration. Yeah, frustration. No, well, Charles, like a mother of a friend of a fight. He's so good. Dude, he's so good. Good everywhere too. And on the ground, he's just so goddamn dangerous. And it which is makes you think, how good is this? This is why I'm just smushed him. I can tell you, he's really good. I mean, it's kind of crazy though, when you think about how strong Charles is grappling is. And now, Islam just, yeah, he called it. He called it. He said he goes, he goes, Islam is going to submit Charles. And he goes, and he's going to submit it with a head on arm choke. And I was like, Kim, I would, I would, I would, I would, I would, I would, I would go shut up. Yeah, okay, just shut up. He's not going to do that. I said he would do it before three rounds. He did it, you know, obviously very quick. But it was, his grappling is just otherworldly. And so he secures that darce by grabbing the forearm. And I've seen a lot of guys try that now. A lot of guys are going to that now. Because you don't have to get his deep. So you just go through and just write it at the top of the cover. You see the chest with your, cover the head with your chest and just suck it in. You see people doing things all, you know, we, we always talk about, you know, back a long time ago, figure for the body, we go, don't do that. They step the foot inside. It's going to cranks you. It's bad. How about that? Just, just have the girl do it. He's a team that AJ McKee does. Oh, the, the, the, the McKee a team. Yeah. Well, that fucking thing. Like, how come no one's doing that? That's the whole thing. Look, okay, look at what he did that. I was like, wait. Yeah, his body style is so long. He's long to reach him. He's a huge for 145. Yeah. He's a big boy. But Grand Dawson just did the genie joke. Okay. How many times have you seen that done in competition? But I've seen it in the, the red, the grappling room all the time. Right. And all of a sudden people are like, never seen that. It's like, dude, it's been around forever. Well, it's like when we talked about Edson Barbosa knocking out Terry Edm. How do we get to that fight before that was the first wheel kick KO? Yeah. Well, we've seen a ton of them since then. But that was the first one. Like that doesn't even make sense. When Anderson's so in front kick, V-Torre in the face, we're like, wait, hold on. You could do that. Yeah. Like I remember Eddie and I having a conversation about kicks. And he goes, what do you think about front kicks of the face? I'm like, eh, doesn't really land that often. No. And then, but cheated does it to Randy and then cheated does it to V-Torre. Oh my God. So V-Torre's been on the receiving end of twice on that kick. Yeah, man. I mean, there's been a bunch of them now. Now you see a lot of front kicks of the face. Because it's such an unexpected thing. Especially if a guy's, you know, you're getting hit to the body with it a bunch and you're getting used to doing this. And that dog hits you right on the chin. It's just such a, such an unexpected technique. Every time we think that we're not going to see something new, something new points up. But the crazy thing about front kicks is it's literally the first thing you ever get taught. Yeah. When you learn how to kick, that's the first thing you ever get taught. And the idea of that they're being used for the first thing you ever learn. Yeah. It's kind of crazy. A little snat-kicked. Yeah. I mean, karate, like that's day one. Oh, that's it. It's just like that. Yeah. And that's what it looks like doing. Oh, goofy and shit. The fact that that's the kick that, and then a calf kicks, of course. Like that's the one. You know, it's interesting because, um, cups Watson is actually saying that he was the first kind of throw calf kicks. He was saying like, I don't know, go back to like 2011. I was in calf kicks. I forget who he fought. They said he fucked somebody up with a calf kick. Well, then I'll tell you before that, that was, no, Jason was one of the early ones. For George Moss at all. Really? Yes. He was doing a strike force in 2007, 2008. Really? Yeah. Well, I believe around that time. If you look at, ATT is a team, they do calf kicks all the time. That is a huge weapon that they use. You go back and watch Mazarall when he fought KJ Nunes and how he just destroyed KJ Nunes. And he was kept kicking the calf to the head kick. To the body shots to the boxing. He just peaches him wrong. People have got a good Mazarall. Oh, he's a good one. He knocked out he's Edwards. The head kick, like people really sleep on Mazarall. But always slept. He was so good. I mean, knocked out cowboy. Oh, my God. But he knocked out Darren Till. How about that one? There you go. He was bananas that step in hook. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. That was a weight class above what he normally fought. Yep. He was one of those sleepers. But he was better when he went up, just like most guys are. But he never got the crayon to deserve. Everywhere he went, whether it was strike force into the UFC, he never got credit until he sort of do things that people didn't think you could do. You know, when he knocked out, like he said, Darren Till, they're running across the cage with Ben Askam. Like those kind of things. He had no love up until those moments. I was always nasty. Always. Yeah. All the way back to his street fighting days with Kimbo. Right. Yeah. He had some good ones. Yeah. I have this. I want to ask you this because I look at these guys now. What is it with the younger fighters that can't get past the old dogs? Like Dustin doesn't have to retire. Justin Gates, he doesn't have to retire. They're still ranked in number two and number three. What are you seeing on your side that makes you think like, these young guys, these old guys, they're not going softly into the night. They're not letting these guys come by. Why can't they energize, get past them? Patting up, you know, he passed Justin like this. Patting up was not at Justin's level with stand up. Yeah. Justin's level was like quite a bit. First of all, Justin is an elite grappler. So like what is Patting it into? He's going to take him down. That's not that's not picnic. And standing up with Justin, Justin has like some of the nastiest fucking leg kicks in the sport. And I wish I could use him more. I know, right? Remember when he used to throw him from the clinch? Like he's in tight with you and he's kicking down on your legs. Like, and you're like, how are you moving your hips like that? Yeah. He was an animal. He still is an animal. It's like he's not, he hasn't faded. You know, Justin's not faded. That physique, a physique is an elite world class striker. And you beat him up standing. It's like, yeah, he hasn't faded. Justin hasn't faded. He's just 36 or whatever he is. 37. I think he's losing, but you got to have a passion for the sport. And I think Dana says, you know, he's looking, if you're not 100% in, right, don't do this. And he's right. And I think there comes that point where it just gets to that, you know what? There's other things out in the world that I want to start doing and things. Do you think Justin's at that spot right now? I'm not too sure he's at the spot, but I think he's thought about it based upon some of the performances and the tight fights he's had. I think the fight with Max Holloway made him kind of think about he had that was a tough fight for him all the way through. All the way through. I think he lives a comfortable life. I think there's a good life. He enjoys playing golf with the boys. Oh, yeah. You know, he's, he's another guy. I know he's like, oh, I spent, I've spent money. I need to make more money and this and that. But he also, to me, every time I take a look in when people talk about him, I think that he's done pretty, he's done really well for himself. I think he's doing well for himself. I don't think he's in any danger where he's losing the passion of it. Well, I did the naked gun or whatever. The second edition of the naked gun with Liam Neeson. And we had Kamaro Usmone and Justin Gates, you were two of the fighters in it. And he was hysterical throughout the whole thing. And he's such a button pusher with Kamaro. Kamaro, okay, let's go easy and all sorts of Justin's doing something crazy. And if I think Kamaro's like, the hell's wrong with you. He loves life. He enjoys life. And I think that, you know, there comes a point where he always had that attitude when he was undefeated. He goes, oh, someone's going to knock me out. He's honest about things. And I love that about him that he doesn't sit there. He doesn't play the, you know, oh, well, we'll see. And so he's honest. And he tells you, you know what? This may be my last one. And he's thought about it. And if he's thought about it, it's telling you it's a thought process is there. How far will it go? If he has a great performance against I think he'll stick around. Maybe. Unfortunately, I kind of think I'd rather see him go away. I know that's saying it because I love watching him. I would love to see him win and go away. That's the whole point. That's what I said. That would be nuts. It would be all the wins the title at the fucking wide end. And that says that's it. I hit my bucket list. The White House thing is odd. I don't like it. I don't like the idea of fighting outside at all. There's problems with it. And then it's doing times. It's doing. And it's DC. And we looked it up the last time, like last year, same day was 100 degrees. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's fun. And you add the lights. Yeah. The tracks bugs. How about dehydration? Oh, yeah. Yeah. The bugs are a big one. Go back to UFC. Yeah. With all those lights. Yeah. Go back to UFC 3. See how hot it was. How are they going to fucking do anything about the bugs? Because I know that Dana was talking about that recently. They were talking about maybe using fans. No, it's not enough. The bug strips everywhere. What are you going to do? Like how are you going to stop the bugs? There's a lot of bugs. It's going to break. That's pretty much all you pass to. You can decide that. That's good. That's good for the fight. That'll help with the breathing. I just don't think that you should compete in a world championship fight in a non-controlled environment. Yeah. If they get you to be inside an air-conditioned arena, it should be a controlled environment. Just like every, like you don't ask someone to do any of it. You wouldn't ask them to play a world championship basketball game outside in the sun. That would be crazy. Yeah. Right? You have to play in a fucking air-conditioned arena. That's how it should be. Yeah. I agree with you. Yeah. But I understand the whole thing. I get it too. Listen. But it's going to be a pain in the butt. A fucking roof. Yeah. Build a roof. Like you've got all the money in the world. You want to do this for fucking my money. I don't know. It's not my money. It's for 4,000 seats. You build a 4,000 seat arena. How big is it? Get a fucking barn to minimum. Put it in there. You know, like we did UFC's, the troops. Yeah. We did them in the troops. Yeah. In the hangers. Yeah. We did. But yeah. They want that White House in the background. Put it in the background on TV. It gives a fuck. It's just like when world-class fighters are competing, I don't think they should have to compete outside. Look at it. They're already putting it in there. Imagine if someone loses a fight because it's too hot out. Oh, yeah. Imagine if that becomes a factor. Imagine the dehydrated fighters. Like the dehydrated fighters that are now being forced 24 hours later to fight. In 100 degree heat outside. Uncles a spotlight. Go back. I swear to God. UFC 3 was in North Carolina. And it was the hottest thing I've ever been in in my life. It was outside. USA 3. No, it wasn't. It was inside. I'm gonna go and go back. I swear to God. You have see three was in North Carolina and it was the hottest thing I've ever been in in my life. It was outside. You know, no, it wasn't it was inside with No air conditioning really inside. They put there was it was a 3500 sea demeanor. They put 6,000 people into it It was under the lights had to be 150 degrees. Okay. It was I saw everyone falling out hoist had the problem after chemo and stuff. You know They all pulled out and stuff. It was Joe it was the hottest thing I've ever been in in my life That was brutal you have to ask yourself as a fighter though is the spectacle worth my career Right like is it worth me going out there and fighting? In the circumstances that I'm not used to well, we did one outside at Abu Dhabi That was when bj pen and Franky every thought and then And that one bro, they were bugs flying around look like birds Big I was like that's a bug. What kind of bug is that connect kill me crazy fucking desert man giant as Yeah, make sure your microphone is up Like a helicopter coming by your outside. It's hot. You're in the desert. This is crazy Like why are we fighting outside? No because I think I had read somewhere where Habib it said no I prefer Islam not take a fight there at the White House There's too many distractions you got all the media you got them that whole week plus it's outside these are all things that your fighters Not used to doing why would I jeopardize his win streak his second title? Why would I jeopardize all of that? Yeah, let you see everything just so we could find the White House I know it seems great. Yeah, I was I fought there, but at the end of the day You got a look and I worked so hard to get here. I don't want to lose it over this one thing I just feel like you could put a roof over it I mean, well, you got all this money you're making a ballroom make a fucking make a little dude It's on a regular basis. I mean are they making a are they finishing the ballroom? Are we gonna get that big? Make your own apex setter bone come on. We'll make a fucking barn dominion. How hard is that? Hard trust me. I just finished one. Oh my god. You're one guy. Oh, exactly State civil engineers get the fucking the army to do it So you're gonna be at that one. Yeah, yeah, we can be there allegedly allegedly if there's not a bomb that goes off between now and then Move fucking knows this world is crazy. I love what you did with the Ibogaine with her man. Thank you way to go Well, what was the process on that? How long does that take? Oh, I don't care what the process was way to go Thank you the process was me texting Trump Not both along. There was a lot of I took him on Friday. Yeah, he showed up to the UFC on Saturday shook my hand and said it's done You're kidding. Oh, no. I'm not kidding at all. No, I texted him. He texted me back Oh, you look at for FDA approval sounds good to me. I tell him how effective it is and helping all these veterans with PTSD People with traumatic brain injuries all these different things people. I mean We have a problem with fentanyl in this country. This is one of the best things that we've ever Yeah, I'm like listen there's so many people that Risk their life for this country they come back and there's no help and this is the only thing is they've found help It yeah, and it's illegal and that doesn't make any sense You should have to go to Mexico to get treatment for something that you got because you were defending your country It's nuts and so he right away He was like look it makes sense to me like he cut through all the bullshit There's common sense and there was a bunch of people who were trying to get in the way of it Of course lunch of people I mean inside the white house People that were trying to get and he's like fuck you fuck you do it And he like was telling them just do it make it happen and he made it happen and that's Amazing for everybody. Yeah, no it was amazing that you know what you stepped up Because you are gonna be helping so many people I don't think people don't have an idea of how bad it is and what that can do for him So I think way to God I was like I always say you always talk about your dummy. I'm a dummy. I always tell people I said he's super intelligent And you are because you got that done. It just proves it. I never asked him for anything else Never asked him for anything never maybe like signing pen or something I've got a bunch of stuff. I got a pen. I got a bunch of things But I was like if there's anything that I would really asking for that is By partisan supported like Democrat supported Republican supported 85% of the country supports it Yeah, especially when he comes to things like I begin which is not even remotely recreational no I haven't done people sick everybody's done. It's as horrible. You get diarrhea But it's 24 hours of misery, but when it's over you're a new person good and look and Rick Perry God bless him because if it wasn't for him getting behind it that changed everybody's opinion Here you have this Republican former governor of Texas Who's talking about it and then talking about his own personal experiences doing it You know, so him and Brian Hubbard I mean they they really went all out and when I had them on my podcast Not once but twice to talk about this and the state of it where it's being passed in Texas They got a hundred million dollars from Ken Paxton so which is yeah, no was it Ken Paxton? No no who who is it? corn Dampatrick sorry damn Patrick so Dan Patrick who approved this hundred million dollars for this I began initiative like these people all deserve praise This is like there's a lot of people that for the longest time the thought of psychedelics is being something that losers do And they realize like no there's a lot of people that need help and this can help every good side with I was just I was just in San Diego last Monday and that I was in LA on Tuesday And it's unrecognizable It's crazy sad like and and and when you take a look at San Diego It's always been beautiful beaches in the background and but it was worse than LA I was in the Burbank area and actually it was a lot nicer than San Diego was and the gaslight district was just disgusting It's right. What is it a gas lamp? Yeah. Yeah. It just I couldn't believe it I walked into a couple restaurants. You got homeless people stumbling in trying to order knock trying to take Food off of people's plates. Why they're there. I'm just like what is going on? No law enforcement. It's right It's the first time that I've went back and I've been back You know in the last three years I've been back two or three times a year easily It's the first time I went back. I was like man. This is not this is not what it used to be this is not it was it just felt I felt like it would I felt like for the first time I didn't feel safe there God and it's weird to me and how do you get that how do you bring it back? Oh, that's simple You bring it back by doing the right things common sense things taking it you know Why I'm okay? Chad Bianco does it oh Steve Hilton does it like who do you get to turn the state around you know It's your girl and a girl Katie Porter. She get it She'll scold everybody into compliance But I'm sitting outside having dinner last night and I'm watching a bunch of homeless guys Talking to themselves and anything and this is the problem. I was a police officer for 23 years, okay? I've been out there with them and you have people that you know they have serious problems You know and I understand you know the ACLU and stuff they they will oh it's not right to put them No, it's better for them and it's better for the the people that are out on the street just trying to live their lives To have that person be put into a place where they can receive some medication receive some help and try to get them back Then it is to let these people just rot on the street and Self-destruct on it. I'm watching it and it's like How is that so hard to figure out that it's better to do something with them that it is to just let them be? It's crazy. Yeah, it's we've lost our way You know as a society when I think a great reflection of that is how many homeless people you have camped out on your streets Yeah, those are the places where they've lost their way the most. That's it And this is unfortunately a lot of these Democrats run cities. I owned a couple of gyms in San Jose And just it was tent city and along the highway like leading up to my I loan the road that lived up to my gym all those things But you would see they would they were stealing solar panels from people's houses and they would put them up on the side Wall so they could charge their cell phones like they're smart enough to do those things right? It's not as if like they're not they're just struggling There is a lot of that's it and they're just struggling but in areas like I mean that can help with that a hundred percent But things like in in San Jose and San Francisco. They're given in needles. They're giving them drugs. They're giving them phones It's like why are we doing this? Well, the other problem is the amount of money that's involved in the homeless industry That's right when you find out that California spent 24 billion in homelessness Nothing not only can't but the fucking they try to do an audit on it and the governor veto did it's like no Nothing It's only 24 billion guys well how much did they spend on that bridge that had the for the mountain lion? Yeah, for the oh Do they hey hey, the mountain lions need a fucking bitch they need hugs It's uh, they need they need they need to wake up the and the problem is that they're in this bizarre mindset This liberal leftist mindset that's just not tenable. It's not you can't defend it. It's not that's because it's great Yeah, I always look at this people to talk about left and right and most people are I'm in the center You know, it's a lot of people out there. It's it's not it's not where but you get labeled as being on the right if you're not All the way if you're not all crazy you're to the far right. Yeah, it's nuts. It's absolutely just to nutty saw Why just saw some of that? I can remember who it was but they continue to talk about you know Let's keep tax in the billionaires keep tax in the billionaires and do what with the money and that's the point That's the thing so why don't we just not gonna go away? Why don't we just not tax the people that make under 200,000? That's actually something Jeff Bezos brought up. He said you should the bottom 50% the people that make the yeah The least amount of money don't tax them at all because because they're not contributing that much to the tax base anyway And they would contribute more to the economy if it more money absolutely have to help everybody that's right I think he's right. I always said 150,000 down. Yeah, you don't pay tax. That's a great number I also thought about it too is if you were to take if you got rid of the You know because they're talking about this housing shortage and all the other things Why don't we get rid of the low interest rates? You know because I have like a couple of interest rates on some houses that I have that are like two percent How do you get rid of those? Well, you want you just raise my capital gains tax? So I don't got to My wife and I whatever we can pay like less on that versus that 500,000 threshold Why don't you make it a million? So then I'll cash out on those and just take my money out and then I'll start putting it back into the economy again Like there's all you're talking like a sensible business California You could do it. You should Twitter jail. You do the death tax they did in New York. I mean the more mom Donnie's friends. Oh, that's nuts Oh my god people are just gonna bail out of that city. It's crazy It's just you fucking people that think like taxing the rich is the solution and do what with the money If you were doing a great job with the money and everything was accounted for and there was no fraud and waste I'd be like well maybe you just need more money, but that's clearly not the case You've got so much fraud and you're ignoring it. Yeah, and then this Nick Shirley kid Oh my god, I suppose is it ever goes through yeah, you should be praise Give that kid an award give a fucking award here I want journalist of the year, and he's not a journalist how much how much fraud do you think is in this country? Billions billions and billions and billions. I mean Elon said Elon and said when he first came in he goes Hey, I think it's close to a trillion dollars maybe a little bit over he said it was so bad that he didn't want to talk about it too much He's worried they'd kill him You know he really sold that don't on it. That's why I'm Joe He's not lying. He ain't stupid. No, he's not Anything but But I mean to think though, I didn't think how much in California they've discovered or let's just say what 200 billion At least you know somewhere around there. That's on the low end New York's probably in Chicago is and then I mean But they've got to do it in all states You can't just do it in the ones where it's LA and in Chicago in New York We've got to do it in all states to be in Texas It's everywhere everywhere this everywhere this fraud and these people are profiting off of the fraud They were funneling it right back into the parties and it's it's dirty business Well, you didn't really think that that shovel the government pays for was really fucking nine or all I mean there's a lot of that as they get a budget and they have to pay they have to spend all the money every bit of it Yeah, otherwise they won't get the same budget next year Which is wild to me because the schools the schools operate the same way if the teachers don't spend a certain amount of money on these things And they don't get the same budget for next year. No, why don't we reward the people that actually save the money? Yeah It doesn't make any sense it makes that's the stupidest thing I've ever heard What is wrong with you? I want to know when when do you come into my class? Your your referee in class. Yeah. When is it when you have it July 17th and 19th? He's gone I'm not even gonna be in the car now. Okay But when are you doing one? Where are you doing them? Usually I do him in Vegas at like stream couture or something like that because I need the gym to put people in cages with fighters If I can I definitely will I would love to see it. I'd love to see it Is there a location we can do one there? Way I don't have that way you look at any time You know you have my number text me if you have a question It's the text Wait I get them all the time so it's not here This is wrap it up right here. I get them all the time so It's nice when you know exactly what the referee can do Where are they gonna go and when you're looking them like with you know a mark Goddard or a herbedee? When you know if you go to the club you'll know exactly hey This is what he can do and this is this is why he'll do it. I'll definitely ask you I promise at the very least I'll ask you next time an issue comes up. No problem. Have you on speed? There you go. Maybe I'll put you on speaker phone after UFC. Hey everybody big John's right here It's a one thing that I'm always watching and it's like you know and you guys like I don't know I don't know Like this is the answer. Well, yeah, I'll reach out. I promise. Love you. Thank you brother. Love you too Let's do it again To be fights talk about Rick and a I live up the streets So let me know anytime all right fuck yeah, all right, but I do like it by everybody