in a debate about actual science, the person in possession of the cutting edge scientific information presented to the public, and then kind of welcome questions and then explain it. But that's not at all what we're watching here. We're watching people push an orthodoxy at increasing volume with increasing hysteria and with increasingly severe penalties for disagreeing. So what is that? Global elites used to pretend to care about people, but they're not even pretending anymore. I mean, here they fly their private jets, you know, separate private jets, including for the prime minister of Britain, his foreign secretary, King Charles, all taken their own private jet at the very moment that they're raising energy prices to historically high levels. And as you just saw there with John Kerry demanding the shutdown of coal plants, which will mean that people will burn wood and dung in China. And they will starve and they will not have enough to eat and you'll have riots in the streets. I think that what's so different now is that the elites are just openly and blatantly expressing their hatred of humankind, particularly the hatred of working people, of poor people, people both in the United States in the so-called flyover states that they hate so much. But also in places like India and China and Africa, where people want to live a better life. And that's what coal has traditionally provided. You know, what's so interesting, of course, is that the obvious alternative to coal is natural gas. If you cared about climate change, if this was actually about climate change, you would just produce more natural gas because it produces half the carbon emissions of coal. The United States reduced our carbon emissions by 22% between 2005 and 2020 with 61% of that reduction coming just from switching from coal to natural gas. But John Kerry and other climate activists are against natural gas and they've been stifling the production of natural gas, clean burning American natural gas, which is the cleanest in the world. So it's so obviously hypocritical but worse than that, I think it's really anti-human and that's really what gets added. It's a religion, it's a cult like you said, and it really is about being against humankind, against humanity. There's so many interesting threads here. I mean, one is that the rest of the world is ignoring it and they pay lip service to it and they're happy to sign treaties that they ignore or they have carve outs for their behavior. But it really is an anglic sphere thing. It's a Western religion. It's only the United States, Canada, Great Britain, New Zealand, Australia, really believe in Germany, maybe, really believe this nonsense. And China and India are like, you know, we've got a billion people here. We have to feed them. They don't care. Yeah, that's right. And there's a financial element here obviously too, where the largest donor to the Democratic Party, George Soros, but also Michael Bloomberg and a whole set of other oligarchs have a strong interest in keeping energy scarce. I think that's what is a big driver of. Yes, that's why they want to shut down nuclear plants, coal plants, they want to stifle natural gas production and they want us to use weather dependent energy dilute primitive sources of energy. So called renewables that are actually anything other than renewable and these are technologies that require three to nine hundred times more land than natural gas or nuclear plants. And that keep energy expensive and scarce so that they can control the energy markets around the world. And so it's really all three of these things. It's sort of a grotesque display of anti human power of elitist power. It's also a religion. These guys actually think of themselves as saving the planet, but it's also just a grift. It's a scam in order to keep energy supplies. Energy which should be abundant. I mean natural gas and nuclear are, you know, basically infinite sources of energy and trying to keep us scarce and keep energy scarce and dependent so that they can exercise greater control over the population. Where are the energy companies, the oil and gas companies in this, that you would think since they're famously profitable and big, some of the big companies in the world, that they'll be making a lot of noise pushing back. They do in subtle ways, but they don't do it in public. Why is that? Well, they've basically been bullied into submission and so you've seen the ESG movement has basically convinced the world that natural gas and nuclear are bad and that, you know, solar panels made by bigger Muslims in China and winter binds which are threatening to make the North Atlantic right whale extinct in the United States that those are somehow better for the environment. It's a complete corruption of science, of rationality. Anybody can see that natural gas and nuclear are the superior forms of energy, but the ESG movement has used political activism to put pressure and also used pension funds to put pressure on the oil and gas industries to basically sell out their main product. I mean, here you have the, it's actually in many cases cheaper. I mean, natural gas is so abundant in the United States. It should be one of our greatest export commodities and so they've gotten the pension funds organized through ESG. We've gotten the political actors like Gavin Newsom, the governor of California to campaign against oil and gas, even though it's been the biggest driver of carbon emissions reductions over the last 20 years and not just in the United States. I mean, people don't know that carbon emissions peaked in Britain and France and Germany in the mid 70s, mostly because of natural gas and nuclear. So I think you've just seen, you know, cowardice said in response to some pretty intense ESG bullying by activist pension funds and by, you know, frankly sociopathic political leaders like Gavin Newsom. So I mean, since this is fundamentally nonsense, the math doesn't work as they say. When farms can't power the New York City subway, they can't fly airplanes. I mean, it's like actually if you don't have cheap energy, you don't have advanced civilization. So how long does this kind of posturing go on before it has to end? I hate Tucker. He said exactly right. I mean, we know that the pillars of civilization are cheap energy, meritocracy, law and order and free speech and all four of those pillars are currently under attack. And so you start with cheap energy. You can't maintain modern civilization without cheap energy. We couldn't, we know we couldn't have had the industrial revolution for physical reasons if we hadn't found coal and they hadn't made a use of coal with a steam engine. So the attack on on cheap energy is truly an attack on modern civilization and it should frighten us and we should be aware to it and alive to it. I think, you know, what gives me hope here is that, you know, environmentalism and used to have a kind of utopian positive side. That's all gone. I mean, we saw with Greta Tundberg and extinction rebellion. It became very nihilistic. It became very anti human. So dark. It was basically just about preventing the end of the world, preventing the apocalypse. They used to still try to hide their hatred of humanity a little bit. But this year, I mean, gloves are off and masks are off and you can just see here they are openly flying their private planes to a climate conference where they're demanding that ordinary people pay much more for energy that we keep energy supplies secure. You know, our electric grids right now in the United States Tucker are in serious jeopardy. They're having reliability crises, not just in California. That's the most famous one. We've seen it all over the country, Texas. We saw it in the in the Midwest and southeast last year during winter. So every we're seeing an attack on the grid, which is really a testament to modern civilizations happening everywhere at the same time Europe, United States. What gives me hope is that I think it's finally becoming obvious to people that it's a scam and that the people that are pushing this really hate civilization or at least they hate civilization for others. They want it only for themselves and that they're in the grip of a really dogmatic cult philosophy. I mean, I think it's fair to call it a death cult at this point when you're stifling energy supplies that are necessary to keep people alive, allow us to allow poor people to escape from the use of wooden dong. I don't know what else you call it than an anti human death cult. That's right. It's not environmental. Mentalism. It's the snarling face of tyranny. The young people say this news is full of wine. And kind of this motorcade. We want to do it in 39. We want to do it as a Jeffrey Epstein.