The general gonna experience. Yeah, the crazy sawed bones are very interesting. Yeah. So let's talk about that, because we've showed photos on the podcast before, and that these sawed bones, now you have carbon dated them and they're a two-win. Yeah, they are. Yeah. You know, I believe this, because we got all excited when we found them. Yeah. Plus, or minus 200 years. There are 190 years. So what kind of animal are these from? I don't know. But they're 200 years old. 190 year I brought one with me. Oh, really? This is a story about how these were found. It was, I got a call one day I was out there at the Boneyard. My daughters have a tourist business around the corner a little bit. Called gold daughters. And Elora called me and goes, Dad, there's a state troop over here and wanting to talk to you. And I look around and I'm like, truck to see what I got in it. I said, OK, I'll be right over. I go over and we had some stuff going on at the time. And I didn't think there was any reports filed any place. But I go over there and introduce myself to this guy and his name is Eric Spitzer. He's the head to the state trooper in Fairbanks. He says, I just out in the neighborhood. I want to come by and introduce myself. I saw you on Joe Rogan's podcast. I love fossils. I love what this is all about. It's my kids like to look for bones. I take them out and what woods we look for stuff. And I just want to come by and introduce myself. And the excitement in his just him talking to me. I said, well, follow me over. We'll go, I'll go show it to you right now. So he went over to the Boneyard. He got out and he looked around. He just couldn't believe it. He picked up some bone parts. I said, well, now you're a boner. He just got a fine one. And he's bullshit a little bit. He goes, you mind if I bring my kids out sometime? I said, bring them out this weekend. We'll fire the pumps up. I'll turn you guys loose and then we'll come check on you once in a while. And they found a pallet two full of bones. Little fragments, leg bones. And then they came back the next weekend. They found a mammoth tusk. And they found these sod bones. A few of them. We got 15 of them now that they found. And so I told everybody, those bones are now called the spitzer. The spitzer finds. Tooth of the young daughters found them. Sometimes it just takes a new set of eyes. I don't know how many of those we've picked up in the past, but we never looked at it that way. So I brought one with me. This is the one that I carbon dated. And so this is the one that's 200 plus years old. Now that you can see that notch right there. That's what I cut out to send in to get carbon dated. And so this is boy, this is some sort of a joint. Is that a femur's at the top of a femur? The lady, Jeanette Rhimes, Dakota Huntress, she thinks it's a moose leg bone. But set it on its hand there, other end. Okay. No, 200 years ago. What kind of utility would that have to do that? What kind of utility to do that? Yeah, what do you mean? Well, the people that did that. Why would they have a bone like that? I would imagine to get to the marrow. Yeah, but then what? You eat it. Maybe a candle. Maybe some like some marrow too. Well, I wouldn't imagine they're eating the marrow because it's the meat. They are eating the marrow and that's how they do it. I mean, if you get marrow now, that's how you do it. But I think there's some utility to that bone is what I'm saying. Yeah. Just the way it sits, it could have put fire embers in it to keep, you know, overnight. Because this was 200 years ago. Yeah. This was 100 years before Fairbanks was discovered. This was, this is even more of a mystery to me. So is this Russians? They don't know Russia. It's about the same timeframe. Yeah. Russians own Alaska. And, you know, I wouldn't surprise me if they didn't go up. They found it anchorage in the late 1700s. I think the utility of it is just a coincidence, honestly, because it doesn't really, it's been worked at the bottom. No. No. No. I agree with you. I don't know. Yeah. That's the whole thing. None of us know. I mean, I'm sure they have used some of these before like that for something. But if I had a guess, I would guess that this is just something that they did to get at the marrow where all the good fat is, you know. Maybe they had some vodka and they ported it in there. Perhaps. I don't know. They probably had some kind of metal cups back then. Well, those two little, it just showed, they look like cups for me. They could have been. They certainly could be some sort of a thing that you could drink out of certainly the right size for a good shot of vodka. Yeah. But so were there supposedly people living in that area back then? No. No. No. Hmm. Hmm. It's right. Because up till now, the dating sequences have been 3,000 beep before present to now is 40,000 years before present. That puts it up to 200 years before present, which is interesting. It is interesting. So what do you think is going on? I have no idea. Does anybody have a theory? There's probably a lot of theories, but that's the whole point about all this stuff. Nobody knows. Well, at least we know you didn't come up with evidence that the saw is older than 5,000 years old, which is one of the things that we're thinking, which is I was hoping that was going to be the case. Yeah, that would have been wild. And when I got the carbon dates, I'm going to add damage. But thinking about it, though, it's even more of a more of an interesting thing. How much of a recorded history do we have of that area from 200 years ago? None. None. So was it mostly like, have you ever seen that Werner Herzog documentary happy people life in the taiga? It's about people who live in Siberia right now to this day. And they lived this incredibly primitive life. Really, all they have is snowmobiles and some hand tools and maybe some chainsaws. And most of what they do is just living off the land, trapping, fishing, hunting. That's it. Yeah. And they, the very low instances of mental illness, everybody's very happy. All these communities of these people living together, just surviving, living off the land, subsistence lifestyle. But I don't think there's much historical record on those people. You know, the people that are alive there right now, if they were to die off, 200 years from now, what evidence is there of them? Other than you might find some stuff that they did, might find some trees they cut down or some logs or whatever is going to be around still 200 years now, they'll be preserved. Yeah. Well, we did find a skinny rock across the valley on top of the hill that still don't know where that's how old that is or where that's from. Skinning rock. Skinning rock. So it posted there. And it's been worked. So there's even a little indent on the side for your finger as you flesh something out. And what is it made out of? Stone from Eastern Europe. Remember, we talked a little about that. Oh, that's right. That's right. And it wasn't local. Right. So there was a lot of traveling migrate and going on across that burning land bridge because it was ice-free corridor. Yeah. And it went all the way into the lower 48. Mm. So there's a lot of stuff that we find as I said last time that they say didn't live there, but it sure died there. Yeah. Like let's talk about that. Like what different animals did they say didn't live there that you personally and your company has found evidence of? Dire wolfs being one of them. Sabertooth being another one. But I found one in my company found one before I was around. Send them to New York City. I asked to see them, but they didn't have them available. And let's see what else we got. Badgers. Elk. And they didn't think they were around back then. No. Why did they not think that Elk were in that area back then? Because Elk are in Alaska. Because they never found any elk bones. Right. But that's it. It's just they didn't find the bones. They didn't find the bones. But they literally didn't think that Sabertooth titles lived in that area. They didn't think that. In fact, in that film, that documentary film, Pat Druckenmiller, who's a curator now in the Director of the Museum, says to their knowledge none of them ever been found there. Wow. But to my knowledge they have been because on a shipping manifest, to him and age that one was sent to him. The one I found was stolen by the British Museum never returned. So I'm on kind of a little bit of a rampage these days about the museums and what they're known with these collections. It's kind of a one man thing as a cause. I think it's important. Well, I think it is important because these museums are run by these academics and academics. Unfortunately, some of them tend to be very arrogant and they want to be able to control whatever narrative they have or whatever information they have and they don't want to be open about it. No. And the AM&H is a private institution, but the Smithsonian is a public entity that's owned by us. So they answered a different set of rules. So Smithsonian has to respond to a FOIA request. AM&H is what are you going to do? Suus. Well, Stump Break You. Was that me? Then you over log them will break you. Oh, with money? With money with lawyers with all that litigation costs. Why don't we fucking crowdfund something? Well, because I have another plan. This is plan's going to work. I have people in our state legislature working on this right now. There's a senator named Click Bishop. He's on the finance committee. He's on the resources committee. He's the majority whip. And he's in making efforts to get the bones back to Alaska from the state of Alaska. Now, AM&H might be able to take on John Reeves. This is some break me. But they can't do it to the state of Alaska. State of Alaska go toe to toe with them some bitches. Now, after we get that through the House and State legislature, the Senate and the House, we'll go to the Congressional delegation. You've heard what an act of Congress is, don't you? You know, that is sure. AM&H give them their goddamn bones back. AM&H is going to see the light. This is a political solution to this. Not lawyers, not all that stuff. I got nothing to gain from this. You know, I'm just trying to get them back in Alaska. So we have that thousand piece puzzle to put together. They were supposed to be studied and researched and the answers to the extinction of that art within the bones. And so you've never been given any explanation as to why they haven't done this research? They didn't feel like it. They just didn't feel like it. Is it because they don't have the resources or it just wasn't a priority for them? And this was all done from the 1940s. There's no reason for them to go back and take that stuff and reenact the research or begin the research. It's impossible for them to come up with any scientific research because they don't have the stratographic information. They don't even know where it was found. Right. But I do. Let's put it all together, boys. And then we'll study it. I just don't understand why they wouldn't want to do that. That seems to me an incredible opportunity to attain enlightenment on an area that's fascinating. I mean, have any academics reached out to you after the podcast? Not that I know of it. How not. How not. I mean, me just finding your Instagram page was like, Jesus Christ, like, how is this guy have all these bones? Like this is crazy. What is this place? This place seems like what an amazing fortunate find that you guys have this one spot 2.1 acres and probably a whole lot more around that area than you just haven't uncovered yet. That has this incredible wealth of bones. It's amazing. It's fucking incredible. And that's why that cut bone, by the way, I noticed you don't have a spitzer bone out there in your lobby. What's a spitzer bone? That's what we call the spitzer bones. Oh, yeah. You ain't got one of those in your lobby. No, I'm a fix that shit. Okay, thank you. You're welcome. We do have the step bison head. I saw it out there. It looks nice. We're trying to figure out how to display it. I think I'm going to have a stand built and just have it set out there. I like that people going, oh, he needs to get a Cadillac. I might have it on the hood. Well, well, that's not a bad idea. As long as you don't drive it around. Once I get a ranch out here, I'll do that. I'll put it on the ranch truck. There you go. But I think it, no, that's not good. That could be deserved. The blue bay bison was 38,000 years old. And that's, you know, they could have known each other back in the day. Well, it looks old. It's fuck. It is old as fuck. Yeah. What an amazing, amazing spot you have. Do you ever stop and just think how insane it is? I do when I have people like Eric Spitzer and his daughter show up and they're just the happiness. They're just so gleeful. Yeah. And sometimes I need to see that to remember that what we're doing is kind of worthwhile. No, it's very worthwhile. It means that people enjoy it and they like seeing it and they like doing it. We just haven't figured out a way to let everybody do it. Well, it just seems to me that this is an extraordinary opportunity to gain some understanding. Yeah. And that's why I don't understand why these universities or, you know, someone hasn't reached out to you and said, hey, we need to really have a full scale investigation. Find out what happened here.