Roger Waters, thank you for doing this. Let's go back to the beginning to that day, September 11th, 2001. Where were you and that happened and what did you think? I was in Ireland Studios in London making a record and What did I think? I thought, can I use the effort? Yes, you may. I thought fuck me. What? What could somebody turn to TV on? So we stopped working almost immediately And I almost immediately called my them wife Laurie who is in New York at the time and I was on the phone with her for the next two hours sort of watching it development and Fold before our very own. It's in a state of shock like everyone was all over the world What did I think? I mean that's that that's a very long and complicated answer to that because I haven't stopped thinking ever since really and it was 25 years ago. I could actually you know I wrote something down, but I know Part of what I what there's one sentence in what I wrote down here was that I thought to myself if this is an attack by foreign people on The United States America Will the American people notice that some people Appused off. Yes with American foreign policy and that this is a result of it No, and I did think that and in a way that was the only positive thing I could think was maybe maybe now the wars come home Now it's you know now something has happened on American soil maybe that and it didn't happen I was surprised which shows how naive I was I guess That nobody even even ever started to to think that or to allow that to color what happened afterwards So that's all it felt to me. Am I making any sense? You're making a lot of sense And I had a similar thought yeah at the time which is not to obviously to justify it or any active violence, but Causing effect is real So yeah, yeah, I had the same thought and I had a huge Controtomp with my employer over it's seen on at the time because I made that point and they didn't they attacked me for it price But I kept working there to my shame, but anyway Then there was the investigation into 911 the 911 commission which was in panel, but the then president George W Bush headed by a guy called Phillips Zellico and It produced a report which was then bound into a book that you could buy at the bookstore Did you assess that what did you think of the interview? I did not read that book I could face I Did wonder why there wasn't a more thorough investigation or any real investigation into what actually happened it because In the aftermath of it will you all watch the same images again and again and again and it became evident Well, not not necessarily evident, but it it looked likely The whole story of the of control demolitions of buildings came up very quickly not least because building seven Which was obviously a controlled demolition? It's collapsed was announced on the BBC in England half an hour before it happened That's a sign that is not entirely organic what you're watching exactly, you know, and we and we we could love About it, but we can't because it's too tragic But it was quite clear from the very beginning that the the I'll bin Laden got together with some terrorist Arabs and they've done this and isn't it all fallen now Let's start well war three was not that there was more to the whole thing than at the eye and well And I to my eternal shame had misgivings that I didn't immediately express About what had actually happened Because the atmosphere was appalling around the time that if you did Express any misgivings at all about the result of the nine-elevening quarry you were labeled a madman and And you would lose any voice that you heard about any subject or not forever Just by questioning it as we all know now people who did start to quest ask the questions were correct to do so Yes, but and I know this is part of the reason that you and I having this conversation today because of my friend Matt Campbell is is That was that was it was a terrible mistake That the questions never got to any court of law or until any any place where you could actually Listen to the evidence and look at the evidence and try and figure out why actually happened if I could put it like that Who is Matt Campbell for people unfamiliar? Okay, Matt Campbell is a an Englishman and he's been involved since the day It happened because his brother Jeffrey Campbell was in one of the twin towers and we skilled on the day happened and Eventually there was a cursory inquest into his death Which listened to no evidence about anything and didn't come up with any answers. I so it's so the in quests said that it was killed by terrorists on on the 11th of September 2001 on that's the end of the story and there are no more questions to be answered and Matt Campbell to his eternal credit has for the 25 years since then tried to get a proper inquest into his brother's death and it is law in the UK where I'm from That a citizen is allowed if there's anything unusual at all about the death of any person You're allowed to demand an inquest. I hear judicial inquiry into why the person died who was responsible and so on and so forth and he is still trying to Get that right for his brother Jeff now He's he's managed to get it all the way to the Supreme Court It's been turned down by the by several British had turned in generals Who said we're not reopening any in quest you can't do it He said but that's unlawful. This is completely against all the laws of the land in England You don't have in quests in in North America I'm told but we do and they're kind of important So he's managed to get a hearing in the Supreme Court in England on October the 14th and 15th coming up this year To Trump swayed at the Supreme Court to count amount The attorney general's Decision not to allow an inquest this will mean that evidence can be heard for the first time in a court of law Anywhere in the world Anyway, there hasn't been one in America and there hasn't been one. I didn't realize that. How can that be? How can that be what the three thousand people die the Investigation the official investigation into it is revealed as false. Yeah The 911 Commission report was written before the inquest Into what happened on 911 so it's fake Philip Zellico did that we know that and Yet there's been no legal inquiry into it since then none which is why I'm supporting Matt Campbell which I am Why if we could on this program? There is a crowdfunder as well I've given him I've given him a lot of money in order to fight this case But we need about twice what I've already given I've given him an hundred grand Donus we need about that much again, so if there's anybody out there We should give them the if you wouldn't mind. Oh, I'd be happy to and this name is Matt Campbell Of course, I didn't write it But but we can find it and we can then it can be found easy Matt Campbell 911 and You've given him a hundred grand in order to force the inquest into this No, you know in order to pay the lawyers who are representing him and his brother before the Supreme Court in England on the 14th and 15th of October If they are successful and the Supreme Court over turns The decision by the attorney general not to proceed then there will be an inquest which will be a separate occasion But that will give you and me and all the people all over the world who are interested to know what actually happened On September the 11th 2001 and you so from what would be the justification for not allowing an inquest into 911 Do you know like what was the excuse? Everybody knows where it's like to get stuck at the airport on a road trip and feel desperately hungry and that can get ugly because There's a lot of crap for sale at airports. We can tell you first hand So bring the everyday bar. It's a glowing exception the everyday bar is a protein bar It's made from three simple ingredients beef sea salt grass finished beef talos So that means no seed oils no weird blends no asterisks at the end You can read all of the ingredients on the list in two seconds and there's nothing you can't pronounce we just pronounced it This part wasn't dreamed up in a marketing meeting. It was created by a combat medic who spent months in Afghanistan living on nothing But mre's and he didn't like it. It made him sick So that experience gave birth to the everyday bar and get this the everyday bar is now just five bucks and fits right in your pocket Tear it open enjoy enough to prep it refrigerate it The first batch ship soon and supplies are very limited to beat the rush visit carnivore bar .com slash Tucker use the code Tucker for 15% off. It's carnivore bar.com slash Tucker code Tucker 15% off your first order or click the link below or scan the QR code on the screen and Check the pinned comment. I think the powers that they have decided that would be inconvenient for them the buildings One and two World Trade Sciences one and two and building seven Given all the evidence that exists and there's an awful lot not just of eyewitness tests by any but the films if you look at the Film of the North Tower collapsing You can see all the explosions in the controlled demolition of that building happening in front of your very eyes And there is no other explanation as to how The North Tower of the World Trade Center fell down It didn't fall down because it was burning aircraft fluid or because an airplane flew into it It fell down because it was demolished and the question is Who placed the explosive in it who pressed the button who demolished the World Trade Center and building seven and the South Tower Who did it and why and those are the questions that we need a proper judicial inquiry to find answers to It'll be very inconvenient to lots of people not least the security come I think they would call secure a cat or something Who did all the security in the building because if this is true that they were controlled demolition That must admit that there were people working in there putting nanothermite or whatever the explosive's were that brought the building Stout in the evenings when the when the workers weren't there behind everybody's backs are up to It's a huge huge huge operation must have been known by hundreds and hundreds of people Funnily enough piers Morgan who I spoke to last week about this Came out and said well if it if it was anything to do with the government or of this or of that or anything Thousands of people would have known about it. They would have all come out and spoke. No, they wouldn't you may well find that if there is a proper judicial inquiry people will start coming out of the woodwork Actually, it's funny you should say that because and this and and it well But we the public have a right to know what up that's all we're asking what happened And nobody has given us an answer You know who who was it who was your theory? I'd be fascinated to what is my theory. Yeah, I haven't the famous idea I think it's very obvious that Elements of the American security services New that there was a plot obviously they did know there was a plot I mean, I think the evidence shows that Conclusively you mean the you mean the part that at a and the other that's correct the other any other 18 in the United States Yeah, being followed around both by Of you know American Government CIA And the FBI and the FBI correct and and also by the Israelis. I mean the these really's new they were there and And a bunch of the Israelis who knew it was gonna happen got arrested actually well they were dancing around correct Sort of correct Congratulating themselves or whatever it was they were doing so so the question is did the Americans and the Israelis Have a hand in doing it did they allow it to happen did they Did they have a complex Staying operation that went wrong and it happened despite their best efforts You know because this does happen where the FBI for example be following somebody and everyone around him will be an informant and The idea is to you know gather the evidence on him and then he goes and shoot somebody and the FBI says well We didn't want that is it that I mean I don't know the answer but And I also know or I believe that the building seven story doesn't make any sense at all And I don't know why you would attack people who raise questions about something that doesn't make any sense but they have That's not a sign of innocence Hmm right at all. Well, I I must have heard somewhere and maybe it was on one of the grapevines of Conspiracy there is out there questioning that a couple of the floors in building seven were CIA offices. I think that's true I've certainly heard that Well, there was a field officer and an FBI field office and I think a bunch of different government agencies I think that's I well there's a close. Well. Well. No what we do know We do know certain things that happen because there is evidence so for instance General Wesley Clark's story is about visiting the Pentagon and his Meetings in the offices either a poor wolf or wits or somebody close to wolf or fates at the time where they described the plan the American Plan the Pentagon plan the government plan who whose plan was it exactly to destroy Seven countries in the five years that followed. Yes Of those seven countries five have gone. There's only Lebanon. No, no, no, no, no, I'm left. Yes standing out of those seven countries So and Wesley Clark is He always seems like a fairly kind of down to earth straightforward kind of a guy in a very fine Professional soldier and somebody who would be unlikely to make this stuff up and and but in order to For fill those ambitions for the new American centuries. It was known by the neo-carnas They needed a Pearl Harbor But who's the they who's the they the Israel possibly is something to do with it elements possibly in the United States government That it must have been it it's a big big thing to pull off And I can sense people now watching this going but pull off what they didn't it was I just Blaine's flew in and the buildings felt no they didn't That's the one thing that we know for absolute sure because every single physicist or Engineer or architect in the world Or they all agreed there is no way The north and south towers and building seven came down because of error plan sitting just Not possible the first person I ever heard say that this doesn't make any sense Just as a structural matter can the building come down because of an airplane strike the first person to say that that I know of his Donald Trump Said that on a morning show he called in the morning of 9-11 and said I was there I'm a builder. I know how those buildings were built. That doesn't make any sense He said that on the open up the tape It's I think it just happened to be Trump. I mean it could be anybody with knowledge of building but uh That is kind of gotten lost over the years that Structural engineers said this is impossible What happened there was a report by a bunch of structural engineers who said that what happened to them? Nothing happened to them. They still exist. They're all still alive. They're all still perplexed They're all still wondering why nobody took them seriously as we all are Where I was like this thing that I showed you earlier where I wrote down that how can you read that and tell us what it is sure yeah I'd be delighted to I mean it's So this is a note that you wrote yourself yeah wrote to yourself. Yeah This is this it just says it says a note from Roger so it was from and to me I'll read it to you for me and I wrote this on the second of January 2019 Okay, so this is a couple months So I've been in stardh Switzerland since the 29th of December 2018 only three days, but in these three days Something has crystallized. I will tell you what it is. I've been wondering Somewhat excitedly about a forthcoming event in New York City The convening by US Attorney Jeffree Berman of a special grand jury in the South Central South circuit of New York City To consider even at this distance in time the events of September the 11th 2001 at the instigation of the lawyers committee for a 9 11 inquiry Quote we have received and reviewed the lawyers committee for 9 11 inquiry and submissions of April the 10th and July the 30 2018 we will comply with the provisions of you of 18 US C blah blah blah as they relate to your submission That's saying that they're gonna have the inquiry and I wrote my heart is beating almost out of my chest The families all the victims all our brothers and sisters All the criminals who might be bought to justice tears stay my eyes On September 11th 2001 that terrible day when America was attacked and the whole world Recoiled in horror. I was in London making a record and watched it all unfold on TV Transfixed and recoiling in horror too Almost immediately. I couldn't help thinking to myself. This is so shocking that maybe the American people Will ask themselves why would anyone from another land want to do this to us? Well having life insurance is one of those things that helps you sleep better at night Something where to happen to you what exactly would happen to your loved ones your children We've heard so many stories of families losing a parent and having their life insurance policy save their financial lives That's the whole point of it. It makes all the difference in the world The next question becomes well, how do I get life insurance? That's where ethos comes in a company we're proud to partner with ethos makes securing a life insurance plan Fast and easy and a hundred percent online people don't get it because it's a hassle and it's expensive The solves that problem you get a quote in seconds apply in minutes and get same-day coverage There is no medical exam you just answer a few simple health questions Then you can get up to three million dollars in coverage some policies is low as 30 bucks a month Takes about 10 minutes to get covered life insurance through ethos free quotes are available now at ethos.com slash chucker ethos eta us dot com slash chucker rates and obviously application times may vary, but it's great According to the American mainstream media the American people didn't ask themselves that question They accepted the received wisdom of the quote They hate our freedom narrative and in spite of massive and commendable protests invaded Iraq End of story. Well, that's not actually the end all the whole of the story within days sensible concerned American citizens started to question the narrative that 19 young Arab terrorists hijacked three U.S. American airplane flights and attacked the twin towers at the World Trade Center leveling three multi-story steel frame buildings informed architects and civil engineers backed up by decades of professional experience pointed out that the officially accepted 9-eleven narrative was physically impossible that it defied the laws of physics The twin towers could not possibly have been raised to the ground by fires caused by the impact of two airplanes Something else must abort them down by the way when I talk of architects and engineers I mean thousands of professional engineers and architects Not one or two cranks or conspiracy theorists The list comprises almost everyone with any expert knowledge of steel frame buildings and how they react to fire Within a week or two the evidence that the twin towers were not downed by Muhammad at a and his friends was Unassailable by anyone with an IQ above room temperature Enter the mainstream media Let us not underestimate the less than honorable influence and connivance of the mainstream media at this point To a man and maybe the odd woman also Not to let you ladies off the hook The mainstream media decided to look the other way They allowed the 19 young Arab terrorists narrative To proceed unchallenged through the charade of the In-official investigation or official investigation The 9-eleven commission No real evidence was heard The official government narrative was simply rubber stamped with no real investigation So today January the second 19 I have to make an apology I knew what was happening I have an IQ above room temperature I was cowered enough by the suffocating weight of society's pressure To pretend that the emperor was wearing clothes And to keep my misgivings to myself I am ashamed of my silence down all these years I challenge the United States government To have a real investigation Now the convening of this special grand jury in New York City is a start We can't bring back our brothers and sisters, but we can say Non-commass We must have a full open judicial inquiry And to the events of September the 11th 2001 We owe it to all the victims of that dreadful crime and also to their families The powers that be of blah blah blah And it goes on sisters of mercy better join with your brothers Put an end to the soap opera of state They say the toothless get ruthless Better run home before it's too late, which is a quote from one of my songs from 1987 The point is This man disappeared without trace where he was fired finally enough by Trump a few years later Who was the attorney the US attorney in the southern district of New York who said he was going to bring it before a grand jury Nothing happened. It disappeared As did the investigation suggested by who was the farchief from Queens. I've got his name down here Chris Jorro he was a commissioner of police from Queens, New York who lost brothers His firemen died in 911. He had an IQ above room temperature He knows that they Buildings didn't fall down because there are plans flowing to them. He tried to help He's disappeared Anybody who makes any suggestion that this didn't that this was what the official narrative it They just they quietly disappear. They lose the next election. They lose their job. They get fired You know, so so this is really really really really really The only member at Congress I'm aware of to say anything like this was Kurt Weldon from Pennsylvania Who's a committee chairman and a powerful incumbent and he began asking questions about 911 And then right before the election the FBI raided his father his daughter's business never filed charges Right She was never charged, but they raided the business to Throw the election And and he lost So that raises the question. Why would you Since you are a famous person successful person? Her rock star. Why would you weigh in on this knowing What's gonna happen when you do? well I sincerely care about right and wrong I sincerely care about human rights All being all human rights for everyone all over the world Okay, and and whoever perpetrated this crime doesn't They didn't even care for the human or for the right to life of the 3000 people they murdered in the in the Twin towers that day So for it to never be investigated is beyond the pale for me And I care about Matt Campbell And I care about his dead brother Jeff and I care about his mom and dad and their family But they're just one family But to his eternal credit Matt has put 26 years of effort into this And I know a number of the other peers Robinson and others who've put time at energy into All of this stuff all of these years and they've done the right thing These are the people doing the right thing People doing the wrong thing or anybody who tries to stand in the way of their being a judicial inquiry with Evidence so that we find out what happened You know because it's never an in America is very very difficult to do it Did Lee Harvey Oswald pull a trigger from 200 yards away and somehow blow Kennedy's head off the back of his No, we know that's nonsense as well. The Warren Commission that one was called Head by one of the Dalit wasn't it for Stodales who was in charge of that and we all know it's nonsense We all know that The Warren Commission, that one was called. Head by one of the Dalit, wasn't it, first of Dalit's who was in charge of that. And we all know it's nonsense. We all know that we've never, nobody's ever got to the bottom of what actually happened. They can't release the files 63 years later. They have not released every JFK assassination related file. The CIA still has them. You know, and if you do, it's easy. Exactly. Well, we all have to remember that JFK, love him or not, he made that incredible speech at the University of Massachusetts in front of what it's called commencement speeches. And it's for graduating students. I'm getting chills remembering what he said. You know what he said? We must make peace with the Russians. There are brothers and sisters. And look where we are now. It desperate to have a war with Russia. That's known as the whole Ukrainian nonsense is all about. And so, you know, Kennedy was right and I killed him. And so it doesn't suit whoever it is who makes all the profit out of war. They want wars to have, they couldn't care less about the human rights of ordinary people. Anywhere. Doesn't matter if you're an American or a Russian or Chinese or Indian or any natural or English, it doesn't matter. They couldn't care less. All they care about probably is profit and power. Well, we care about something different than that. We care about one another. And we, as I said in that little thing I gave to you earlier, we try and develop our capacity for empathy with our brothers and sisters in other countries across national borders or religious differences or whatnot. Oh, we're all human beings. There is only one race, the human race. We're all part of it. We have absolute responsibility to try and help one another. Cities on the East Coast hit triple digit temperatures on the 4th of July. It's hard to get a good night's sleep in that kind of heat. Cozy Earth makes it possible. Cozy Earth's bamboo sheet set is buttery soft and temperature regulating. That means you can sleep comfortably no matter how hot it is outside. Some people love it so much. They completely revamp their bedding. They want as much Cozy Earth as possible. They are what we call Cozy Earth extremists. But we're not afraid of them. We revere them. We read an experience this kind of luxury when you're outdoors. Well, the summer Cozy Earth is proud to offer brand new resort beach towels, light, highly absorbent, making them perfect for pool or beach for the whole summer, really. Plus there's a lifetime warranty in 30 days of hassle-free returns. And the bamboo sheets, new resort beach towels, stand out essential. We're checking out for elevated luxury every day, not just on vacation. Want cooling and comfort to beat the heat? Visit CozyEarth.com. Use the code Tucker for an exclusive 20% off. Code Tucker 20% off. And if you see a post-purchase survey, take a moment and feel free to mention you heard about Cozy Earth on this show. So once you raise these questions in public, what was the response? Beach questions. What this, the questions about 9-11. Like, why can't we have an inquiry? Hey, Tucker, we're doing it. This is us doing it today. We're doing it together. I'm a sympathetic ear on this question. Not everyone is. No, I do understand that. But that's what we're doing. That's why I'm here. And that's why I'm so grateful for you to be, you know, having this conversation with me about this because you have a huge audience. And when your audience here, this may be there, go, you know, why don't we have an investigation? We made a whole documentary on the subject multi-part and I didn't know until right now that there had never been an inquiry, an independent inquiry never by court into 9-11. I just, I'm a little bit shocked to hear that. Isn't that bizarre? So thank you Matt and God bless you, Jeff, you know, and your family and all the other families and all the families of all the firefighters who lost their lives in this sense, who are. There the eyewitness and the eyewitness report, boom, boom, boom. They all hear it. They all know it. Everybody knows it. And you open your eyes and the story of the BBC and building seven. What? They tell you that it's fallen down half an hour before they demolish it. It's bizarre. So yeah. So this is, this could be this conversation between you and me could be a turning point for the whole human race. I often say this in other contexts, but we're right in it now. You and I are right in the middle of a battle, okay, an existential battle for the soul of the human race. And we empathize with one another or not or will we allow the oligarchs and all the, and sometimes people in our governments to keep us at each other's throats over dimes and growths when we should be giving it, giving it one another helping hand and communicating and cooperating across national boundaries, particularly with the Russians and the Chinese and the Iranians that are not for care. I've got another PTC which I won't read you, but where I went on the same day I wrote another note where I said, how bizarre is it that they're suggesting that we should invade Iran? This was eight and a half years ago that I was responding to that. And then Russia, are you insane? Do you know who the Russian people are and you do know? Do you know that they won the Second World War before you not got involved in it? 20 million Russians died saving this planet from the Nazis, 20 million. And we won half a fight with them. It's just, I've been there. They're lovely people. I agree. You've been there. I saw you're thinking about the underground station. Yeah. Yeah, it was very moving. I've found that moving because, and it's such a surprise to be, oh really? No, no, Russians and monsters, they're communist monsters. They were destroyers or, you know, they're... That's a civilized country. Yeah. If there's a definition of civilized, it's that. And it's many, many different groups. Ethnic groups from all everything from, you know, the Chinese borders to the Ukraine. So it's all very, very difficult. But are you worried that the West is moving toward an actual war with Russia? Not just Ukraine against Russia, but Western Europe, US against Russia? I'm worried that some of the people in the governments of the United States of America and the UK and the European Union are making blood-curdlingly bloodthirsty noises about the possibility of fighting their, particularly in Germany, by the way. They're trying now to get 5% of the GMP of all the European countries to be put into a big piggy bank in order to fight the Russians. The Russians don't want to invade Europe. Why are they talking about? But they're saying that and they're saying it publicly. And they do it. Who knows why they do it? They do it because maybe they're asked to say those things. by whoever is is paying them. It's still a bit of a business politics in Europe and definitely in the United States of America. There's a ruling elite with a lot of money and they pay, and so they pay politicians to do their bidding and what they want because it suits them because they make money. Basically, it's greed. It's the greedy. In my view, that's my view. I don't think there's any question you're right. I mean, it's obviously true. It's just that when you push an entire continent into a war that it cannot win by definition, you risk the lives of millions of people. I mean, that's a big step to do something like that. It sure is. Yeah. And it's crazy. Now we have to be cooperating with the Russians. Of course. Particularly. Yes. And then good people. You've been there. You've got the whole thing. Me too. I've worked there a lot in my life. I'm doing, you know, I do interviews with them whenever I can. It's sort of how it breaks my heart that I can't watch out to you anymore because it's banned. You can't watch Russia today. We used to be able to in America up until the start, up until 22. Up until February, the whenever it was. Yes. 2022. When the special military operation as the Russians call it started. Because the Minsk Accords were not adhered to. But that's another conversation. But may ask, so you grew up in England. Your father was killed fighting the Nazis in the Second World War. You grew up in a victor country that congratulated itself on its freedoms. You know, if we hadn't sacrificed, we'd all be speaking German and marching in rows. They always said that. Is it strange to live in a world where you're not allowed to watch a certain TV channel? Yeah. Of course it is. And I did grow up in post war in England. And we suddenly we had a national health service because we had a Labour government after the Second World War. And then weirdly enough, it all turned to ratchet with Tony Blair and Margaret Thatcher and all that right wing stuff coming back in again, which it did. And interestingly enough, I wrote the wall in 1979. I wrote a song in that called Goodbye Blue Sky. Oh, it's a beautiful song, but it could, did you hear the front? Did you hear the front ones? Did you see the falling bombs? Did you ever wonder why we had to run for shelter when the promise of a brave new world unfurl beneath the clear blue sky? That is a lament for the fact that the Second World War was not the war to end all wars. Like the First World War was meant to be. That we certainly realized that this idea that we had that we could live in a socialist future where we looked after one another and also a future where we didn't have wars, nation against nation was a pipe dream because it didn't suit the oligarchs who whenever it was in 1948 for the declaration of human rights had their fingers crossed behind their backs because they never believed in human rights at all. They believe in profit and that's all there is to. So we live in a very difficult time where it may be unless you with your audience or me with my tiny voice can join with our brothers and sisters and pull together the ordinary working people all over the globe and we can make the voice of the choir so loud that we can crown out the propaganda of the ruling class, particularly in the United States because ordinary people in there have been so hoodwinked by them and they believe, oh, we're the greatest country in the world, not in our. And anyway, even if there was a great country in an art gate, it's not important. What's important is are you kind? Can you be kind to people? That's what's important because that's what brings joy to your life. And we all know it. Charlie Mackeezy, who's an artist I know in England, he wrote a great book. It's a sort of cartoon, but it's a book and it's called The Boy, the Mole, the Fox and the Horse is the name of this book. Check it out because on page three, and I know this because I knew him and he gave me a copy and he said his name or whatever, the Mole and the boy who've made friends are sitting on a branch of a tree and the Mole says to the boy, what do you want to be when you grow up? And the boy says kind. I'm sorry to be sort of sentimental, but I get like, oh my goodness, I'm not. Yes, yes, that's what I want to be too. And that's what I want on my brothers and sisters, kind, be kind to one another. Then you can't have a war. War is a really, really bad idea, don't it? Yeah, for everyone. For everyone, yeah. You have been vocal in your criticism of the killing in Gaza. Yep. And then you're going to be a part of the treatment of the Palestinians over a number of years, probably the last 20 years. And exactly 20. Exactly 20. Yeah. Why did you decide? I mean, you must have known that saying something about that, you were going to forfeit some of your hard-earned rock star privileges. Yeah. I mean, right? Yeah. Yeah. I went there. Oh, I did a gig in a place called Never Shoulon, what a salem in Arabic, which was a piece village halfway between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, where they grew chickpeas. And I did a gig in the open air. And I did it after I'd canceled a gig in Tel Aviv in a football stadium called, I can't remember what it's called, the state, it's a higher con. It's called, higher con park. And it's built on the ruins of a destroyed Palestinian village. So and I'd never been anywhere near Israel and I'd believed all the propaganda of the socialist Israelis with their democratic ways rolling their sleeves up and creating all this, you know, a wonderful country. And then I went there and I saw the apartheid. I saw what was happening. And I went back, I went back two years later and I drove all over the West Bank with Unra and with a woman from Unra called Allegra Pacheo. And I never forget I was, we were driving north towards Janine one day. And I went, well, this day of nice roads, because it was a nice, too lame black top dog back road. And the leg looked at me like I was daft or something. She said, yeah, if you're Jewish. I went, what are you talking about? She said, you're not allowed to drive on this road unless you're Jewish. Don't be, I just said, don't be silly. Can you imagine going, you want to drive to Pennsylvania or somewhere, you know, Philadelphia and you go to get on the I-95 and they go, you're a Christian only, because if you're not, you can't go the road and you go, what? Don't be daft. That's it. It's a completely apart society. If you're an Arab, you're not allowed on the road. I didn't believe it, but I did after a bit and I saw it and it was just hell on earth. They've created hell on earth. And in that visit and those visits that I made, you know, I decided that I would be vocal and do anything that I could help my Palestinian brothers and sisters to achieve equal human rights with their Jewish brothers and sisters between the Jordan River and the sea. Not asking anyone to kill anyone, right? But you have to have equal, you can't have a part, you cannot allow a part of its searches to spring up in the world. That is not a way to encourage one another to be kind in my view. So you see this, you're stunned by it, moved by it, outraged by it. When do you decide to talk about it? Did you think about it immediately? Yeah. And what was the response you got? Well, the Israeli lobby in America particularly were not best pleased. So they would, and they have ever since done everything that they can to destroy my career. They're failed. I fight back, you know. What have they done? Well one thing that they'd, one thing they did, and it's almost the most criminal thing in my view that they did was I used to work for an organization called Stand Up for Heroes and it's helping wounded American servicemen, limbs missing, you know, whatever. And somebody asked me, Bob and Lee Woodruff, the name of the people who run a foundation called the Woodruff Foundation. I know them, yes. Okay. Well, and Bob called me up one day and who's this Bob Woodruff, never out of view, you know. And he said, there's this thing and we do a thing called Stand Up for Heroes where comics do and somebody plays and Springsteen comes and he sings a song and options are concerned. We raised money for these wounded men. Would you come and sing a song? And I thought it through and I thought, well, let me think about it. And he said, well, we're doing a thing at the National History Museum in a week's time. Would you come? It's just, you know, a glass of champagne and meet some of the men and see what you think. So I did. I went to this thing and I was wondering around with my glass of champagne and there were a number of men in uniform around it. One of them is in a wheelchair. He's got no legs and only one arm and he's in his dress blue so he's got all the kit on and he was sitting on his own. So I thought, well, I'm for penny. And I went over and started talking to him and I'm smiling now because his friend of mine now, this was in 2013, so that's 13 years ago now. And he looked up at me like that sort of to be polite and then he his eyes opened wide and I realized that he recognized me. And so he went and went like that bit and then he said, I play the guitar at all. So he was letting out guy and then I looked at him. He's got no legs and only one arm and I'm thinking that's a bit of a stretch playing the guitar. And he could see the look in my eye and bless him. His name's Dom. So he looked at me and he went, oh yeah. Well, I don't play the guitar anymore. And he went, now I play the drums and he does and he's bloody good drummer as well. And so that was the start. So I went back to Bob and Lee Woodruff and said, I'd feel a bit funny getting out there and we were my arms and legs singing a song. However worthy it is. Why if I go down to Walter Reed because that's where a lot of these guys were Bethesda at what school then I think the Naval Hospital. Why if I find there's a bloke down there called Arthur Bloom who's running a therapeutic rehabilitation music program. Why if I went down there and started a band and we played and they went down the daft and I went, I'm not being daft and being serious. Anyway, this said yes and we did it and we did it in 2013 in the Beacon Theatre in 2014 Madison Square Garden and blah blah blah. But then and this is to answer your question 2015, by just coming up. No, yeah 2015. And I was in the Hamptons in the summer and I suddenly thought hang on a minute, it's August. I haven't had the phone call because the show would be in November. So I called the producer, he's a lovely guy called Andrew Fox and I went, Andrew, I haven't had the phone call. So I went, get over here and he did and we sat outside with the glass of wine. I said, come on, cough. What's going on? And he told me it was the Israeli lobby who've decided that you can't do it anymore. What about the men? No, the men can't either because if the men do it and you're not there, people will ask questions. You're not allowed to help veterans if you criticize Israel. That's correct. Yeah. You're not allowed to help veterans or I was involved in other charities, which were distributing food from restaurants, posh restaurants in New York, school city harvest. Yes. They told city harvest the same thing. Not a single cent from any of us if you go on dealing with Roger Waters. In other words, accepting help from you. Yeah. You were just a volunteer just giving. Oh, I was a friend of the people running it as well. But now you can't. So all I'm saying is it's disgusting beyond any imagination and people for what? For being critical of an apartheid state, which is what it was. I am very critical of the state of Israel. I've got nothing against Jewish people, nothing. I don't care less what religion anybody is. Has anybody who knows may or tell you? So yeah. So is what it is. You got so intense at one point. I was reading that you couldn't, you were banned from certain hotels because the hotel. Yeah. Is that true? Yes. Yeah. That didn't start happening until 2023, which was the last big tour I did. And both in Europe and in South America, particularly, I couldn't find a hotel to stay anywhere in Buenos Aires or in Colombia or in Ecuador. In Ecuador? Yeah. Well, they've just been taken over by Naboa, who as we know is a gangster from Miami. So who knows what his issues are? Yeah. You couldn't stay in a hotel in Ecuador, Colombia or Argentina because you could have been outside Israel. Yes. Oh, Uruguay. Montef Fadeo. Yeah. You could make it up. Good to you. That's a long way from Israel. What is keto Ecuador or manavino Uruguay or B.A. have to do with Israel? There's an Israeli lobby that is very organized in all of those places. And they may well be in other cities in the world as well. Certainly, in many other cities, Frankfurt, they tried to cancel my gig in Frankfurt. They did cancel my gig in crack hour in Poland in 2023. And what grounds? On the grounds that they wanted to cancel me because I was critical of the genocide. Because I'm against genocide and they're not. They're in favor of it. That's why they're all quiet. They're asylum. They all keep silent. They close their mouths. You know, they won't speak because they know that they'll get the treatment that I get if they open their mouths. There is, there is a very powerful lobby. And and it wants Israel to go on being a genocide or apartheid state. And to expand and to take over Lebanon and Syria and Jordan and greater Israel. It's the whole, it's the plan. They're not, they don't make, it's not a secret. Netanyahu and Ben Givir are into, who's the ambassador there? The US ambassador is called Mike Huckabee. Mike Huckabee, excuse me, for laughing. But yeah, crazy Christian signers. And maybe at the bottom of it all is they're all waiting for the coming of the Messiah. They don't care. Well, Mike Huckabee obviously hopes it'll be Jesus because then he can go to heaven with Mike Pence and and the other Christians. I'm sorry to know. No, I know. I couldn't agree more. That's not Christianity just for the record. It's not even a close facsimile of Christianity. As I recall, you're a Christian. As I recall, Jesus threw the money lenders out of the temple or tried to. Yeah, that's probably why they crucified and braided a whip. There you go. And I'm not making a joke about that. That that bit of history really impresses me because usury is, you know what? I mean, one of the things that the US government and other government, particularly the Israeli government, have got against Iran is that landing money for profit is illegal in Iran. Did you really? I didn't know that. It's against law. Usury is against the law in the Islamic Republic of Iran in Persia. It's illegal. Why would that offend other governments? Yeah, it's the basis of the way everything works is that you get control over a government by lending them money. And once you've lent them the money or given them the money, I mean, don't look at me with your brow fire or like that. You've seen the Congress of the United States and the cash that they offer. Oh, yeah, I'm. Of course, I know what you're saying. Again, I agree with you completely. I didn't know that Usury was banned in Iran though. Yeah. Right. Forgotten. What is when you saw the United States going to war with Iran, what did you think United States and Israel? Well, it's despicable, obviously, to attack Iran. Why? What? They've done nothing. What have they done? Nothing. Certainly posing no threat to anyone in the United States of America or Israel as far as we can tell. No, they're just there in the way because they have a different view. For instance, Usury is illegal under their system. Whether it's anything to do with Islam or whether it's just to do with the, with their form of socialism, I've no idea about it goes against the grain in a big way. And why? But why have another one? You know, because it's part of Wesley Clark's prediction as well, you go, oh my goodness. Only Iran and Lebanon are the only two countries on the list that have not been totally destroyed, including Syria and Lebanon, Somalia and Sudan and blah, blah, blah, blah. You know, this was the plan of the near cons all along the new American century. I'm sorry to be, to be sound as if I'm banging on about because, you know, my mum came over here before the war as well. And she did say to me, she used to say to me because she was very left-wing her politics. She said, the people I met in America, darling were very nice people. Many, many of them very kind and very hospitable, you know, blah, blah, blah. And she would lower her voice with them very, very naive. And now we can love, but it's like to be suckered into the state you're in now. As you are the absolute devil as far as the rest of the world, obviously, because you wage war ferociously in order to line your own pockets and in ways that the rest of the world finds despicable. ferociously in order to line your own pockets and in ways that the rest of the world finds despicable look at what's happening in Venezuela now and and there's no no pretense made about it oh we're gonna go in and just steal all the oil and anything of any value under there and that's now the model so that might be the reason to have a war with Russia then we could steal whatever's under the ground because we haven't got it or the Chinese even worse they've got even more rare manuals if you want to make I don't know that the computers and things we're getting away from Matt Campbell and his brother Jeff but I don't mind no I'm just it's an interesting color it is interesting and it's you probably don't read a lot of what's written about you but you were described as a hater and a dangerous man and I have listened for the last hours you've invade against war in favor of kindness yeah said I don't recognize ethnic or religious distinctions I just love people these are not words of hate these are the opposite correct how exactly I mean I'm just taking by your own words thank you how is it that you have been slandered by the media as the opposite of what you say you were well it's like how is it that in England over the last year they've been describing pro-Palestinian marches that are anti-jansicite as hate marches not that my friends who are out in the streets protesting against the actual genocide that's going on now after Palestinian people and yet the British media call those hate marches it's bizarre there's no hatred involved in those marches it's pure love pure it's exactly what I'm proposing it's exactly what I support with all my heart and have done all my life it's like me like the thing little thing I gave you saying everything word I've ever written in all my rock and roll writing okay is is is about that is about encouraging empathy for others in myself and in others that that's what that's all kind of that's all I write about because it's what I care about it's what my mom and dad instilled in me my father who was killed by the Nazis and my mother who with every bone in her body believed in the inherent goodness of the human race and and and and believed in the possibility of what was it why we had to run for shelter when the promise of a brave new world unfold beneath a clear blue sky okay my mom believed in the brave new world unfurling and we're not talking all this hux see now right not that brave new world but an actual real world where people love one another and help one another and get back what it is it's like in the surprise my rote years ago go there's something the doctors know from ages gone or something good friends to help rebuild the barn I was thinking of it as I drove through the countryside coming up here through Maine and seeing all these houses dotted they're all the same they're all exact they're all cardboard you know copies of one another they're all clap board they're all white or brown or whatever but they and you can but you can imagine people living in them human being and you can imagine people look it's barns fallen down let's go open rebuild it good neighbors to help rebuild the barn that's what we need not war war is the absolute worst possible thing and yet they're the biggest industries yes in the developed western country and then was zealously defended I will say that what you've been doing media interviews for 50 years more um how would you describe the media's role in war well sadly um it's holding it up you more war it's basically what the western media now is sort more or less saying more what the certainly not going I think we should go and stand outside right here and stop at you know oh okay I don't know well let's all go to Washington DC and say if you drop another bomb on Iran you'll you'll never you won't be anywhere to do with any government that represents me because it's the worst possible thing that you could be doing or going and kidnapping um Nicholas Maduro and Celia Flores from Caracas where they live where he's the president of the country in the head of state just because you've got helicopters and more arms with guns or do anything their bloody world told you know it's awful obviously this is this is even worse than the Biden administration or Bush before that or it's gone you've gone downhill and a big what happened to you I mean it feels like it to me I mean I think it's going to be hard to emerge from this Iran thing intact I mean I think it's very destructive well it's so self-destructive as well entirely entirely anyway yeah it's yeah I'm still trying to figure out why we did it exactly the mechanics of it but yeah no it's it's worse even than I worried it would be for us and for the world so I completely agree so when you go do interviews or how do people respond to you how does the media respond to you well the media doesn't speak to me what do you mean well they don't I don't do any mainstream media the closest I come to mainstream media is pure as Morgan who shouts at me for half an hour and you who have I have to say a very nice host well we are Sam which is very nice but you don't do you don't do morning shows on network television no one asks you to come and talk or no I'm no I'm put on an on-grater out there in media land you think the New York Times would print an article if I wrote it I've sent up teenagers to big newspapers all over you know I don't anymore because I know that nothing will ever get printed in a single word I'm for a book and I'm proud of it I saw a vamp out of it because I'm preaching kindness yes thank you Charlie MacKeezy by the way I hope you see this and you get your name things it's such a beautiful little book the boy the model the folks and the horse what do you want to be when you grow up kind last last question thank you go on that where does this go do you think so we're on the precipice of a deepening Iran war a total explosion in Russia are you do you have any hope at all that this can be resolved peacefully these two conflicts some more digital an Arabic word that means perseverance steadfast perseverance in resistance particularly to the occupation of your homeland so it's very well used and well worn Arabic word which and it moved me when I first first heard it what it is and I've written a song called Samo Adonae and I won't try and remember all the lyrics because I can't but I know how it finishes up it finishes up when we with me talking about all the ordinary people all over the world standing shoulder to shoulder from the river to the sea from every river to every sea all over everywhere okay and raising their voices together as one ordinary people okay and it go I what I'm not going to try and remember the exact form of the words but it ends up with this idea when they do that with Samoord with steadfast perseverance altogether they can turn this ship around but it will take them to do it they will have to do it the people standing shoulder to shoulder arm in arm it will take that kind of force to turn this ship around from its path to the ultimate destruction of the human race imminent destruction of the human this could end in a nuclear configuration any minute with the way easily very easily so we the people and people who do speak to me right like us be speak to me who's us be us be is the dock workers union and enterley they revere me so at least you got the dock workers you do and that makes me so happy you know the thought that ordinary people may hear my voice and may go you know what he makes a lot of sense that's how I feel to oh do we really all have yes you do you all got to come together and raise your voice whenever you get the chance to do it because we are many and they are few the people the enemy is a very few very very rich oligarchs probably a thousand or two thousand of them in the whole world and they run the whole thing they keep the wars going and they do it because they're greedy they are no boa inequidor or this new woman has just been who's just stolen the erection in Peru who drew rami or whatever a bloody name is and there's somebody else just come in and cast in Chile unfortunately there's a big move to the right politically in South America which I've followed quite a lot so you have to stand out people and you have to organize you know it's back to listening to what our friend Malcolm X had to say back in the 60s we have to organize we've been out organized we're not outnumbered or out thought or out felt or but we are we have been out organized and so is there any hope yeah there is you know are an opera about the French Revolution called sire rah which is the future tense of saver saver means that's it yes sire rah means that will be so it's it's a sort of fool I'm sorry you run an opera about the French Revolution yes I did something I've never done oh okay but hang on and so I just want to say this the guy who wrote the libretto mate mainly who was a Frenchman called Etienne Roder-Shill he said he said something to me one day we were walking down 54th street it was early in the morning he's now co-holec so he had to stop for a couple of large scotches and I had a couple of his breasts so anyway and he was doing that French thing that they do with his she's tarnled yeah you know and looking loved and and I asked him I said something to him I said what gives you hope Etienne you know and he went and he thought about it and then he let another bench and Etienne's now another whisk and then he went and he started to speak and he wrote I was here I beg you about I was here ah we are felt something yeah perhaps I was not alone I wrote it on a piece of paper and it's been in my back pocket ever since I knew may have to think about it for a bit I was here I felt something and perhaps I was not alone it gives me hope too you could use it to describe our conversation I was here I felt something and perhaps it was not alone I don't think we're alone good Roger Waters thank you for that no it's all thank you