Thanks for joining us, Mr. Prime Minister. Thank you very much. So you had the World Cup a few years ago here. It was very widely covered around the world. And part of the coverage, maybe the majority of the coverage was not about soccer football. It was about your country and how it was, you know, you had to come into line with the social mories of the West. It said it was a lot of lecturing about to your country about the way that you live. Did you feel that? Well, it's unfortunate, you know, there are the whole purpose of hosting the World Cup is to bring the world together in that country, to put the country in the spotlight about the football, about the tournament and about people coming together. Unfortunately, countries and some NGOs try to use this as an opportunity to attack on values of the society itself, on values of the country, of the community by using it as an opportunity to change these values and to impose their own values on our country and our people. That's something wasn't, was expected from our side that we will be attacked. We will be hearing a lot of lectures about values and things that are not belongs to us. And basically our decision from the beginning that we don't need to change the country for one month's tournament and I cannot change the value of a whole society and impose on them values that I don't believe in. And it's against every principle in our society, against the principles of Islam, against the the principles of Christianity as well. And that's basically, we said very clear, we respect everybody who's coming here as long as they are respecting the laws in that country. As you are expecting from the Qataris when they visit any of your countries in Europe to respect your laws. And basically that's what we want from the people. Anything happened in their personal life, it's their personal life. But nothing should happen in public against the laws of the state of Qatar and we will never change. The problem that those countries and NGOs put a lot of efforts in demonizing this World Cup in order to impose their values, yet there were many things happening around the world and they are just telling blind eye if they put some efforts and energy on those real issues that affecting the human lives around the world would be much better than the waste investment that was and campaigns against the country to change its values to impose new values which are not even related to us. So what do you think that is? This used to be called cultural imperialism, taking your values and using force to impose them on another society. But this is probably the richest country per capita in the world. It's free Qataris can come and go, they don't have to live here, they choose to live here. And your values are thousands of years old. Why would it be important for an NGO? I thought there was supposed to be feeding people, but instead they're yelling at you for not having enough transgender Qataris. What is the point of that? What do you think that actually is? What are they trying to do? Well I think it's it's mainly driven by an agenda that these are the things that we would like to see in countries that they are not accepting it. You know, and societies that they are not accepting it. We need to make it normal for them. We need to normalize it. Second, a lot didn't accept the fact that Qatar is a small Arab country can host a world-class tournament. Basically they were like, you know, how a lot of attacks that while Qatar won the world cap like they don't have even the culture of the world cap. I don't know what does it mean. If I am a country like a marginal country, I don't have the right to host a world tournament. And this is more about honestly like I see it like more racism and superiority. And that's that's basically I think the main driver for us. So what officially you're told me a funny story I want to check to see if it's true. This person told me that some bureau or commission in the United Nations was rating the human rights here in Qatar and said, in order to score higher, you have to build nursing homes for your old people to live. And this person tried to explain, you know, we don't have nursing homes because old people parents live with their children. But you built them anyway in order to get a higher score on this and they remain empty. Is that true? Well, it is a true actually. They are like, you know, sometimes when you have international organizations trying to impose certain conditions in order to give you like the better status that will make you look good. It requires from you some steps that you will do that. It's not even required a need it here in this kind of society. Look, the small country. The people here family matters for us. Parents matters for us. We are in debt to our parents until the last day in their life or in our lives. Whatever comes first. If someone will leave his parents alone without taking care of it, he will be public lesion by the society. It's not really an acceptable custom or habit in this country to have your elder to have your parents staying in a senior home. He's the one, the parents are the ones who took care of us when we were children until we grew up to become independent. And we should, we have the duty to take care of them. And that's really the genuine nature of the country society. So that's why you end up with something that you don't need. It's not a, it's not according to your value. It's not according to your religion. But we build this anyway to get, you know, get the fancy branding. It does if you take three steps back. It's like they're mad at you because you don't have enough transgender. They're mad at you because you don't put your parents in some institution. Maybe they're trying to break up your families. Well, it can be, it can be a reason. Honestly, I don't know what is, what is really the purpose behind this. But we see that, you know, a lot of things that are happening are attacks on a humanity in general. It's when you lose the family value, when you lose the connection between the family themselves, you lose the connection between the people as well on a broader level, on the people on the same neighborhood, on the people in the same region, in the same countries. And that's basically will just make us, you know, as individuals who are, quote unquote, independent from anyone. That's what we will feel yet it will just make our society vulnerable and easy to be penetrated. And that's, that's I think the main issue that we are facing and the main threat that we are facing. You have seen Takar you spent a few days in Qatar and you have seen Kim to my home and you have seen that my home is surrounded by my family hopes. And it's not, I'm not really living in an isolation from them. I'm the family. Definitely not. Then you clear family, the bigger family and it's like it's all one community, one one family. And basically you can apply this and magnify it to the entire country. This is not the case for me. I mean, this is the case for everyone here. People even when they move temporarily to another neighborhood or to another place 10 minutes away from their family, they feel homesick. So it's, it's, we believe that this supposed to be the case for all the countries where families families bonds matters, families bonds really create from your society as strong society. That's not easy to penetrate it. And that's what creates the national unity as well. And in face of Sarah threats and everything. So that's kind of the key is that when you are cut off, when you're alone, you are powerless and you can be controlled. Yeah. You can be penetrated it. You can't see a penetrate. Yes. Very cool. Your country has been in the American media sporadically recently. And it's under attack for reasons. I don't, I don't fully understand one reasons. I want to come here. We're to understand why people are mad at you. And I think you've got the biggest overseas US air base in right near here. So you're clearly US ally. But I keep reading reference to Qatar as anti-American or post-lamist or a threat to the United States somehow. Where do those attacks come from? Do you think? Look, we're, as a country, we always want to do the right things. And basically, the right things, not for only for our people, but for our people, for our region and for our friends. And when you are trying to do the right things, sometimes you change your mind, you know, when you hear this kind of criticism. But it wasn't really an or culture because we believe that it serves the real cause behind all these efforts is to bring peace, peace for the people, peace for the region and peace for our friends. And basically, the pieces like is the main foundation for us, for our people to prosper. And peace has a lot of enemies, a lot of enemies who want to undermine it for political reason, who wants to undermine it for economic reason, who wants to demonize your effort in order to make sure that every step you will take will be suspicious in order to control also the parties that you are helping in that. And basically, they don't know by doing such a thing, they are not harming us, but they are harming the region. And they are harming our friends, including the United States. And having an ally like an partner and friend like other with the airbase as one example and working together very closely on a lot of issues, a lot of files helping bringing Americans home from different countries with a thousand day evacuation in Afghanistan, whether it's in American hostages all around the world, mediating in different conflicts, they basically keep criticizing Qatar and attacking Qatar. They think that this is just hard on Qatar and Qatar reputation. It's not, it's actually because we always like, we go back to the results. We focus on the outcome and we think about that that should be our objective and we should focus there and we shouldn't really disturb ourselves with any noise. But they don't know that this is harming the US and the US interests at the end of the day. So my sense is that part of the criticism and the confusion for Americans well, I think two causes. One, you have a Hamas office here and Hamas has been designated, I think, repeated by the US government, turned on by Congress as a terror organization and people say, well, how could you have a Hamas office here? What is that? We have to go back to the root office of this office. Why why why it's here in the first place? And Hamas office was opened here in the first place. It was opened with full transparency and full consultation and actually even request from the US. And the US asked you to put a Hamas office here? They are. Actually they have asked us to open the channels with them and to have an established communication channel with the same case what was applied to Polybond as well. And look at the end of the day, if you have a presence of someone in your country and you are engaging and talking, it doesn't mean that you are endorsing his ideas. It doesn't mean that you are supporting him. We are our purpose of this office was to facilitate peace to stabilize the region and to make sure that always it's serving the purpose and you can go through even everything that all the events that happened in the recent 10 years since the office was officially opened here in New York. How many peace deals been pro-broken from that office through that channel? Many of them. 2014 was the discussion and negotiations was initiated here and ended in Egypt. In 2018, 2020 and 2021 with all those discussions and many of the discussions that we avoided at preventable there are many plenty of them. You will lose count. Then after 7th of October, the first hostage deal that released the hostages, the only in children was 109 and the foreigners, was 109 hostages. November 23 happened through that office. Second hostage deal which we are going through right now was produced out of this office. The office is a communication channel and it doesn't make me feeling shy that I speak with someone whom I have a disagreement with as an influence spoke with North Korea. He didn't shy out. He met with him. He engaged with him. He wants to put an end for the conflict. He wants to make a deal with him. He's a lead maker and this country basically is brokering deals. At the initially at the request of the US government. Yes. And it continued like everything that we did look at. What I'm confident that throughout the years that I've been working under the leadership of the Emir, we are sure that every step we are taken, we are very transparent, coordinating with the US and making sure that we are doing the right thing. So I have nothing wrong that I did that I am shy away from. I know that we have a lot of attacks and unfortunately we have attacks from the US legislation like from the Congress many times although we did it at the request of the government yet we see the Emir always telling me that we are able to save a single life. It's worth everything and I'll tell you something. We've been under a significant attack in the last 15 months during this war and Gaza. Unbelievable. No one would handle such an attack and we work tirelessly on achieving this deal. And the moment we went out to announce that a deal being achieved and we see this celebration and the streets with the Redson Gaza or an Israel, that moment makes us forget everything. You've been attacked with the US Congress. The core question for me is if Qatari is an enemy of the United States, why is our air base here? Have there been calls to remove the air base? Well there are like some voices who are unfortunately very much misinformed that this is very critical for the US, what they were security to be here in this region. And you know actually the base itself when it's moved the first place was moved after September 11th. Yes we do. And it was a very risky decision for any country to take it and we took it. We took it because of the friendship that we have with the US because of the partnership that we are committing ourselves together with the US. And it turned out to be like the most important US base outside the United States and basically it served the security of the United States but also it served the stability of the region. If you like guys you're probably a little tired of companies that claim to care about your privacy and then whip around without your knowledge and sell your data to the highest bidder. They do it all the time. They make a fortune off your private information. Everything about you, everything you do online can be sold and it is. But there's one way to stop it. It's called ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is an app that sends 100% of your online traffic through secure encrypted servers. Privacy is the point of the product. If you don't have it everything you do online can be tracked and recorded by data brokers and then sold to pretty much anyone including foreign governments. That seems like a total violation of your rights but unfortunately it's legal. ExpressVPN prevents it. It prevents data hawks from compiling your personal information and it blocks them from invasively profiting off what you do online. So if you're new to using a VPN, rest easy, it's super easy. You just plug it in and it works. With ExpressVPN there are identity defenders, scours the sites of data brokers and requests that your information be removed. Right now you can get an extra four months of ExpressVPN for free. To scan the QR code on the screen or go to expressvpn.com slash Tucker. So the president's on-voy in this region and to Ukraine and global at this point is Steve Woodcoff his friend and Whitcoff who I think is done a good for the record I think it's done a good job. But was attacked in some US media for his connect. He had done business in your country and he was attacked as a tool of your government. Well you know sometimes when you read the reports about Qatar or Qatar like you feel that this is a superpower that's controls you know everywhere and everyone is a tool in the hand of Qatar. Look this is all a joke. Steve is a respected businessman. He has done business with his and do anything wrong with him. We have done business. I've known him for a long time. I attended his son, I think. I have a personal relationship and all this happened before even the election you know before the election taking place this was I think last February just months before the election. This friendship and relationship it means that there's a trust between two people and this trust will of course matter for you know the working relationship that we have and partnership that US and Qatar has and benefited the deal at the end of the day. The man traveled all the way. He stayed here. He spent few days in Doha. He participated with us in the negotiation. He pushed when it was required. He did a great job. We as partners we achieved the deal at the end of the day. The deal wouldn't be achieved without you know with Qatar's single hand at you or with the United States single hand at me. He needs all of us all of us are one team and work together now. People are attacking him for his relation with Qatar and being a tool and Qatar. If you go back and trace back those people who are not interested in having a deal not interested in having they put their political interests ahead of the interests of even the hostages themselves. How many family in Israel celebrated the return of their loved ones? I'm not going to talk about this. There's hundreds of thousands of people they've been fed after very long but just you know if you look at this and look at the ones who attacked someone like Steve Whitco who achieved and succeeded at reaching this deal because of his relation with Qatar is to make sure that the next time he calculated his steps but Steve is great man, straight shooter doesn't matter for him as it doesn't matter for us. We are friends yes this is something I fear a pod of that I have many friends in the United States and those friends might become you know in certain positions with their own this administration or in the future administration. Doesn't mean that you know those friends will be like a tool in my in our hand and on other hand and basically the people who are using this they just you know the problem that they cannot take it to that a small country can get the results they they always have to think about an external factor that bringing them these results and when they look at it as small country and with this amount of resources the first thing that will come to them I know they are a piping everyone I'm a country like any other country I'm operating like any other country I protect my people's interest I protect my region interest I protect my friends and that's what we'll always continue the same way. So Trump gets selected in November and inaugurated in January and immediately there's a ceasefire almost immediately with Steve Whitco reading the negotiations with your help but that's coming after years of bloodshed utterly destabilizing this part of the world the world itself where was the Biden administration during all of that. Look at Takaro what's really making me feel sad that the agreement that we have achieved in the fifth of January this year is almost 95% the one the framework that's being agreed in December and the agreement that's been agreed in March 24 and it took all these months in order to you know to put it in motion with the previous administration we were working very closely the director of CIA is someone that I worked with I respect a lot and we did you know a lot of work together the partnership was honestly you know an exemplary but at the end of the day I think it's the calculations of one party over the other that why would I do it now let me wait and then President Trump of course they know there is no like there is no deal happening before the inauguration as he announced to might have a consequences and I believe that was that played a bit on this but the fact is they couldn't get a deal done he did I think this is look also the way that Steve has managed to represent President Trump was also a very effectively one of the criticisms of your country is that you're too close to Iran and I should say you're very physically close to Iran yeah we are physically close to the house close it's around 120 miles away right across the water yeah it's just you know you can have a boat ride in 90 minutes you are there so what is how would you describe your relationship with Iran and why do you think you're being closer to it look it's you know Iran has has a lot of problems those we understand that we acknowledge that they have problems with the region with countries in the region yes at the end of the day Iran is you know our next door neighbor and we have to have to maintain a good relation with all our neighbors we have a lot of things in common when it comes to the gas field the largest gas field in the world it's partnership between us and the Iran it's have a bit too third of it in the paterit territory and one third is in the RNA territory this is in the golf this is under sea yeah this is the one and in the golf seat you have I have to coordinate on environmental issues like for example the water contaminations I have to coordinate and security issues like smuggling I have to have this relationship this working relationship with Iran but also when you think about it from a bigger perspective it's for the interest of the region to have a better relation for everyone in the region with Iran and you have seen that there is huge progress in the relationship with Iran and the GCC between Iran and the GCC in the last few years and basically even the disagreement that we had on certain policies for example we worked against each other in Syria for 14 years against Iran right which was packing as well yeah and the same thing in Lebanon and those differences are put aside when it comes to the bilateral we we made the bilateral as a relationship of necessity that we need to have this engagement together all the time those disagreements we talk about them we try to understand each other concern and we try to find the common ground and basically that's what we expect from other countries to do when they have when they are you know around neighbors that some others has disagreements with you need to engage now this is a criticized in the US that we are close to Iran in terms of what in terms of policies that has controversies with the US it's not true our policies has been very clear our policies based on principles it our policy has zero enemies we have to have friends with everyone we would like to see peace in our region we would like to see peace around the world if there are we see innocent people under attack whatever their backgrounds we will always help them and we'll support them these are the things that our policy stands standing for so if they We will always help them and we'll support them. These are the things that our power policies stands for standing for so if they see me that you know This is like putting me on a club on the other They are watching me from thousands while away. They don't know what's happening in this region They have no knowledge about this relationship. It's An important relationship not for me for the entire GCC and for the entire GCC stability Look Tucker. I think that there is a misunderstanding or Let's say maybe it's more about a legacy that The US needs to take care of the whole world of problem. This shouldn't be the case Each region needs to address their own problems needs to make sure that this region is stable the US is The friend and the ally of an partner of all the GCC countries So the US expects from us to come to them With vision that this is the way we would like to see the region and that's the way we are going to work on the region And we would like to have also your support in that direction That's I believe how the relationship should work between us and the US not I'm waiting for the US What's the problem between them and Iran? Then I based my dealing with Iran based on what the US one The US is waiting to listen to me what I need from Iran because I am the friend of the US and Iran is my next door neighbor and Basically, I think this misunderstanding or let's say the legacy issue that's what's driving this whole narrative loting here and I think that You know one day Everything will be resolved diplomatically if I take a stand against my labor Because of an external issue Very strong a stand what I am going to do with Those two adversaries come together So I think it's the policy of your government that you oppose Iran getting nuclear weapons certainly your neighbors Yeah, I've grown the record against it How close do you think Iran is to getting a nuclear weapon? Well, look actually A nuclear weapon is bad for the region for any country whether it's Iran or any other country But also like when it comes to you know developing a nuclear program There are concerns of course when whenever any nuclear program is developed around your region and those concerns can be not only A military concerns, but also a security and like safety concerns That as I mentioned to you when if if the water is contaminated the nuclear facilities Of Iran or on the other side of the coast. It's closer to Doha than Pahlau itself So there is and the threats it's affecting me my country affecting other countries in the GTC more even There's a nuclear side directly across from you. Yeah, and that's basically You know that's why it's putting the entire region and a lot of risk that there is no clear standards For managing those nuclear facilities and those clear standards ensuring that this is a nuclear Power plant that will be used for peace values Now who's who's right or who's wrong? This is not for me to judge yet What we would like to see we would like to see a nuclear program that have Complying with the international standard. We are speaking with the Iranians all the time that We need to work together. We need to work with the IAA in order to ensure that those standards are followed There are a lot of News and headlines. We see that Iran is close to nuclear weapon. This is nothing We have ever heard we have ever seen. I mean our experience even our engagement with With the leaders there even with the Supreme Leader He said very clearly that he has issued a federal A declaration that Iran will never go for a nuclear bomb and basically This has also its moral status within the country So I hope that we can reach to a solution at the privateic solution where You know there is prosperity for the region sanctions are lifted nuclear program is peaceful and assurances for the entire region and This is would be I think A booster for the region development and prosperity So there's a great deal of pressure in Washington on the White House and on the Congress to participate in or sign off on An attack an aerial bombardment of the Iran nuclear sites however many they actually are One of which as you said is directly across from you. So you think about the slot What would be the consequences if that happens and that that's not theoretical as you know that that could happen? Yeah soon What would happen next? Well, I think it will just Will be a start of for all that will spread all over the region and Basically do we expect from any country To get attacked and to stay silent There will be a reaction those reactions and retaliations Where it's going to be are they going to reach 1000 miles away They are going to be in the region and basically every country in the region are concerned from Such as that because it will affect our security number one but also for for country like the US It will affect their security as well. They have big stake in that region whether it's in military basis whether it's an energy facilities in that region economic interest Forget about it with educational facilities so all those you know Interest will be affected if Something got forbid in that region Look we There is no way that Qatar With you know support any kind of military step that region And we will not give up until we see a diplomatic solution between the US and Iran. This needs to reach to an agreement I just going back a second You've said that there's the Iranian nuclear facility directly across the water from you If that were blown up And nuclear material wound up in the water since it's right on the water. What would happen to the water? This will be Basically entirely contaminated We have run this exercise of risk in the country a few years ago before we bought Before we built our reservoirs We had the water that we use for our people is from this elimination And we don't have rivers We don't have water reserves And basically the country would run out of water in three days So how country? The whole country Now after there is a resource we increase that capacity and we are Keep increasing it But this is not only applied for Qatar This is applied for Qatar. This is applied for Kuwait. This is applied for UAE It's all of us That part So if that nuclear site gets blown up and nuclear material winds up on the water none of those countries have water No water Fish Nothing like Has no life. Oh, so that would be a history changing environmental catastrophe. It is an environmental catastrophe That's why I'm you know, that's why I'm taking you. That's the position Of Qatar in the map and the region with Iran And lots of people they they don't even understand it. I remember one once I went to You know, there's a US Congress and there was meeting with one US senator And we were talking discussing about Iran and He said basically you don't have You don't have to deal with them and I drove for him and up on his desk for the first time he realized that This is these two countries are that close to each other So there are a lot who doesn't see this region as a close You know to Iran and like it's too intertwined So they don't have maps in the Senate. No, they do have maps, but probably they don't know what's up I'm very smart Do you think I mean to accent you can say I should say you're the prime minister, but you also the foreign minister so you This is what you do all day every day But to the extent you can say do you think that the Iranian government is willing to deescalate through negotiation Open up its nuclear sites to international inspection of some kind Reassure the world. They're not two weeks away from getting a bomb as we read practically every day on the internet Whether it's true or not. I mean, do you think that's achievable? Well, I think it is achievable and actually all the engagement that we had with Iranian officials as as I mentioned to you is We were just there a few days ago actually and engaging with the president engaging with the Explain leader the foreign minister over there in order to find that the dramatic solution and basically they are willing to engage they are willing to get to a level that create concourse for everybody and Most importantly, they are focused on lending their relationship with the region and that's that's something in itself It can create a lot of progress in every front with your own So I believe there is an opportunity now We you know, we come back to the question that you can and they and they which come first I believe We should forget about these questions and you know get the parties together start to understand each other concerns and basically if everything is complying with the international standards I don't see any reason why we don't have a deal Sleep is essential all mammals do it, but only people have trouble doing it And now you want to get into bed feel great and pass out But how do you do that without drugs? Well cozy earth is one way cozy earth makes an amazing bamboo sheet set that sounds weird But is awesome next level soft their temperature regulating Now that you stay cool uncomfortable all night long and it really helps your sleep cozy earth makes them They also make bath sheets the perfect addition to your shower routine huge super absorbent stunningly soft You'll never want to go back once you go the full enormous soft bath towel route Coz your earth is all about turning your house into a sanctuary. You can unwind recharge sleep They make a risk for you the hundred nights sleep trial in a ten-year warranty Really yep a hundred nights ten years go to cozy earth.com slash tucker Use the code tucker of up to 40% off that would include sheets towels pajamas and more cozy earth.com slash tucker and you get a post purchase survey it probably sent it to you tell me you heard about it here That's good for everybody. We hope you enjoy it There's talk the United States have increasing sanctions on Iran I didn't know that was possible but Iran has been under some form of sanctions for almost 50 years 46 years I think Have they achieved their intended goal and bigger picture have you ever seen sanctions Against anybody achieve their intended goal Look this this issue is very Controversial first as a principle for for my country for state of Qatar We see unilateral sanctions all unaffected and its punishment of punishing the people Not punishing a country or origin. That's number still of the revolutionary government from 1979 in power right? Yeah I mean if this is if it has if it would lead to a result We wouldn't be in that situation until now Now Castro died in Havana. Yeah after 50 years of your sanctions. So so just you know going back sanctions What does create pressures the people? Starves them to create black markets. It creates a whole illegal system It if the sanctions are coming out of the US It's actually prevents all the US interest or companies To have business and lose the opportunities for other countries So I don't see a world where the sanctions work honestly For us as I told you it's a core principle in our foreign policy. We refuse we don't We don't support sanctions at all And sanction countries I'm talking about and sanctioning countries is just Making the situation in much worse. Well, can I say so three of the biggest are all pretty seeing countries in the world? Venezuela Russia Iran has been under I mean the most extensive sanctions in history. Yes They're still selling oil though. Oh, yeah, like a lot of oil. Yeah, much good. Yeah, I think I think it's mainly it's sold in different means different currencies and Look tucker I I recall when the Russian sanction came out at the beginning Beginning of the war on the Russia and Ukraine. I had their interview in one of the US media chance and I said very clearly that sanctions will only create a parallel market place for other currencies So The dollar dominated International currency You will start to see people moving countries moving away from that. Yes by the time So it won't benefit It won't benefit To want to get you what you want. It's the contrary that's basically what's been you know At the end like any country like Venezuela for example or Iran they need to survive they need to feed their people they need to Get you know at least the basic requirements That they want They will find ways to sell sell their oils They will find ways to use other currencies. They will find markets who will accept them and You know selling them and buying from them And that's basically you you created like a parallel markets And that's that's what I've been saying that so you cut out US countries you weaken the US dollar You make the country more repressive Inevitably But you don't dislodge the leadership whether it's Putin Chavez Maduro the I told us in Iran Fidel Castro And you don't prevent them from selling their oil and international markets. So why exactly would you? Honestly look from at least you know my my humble experience looking at all those sanctions countries In the last let's say you know I always like to talk about my channel Diplomacy which is 10 years in the last 10 years. I've seen a lot of sanctions floating around on a lot of countries None of these sanctions has achieved the results. That's Attended well, I mean I think that's true. It's done an ideological point. I think that's like factually true, right? It is factory through you so why does I have What are we just doing it just you know If you go and name a single country that Has a regime change Yes Or an entire like behavior change to the good Because of sanction you will not find any Okay, so Again, I don't think what you're saying should be controversial because it's provable. Yeah, go to Wikipedia. Yeah So why I mean just I think this morning I was reading we're gonna sanction this person more What there's got to be some reason that the US Congress and various administrations have continued to want to do this even though there's Absolute proof that it doesn't work What would be the reason to do it when look at as I told you, you know when when You know some I don't know honestly, I mean you can ask this question more for us You know Legislative on policymakers, but I think from my perspective. This is when you have Like if you don't talk to the other party If you don't want to use military, which is something that we never advise for The only tool will be remit will remain in your hand is Sanction to show power and to show leverage which some people they think that this is leverage and power which is not What doesn't seem to be no powers measurable right actually look as you know Just you know if you go through every like every sanction countries It's never achieved objective. That's what I want to say. Yeah. I think that's true How does the Ukraine war and do you think? Well, look, you know There is Lesson that history taught us that there is no more started With one of the parties wants to war always two parties. They don't want the war and they end up in our and There's no war ended without an negotiation The negotiation table to find the peace solution How despite how long it took So this war will end at the end of the day around the negotiations now if you look at the recent efforts that President Trump is doing and Together with the kingdom of Saudi. I believe this is the right direction the right path forward because You know, we were like when the war started as a state of Qatar. We always like you know Express Our willingness to help to support if there is Any chance for mediation We looked at it. It's something far away. It's in Europe yet We have some experience in mediation, which is a triker curve that we have looked throughout the year And we saw that this conflict is too complicated. We tried To break it down to Smaller mediation efforts and we were working on the children file for example Russia and Ukraine children bringing them back to your their families We were working on the energy file, but unfortunately it didn't Didn't work out in order to build a foundation for You know Someone like President Trump to come and to Broker a peace deal. I believe it is the moment I believe that the steps that's been taken are the right steps And basically the way it ends it should be the way that It addresses both countries concerns I think that The Ukrainians has a legitimate concerns that they need to address and the Russians has a legitimate concerns that the Ukrainians used to address And I believe this will never reach a solution unless there is some Direct talks between them and also Some demonstration of support from the partners of Both Ukraine and Russia that they need to put an end for this and they need to understand each other concern And they need to take them consideration And the partners role is to give them the assurances and the comfort that Those considerations will be taken Seriously I hate to say it, but I think Russia's partners are probably willing to Express support for asylum and I don't know if Ukraine's are and that would be Europe Great Britain Um in Western Europe and I mean you just saw the prime minister Of Britain say the other day. We're gonna send British troops to Ukraine Well, it's You know at the end of the day as I told you it's It's an issue between Russia and Ukraine and they need to They need to address it themselves. They need to get the assurances that You know both countries need I think that within even within the EU not everyone is sharing the same opinion I believe but at the end of the day they will come They will come down to a conclusion that this issue needs to be a certain peacefully And this issue needs to take in consideration everyone to say you participated in this successful ceasefire Between Israel and in Gaza and who knows if that Wes I mean I don't know this is gonna air so I don't even want to speculate But um, but clearly it's been awful for everybody Certainly certainly been awful for Gaza. It's been awful for its neighbors. I think it's been really bad for Israel I mean it's just kind of hard to see an upside So how would you if you were in charge fix this You know 80 year old conflict For good It's gone but gone back to the basics You know if you look at The history since Madrid declaration in the 90s Where Israel needed to be integrated in the region? Economic normalization should happen between the countries in the region and A political horizon for the Palestinians to establish their own state On the borders of 1967 which is according to the security council resolutions Since that time until today We didn't see anything but the situation is going backward More settlements more violence more You know policies which are distracted for the Palestinians unfortunately and Basically We are expecting from the Palestinians You know just to obey To stay quiet and Not you know there will not never be anything instigated This is normal You know when you have You know a situation that Lasting that long To have this kind of turbulence all the time And I'm not talking here about 7th Hookedover I'm talking about the entire period How many wars we had? We had a lot of them A lot of people we hear them saying that we need to try Something new we need to try things that We are not even you know thinking about Yes, we agree The two states solution We've been talking about we never tried this Have we ever tried it and didn't work? Does this country that Established next to Israel will be a threat for Israel? It's a threat as long as it's not a country And we said that we are willing to provide security guarantees for Israel We all of us we will be integrated together as one region And demilitarize Palestinian state even So it's not even like you know fully independent Not even a real country Yeah, it's demilitarized So it's it's basically like everything you are offering And in exchange We all we were always like you know Either because of their political situation in Israel like we were always Faced by rejections There were just few leaders in Israel who had The courage to come out and to say that this is This the only solution This is the only way forward But in the last few years we didn't see any of them Do you think Donald Trump can force the Palestinian state? I think you know, I look the President Trump he's a great deal maker He's a great businessman He's very successful. He made Borker many deals Around the world during the first administration And I believe that we will have peace one day This is the best opportunity for us with someone like President Trump Are you is guitar at net zero? I know there was some enthusiasm on making sure you got to net zero Well, if you see you know the largest exporter of LNG and that's zero. I think there's something happening wrong Does that mean you're dead if you're dead? We are we are like we are We are committed first of all that you know We aren't you supposed to pretend you're getting to net zero Look, I'm not I'm not you know going to Pretend anything that I'm not going to do but The gas has proven that it is the most important reliable base load source of energy for the next century So and the gas is much cleaner than a lot of other energy resources and benefiting the environment benefiting a lot of countries switching from coal to gas And that's what we are producing. That's what we are focusing on Now countries who were just you know rushing to get to net zero and trying to impose some You know green policies that are not realistic. They are attracting from those policies now Yeah, you see them like you know Some of them they go they are going back to coal Well, they're also in the verge of revolution in some cases because they destroyed the lives of their people. Yeah, so it's it's basically also it's not fair when you Try to impose you know these kind of regulations in countries that they have their resources not not being developed not being exploited and They have no electricity even Like Africa for example and you want to make sure that no everything there is green is everything that's to reach net zero And you're not allowed to Come and to exploit your energy But I don't have electricity So the whole concept I think it's Right now there is a lot of debate there is a lot of you know argument about it and I'm not sure if the world will be able to achieve it look we understand the danger of the climate We understand the danger of the climate change But it doesn't mean that we should ourselves in the food We need to think about it wisely. We need to think about gradually and look talk around stay here maybe I told you In a separate meeting that You know the pyramid of the needs of the people first security Then food and water then health Energy Education Education strong economy and then climate change and environment So we are living in a region that Barely handling the three like the three layers of foundation and People like coming and you know trying to impose on us the tip of that We need to make sure that our neighbors are And people are coming and trying to impose on us the tip of that. We need to make sure that our neighbors are surrounding our secure. We need to ensure that they are fed. We need to ensure that they have enough health care. We need to ensure that they have a good education. We need to make sure that they have energy, access energy in the first place. Time for their true life out story. I got a call for a friend of mine yesterday, honestly true story. Who said his girlfriend had just broken up with him over Alp. He wouldn't stop and I thought to myself that's kind of sad. He said no, it's not sad. Imagine if I married her. Now I know I was saved. Then the next day this same friend is driving at twice the speed limit for a major American city. Pulled over by a cop and a speed trap. Cop takes his license registration, goes back to patrol car, runs him, comes back, looks in the window, and sees a tin of Alp on the dashboard. Pause his. Stunned, says to my friend. He says to use Alp. Yeah I do. Says my friend. So to I says the cop we all do. He looks at my friend, thought Flang goes drive safely, so her hands back his license registration. No ticket. So in two days he's saved from a tragic marriage to a girl who doesn't like Alp and a speeding ticket. All true. It's more than an example. In an age 250 million people are guessing they're about 350 million Alp stories. Email us yours. We want to know and read it on the air. Tell Alp Pouts.com. Tell Alp Pouts.com. Give us your app story. It does seem like things have changed just in the past six months. Partly because of the electricity needs of AI, of EVs, all stuff baked in the cake. The clear limits of renewables, like they can't actually run a modern society. That's all obvious now. And so a lot of investment funds and politicians have sort of pulled back from the net zero theology. But what's amazing to me is that it seems like some of them really believed it. I mean in the case of Qatar, you're opening up a new gas field. And I think some like even energy people laughed at you and said that there's kind of no future for gas. Yeah. Well look at what did they say that? Well this actually happened to us twice. Once when we started the gas exploitation, it wasn't yet the future of the energy. At that time this was back in the early 90s. And we took the risk. Qatar was totally different economic situation at that time. We took a great risk. We put a lot of pressure on the country and the needs of the country. And apparently the LNG picked up and became one of the main sources. Then at the peak of the net zero and the green agenda, we announced the expansion of our production, which was back in 2018. And we decided to go into invest. And at that time, you can read reports from the IMF. For example, that a lot of countries will end up with a lot of oil and gas. But with no money. Because they will have no countries to sell the gas to. They will have no markets to sell their oil to. And this was just in 2018. And like everyone was panicked. The same year, we have announced that we are going to expand our gas field production. And we are hoping to double it by 2030. So from 77 million cubic ton, which was peaked in 2011 and continued the sustained unturned today. By 2030 we reach 144. And that basically will be the biggest. So there was a projection in 2018 that no one would want to buy your natural gas. After 2050. Who made that? That's like... That's by enough report actually. It's not a projection for Qatar, but it was for the entire GCC. And basically so far out of whack with observable reality. That's insane, obviously. It wasn't. I mean, we had a debate about this within our government at that time. And we didn't believe it. We've seen that their requirement for the energy will just increase. We were watching the revolution in a lot of technologies. And we have seen that, whether it's the green hydrogen, the blue hydrogen, the renewables, all of them they can never be cost effective in the next 10, 15 years. And maybe more. And they will not be enough. The base load, you will always need an energy mix. And the base load of this mix will be the energy, which I mean, always I guess. So that was obvious to just interested non-experts like me or just people who read about it on the side. But the IMF researchers and energy analysts who came up with this projection, do you think they really believed it? Well, I don't know. Honestly, I mean, we were like at the beginning when we have seen these reports. We were just questioning why they are doing that. But it was like part of the global sustainability agent. And probably this is an idea that all international organizations agreed to promote. And basically it's the same thing like when it comes to those organizations, you all see a common agenda item. That everyone is advocating to talk the same direction. Look. We have to remind you in order to keep you from working on the energy. Again, as you know, the green and the climate change, it's something that all of us we need for our survival, for our planet. Yes. But also we need to be realistic in our approach. We need to make sure that this progress is not harming us. It's benefiting us. It's not because we want to make sure that the planet lasts forever. That our people doesn't last forever. Yes. It's basically it's really a miscalculation. Now, another example I want to give you, like for example in our partnership with the US and the gas area. We have during the time before like the fracking and the shell gas in the US, we were supplying the US with energy at certain point of time. We built this, what so-called, they called in-pass in Texas in order to be receiving terminal for the gas. During President Trump time and the first administration, we signed with him, we signed during his administration to make it as a sending terminal. So all the gas that US gas will be exported through that terminal, which is a partnership between Qatar Energy and ExxonMobil. To explain, you take natural gas out of the ground. It's often found with oil. But then you have to basically freeze it and make it to convert it to a liquid state in order to ship it across the ocean. So, it's how LNG is liquefied naturally. Yes, that's what you're talking about. Liquid-fied natural gas, yes. And then you have also beside that during the same meeting when during the previous administration or the President Trump, the first one. We have signed the largest single largest petrochemical plant in the world. It's called the Golden Triangle, which hopefully will be online very soon. And that's what will provide the basic feedstock for oil dentists in the United States, which is the polymers. And this is also a partnership between Qatar Energy and the US companies. I mean, looking back, I think we can be a little bit more critical to try to understand what the green agenda was or that zero was. But no one ever explained without natural gas, how are you going to get fertilized or in plastic? Did anyone ever explain that to you? No, they have no answers. Even I mean, even people with like what adopting the green agenda when they are talking about electricity, for example, generating electricity from green energy, and resources. Those electricity will need batteries. Batteries will need lithiums for the AVs. This lithium, when you mine those lithium, what is the effect on the environment? Oh, I know. And when a few calculated, it's much worse for the planet and for the land. Plan the oil and the gas combined and maybe from the coal as well. So it wasn't really well thought of. It was something that I believe was, you know, taken to a direction. Doesn't serve the interest of the entire world. Does it make you nervous that the smartest most powerful people in the world could jump to conclusions they didn't think through without evidence that they could just say something was true without knowing it was true and thinking through the consequences? I mean, it seems like a kind of mass insanity that took over the world. It keeps us up all night. That's it. Me too. Mr. Prime Minister, thank you very much. Thank you very much, Dr. Appreciate it. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars, when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.