the general gonna experience. What's really wild is like there's people that get away with not telling you the numbers. Oh Netflix, Netflix gets away with, and we were just discussing this last night because it's sort of a friend of mine was saying, like what are you thinking about this actor's strike? And I said, I really don't know enough about it to comment other than, look, if you're a person and you do something, like even if you're a comic and you do something on Netflix, like when I've done Netflix specials, they just say it's doing really well. And you go like, what does that mean? Like how many people are watching it? We're really happy. Yeah, what does that mean? We're really happy. It's doing great. What are the numbers? What do you think is the purpose of keeping it secret? Well, it's a genius move because they don't have to tell you. So you can't really negotiate, like if you do it special and that special is 10 million people watching it. Who, oh shit, we're not the last one. We're not paying a son more money next time because if he finds out that this many people are watching, you don't know until you go out in the road and then you sell more tickets and you're like, oh, people enjoyed it. I guess it worked. Right. But when you don't have any data from the company, they could just not give you the data. Like on their side, it's great for negotiation. Right. They have to tell you shit. It's just they have all the leverage. There was an article about this yesterday. Okay. Serento's defense, not disclosing streaming numbers, creators feel trapped by ratings box office. So how does he defend it? I like to hit Serento's body. By the way, it's a very nice guy. It's the longer paragraph is here, but it's part of our promise with creators of the time we started creating original programming or creators felt like they were pretty trapped in this kind of overnight ratings world. Oh, they're trapped by ratings. We're doing this for them. Yeah, we're doing it for them. We're doing the for them. They don't know. Over night, ratings, an analyst interview that went on a weekend box office world defining their success in failures. Serento said during a pre-recorded analyst interview, that's a little gas lady. And as we know, a show might have enormous success down the road and it wasn't captured in that opening box office. So part of this was the relationship with the talent, not just the business aspect of it. Well, and I do think that over time, people are much more interested in this. We're on a continuum today of how much data do we publish. I think we've been leading the charge, starting everyone down the path of a top 10, publishing our top 10 lists and our annual wrap-up list, and everything to give a lot of transparency to the viewing. And I just expect we'll be more and more transparent. Just say the numbers. This is a weird little dance you're doing to avoid. Just tell people what the numbers are. Yeah, it is. And a tube was saying yesterday to the on top of this that they might be changing the way videos work. But I think they said for the first 24 hours that all stats will be live. Like live viewer count, live thumbs up. I guess people really want to know that. So I'm opposite of what he was just saying. Yeah, and that's what people want. They want to know what's successful and what's not. It does seem interesting that he says that like, oh, we have a show might do better as time goes on and the initial box office numbers might not reflect that. But then you're also canceling all these shows. They get the second and third season. Yeah, shut up. Right? It's like, it just doesn't lend that credibility. We're doing it for the creator. Right, guys, we love you. Right. Well, we're doing it for you. Yeah, yeah, this seems like a very abusive relationship. Yeah, so I would imagine that has something to do with, I think if you were an actor and you were star of a Netflix movie and it was fucking huge, you would want to know what the numbers are. Right, it's got to be part of their, I don't know. Is that part of what they're asking for? I know it's streaming revenue. I think that was one of the things asked you. Just one of the things is like the AI characters. Yeah, that's a big part of this because sex still is strike, right? I believe so, yes. So I think the AI thing was there was one contract that I don't know if it was actually being someone that actually trying to get people signed or it was just being discussed where they would pay the extra, like an extra would be on the set. And then they owned their digital image. They could use it forever. So they could put you in the background of the fucking Hulk movie that could put you in the background of it. You know, like conspiracy theorists believe they're crisis actors who show up at every mass shooting and start talking about something in this bullshit. Like this is the most evil of conspiracy theories, right? Right. But this crisis actor thing, imagine if you just start seeing like AI people in every fucking movie, every disaster movie, you see that same guy? Yeah. Like that's that dude. And that dude probably got paid 200 bucks. It's like the Wilhelm screen, but with like people's faces. Right. Yeah, that's right. Oh, if it's a disaster thing, you know, this guy isn't it? Well, maybe they'll be able to morph your image, give you a mustache. I think knows. As I'm sure they can tweak your face. I mean, they could face swap you with different extras. They can do all kinds of stuff. Oh, yeah, for sure. What they can did. Did you see the unreal five video game engine car on fire? Car on fire? Jamie, see if you play that. Someone said, I forget the tweet, but it was something along the lines of you're not going to be able to ever know what's real again. You know, and if it feels this way looking at the news with what's going on over, you know, over in Israel and Palestine, it's like, what am I seeing? How much of this is real? What's, yeah, how much like the propaganda on top of that? The like shitty reporting, shitty reporting. It's like, it is like, it is so interesting that we have phones and we have the access to information constantly. Yeah. And now we just know if none of that information is true. Well, we just know quickly what actually happened if you're online and paying attention. And the mainstream news is so far behind that. Right. And I think that's what I was saying that, you know, the original narrative was that Israel bombed a hospital in right in Gaza. Right. What actually happened was another Islamic terrorist group launched a missile it failed and it landed in the parking lot of the hospital. So this is fake. This is the unreal five engine. You see a car on fire and then they have a little video thing. I think I think I'll just the cars fake. The rest of the video should be real. So they inserted a car into a real scene. Is that what they did? Yes, no one really knows the honesty because Unreal Engine looks so fucking good. There's been a new video of the 5.3 and it looks, but I could Jamie, I could imagine that's all the video engine. It could be, but like right there, that person walking the background. Yeah, but you could do that. You could. Well, that would be easy because they're not even in focus. That would be so easy in comparison to this car that's in focus. That just, well, I've just, I've watched a lot of it. I just don't, I think that all they did was add that. Okay. Just saying. Well, you might be right. Look how good that car on fire. Yeah, I mean, it looks, it looks incredible. Very real. And look how the flames vary. The flames vary like an actual flame would. It's not like sometimes you will watch like digital flames. They do the same pattern over and over and over again. But this just looks like real fucking fires. There's a level of randomness. It's reacting to that thing in it. It's nuts, man. Yeah, the thing is making the smoke move. Motherfucker, dude, they're so good now. You're not going to have any idea. No, you can't tell, you can't tell what's real at all anymore. And I think it was in 2015, they passed a law that allowed the CIA to use propaganda on citizens for the greater than nation. Yeah. No, there's something like that. I mean, that's always been a thing though. It's funny that it's a pass-all law. Well, now they can't get arrested for it or no one's good. The trouble for it. Yeah, I guess. I mean, but no one was really getting trouble for it. No one was really getting trouble for it. No one was really getting trouble for it. It's like, it's like, it's like, it's like, you kill the president. Allegedly. It's more like them dotting their eyes and crossing their teeth. Yeah. Let's just make sure that no one's that law, Jimmy. I was just looking it up. I just stumbled across an article from the New York Times 1977, worldwide propaganda network built by this. I can't imagine. 1977. And I mean, I can't find article really, but it's so hard to know what's real and what's not real. Yeah. I think that's like when we talked about what the shift in COVID was, it really causes like now I'm just suspicious of everything. Everything. Everything I read, I'm like, what's that? What angles are coming from? Who's funding this? Exactly. And it didn't used to be this is what comes up about what we were just talking about. Obama did not sign a law allowing propaganda in the US. Okay. So here's the claim former president of Barack Obama signed the law in 2012, allowing the government to propaganda, allowing government propaganda in the US and making it perfectly legal for the media to purposely lie to the American people. AP's assessment. And false in 2013, Obama signed legislation that changed the US information and education exchange act of 1948, also known as the Smith Month Act. The amendment made it possible for some materials created by the US agency for global media, the nation's foreign broadcasting agency to be disseminated in the US. The facts, opposed circulating on Facebook, with a photo of Obama falsely states that he repealed a ban on government propaganda in the US when he signed the National Defense Authorization Act in 2013. The amendment did not repeal the Smith Month Act, but rather lifted some restrictions on the domestic dissemination of government funded media. Okay. Government funded media, though, is you're getting close to propaganda, right? Okay. So here, the change essentially eased restrictions for Americans who wanted to access government funded media. We're going to get for you to test the rentals right this. We're making it easier for you to access it. The change essentially eased restrictions for Americans who wanted to access government funded media content. Because, you know, most Americans really want to access government funded media content. I think of anything better. What I rather watch Game of Thrones with government funded media content. I think allowing media produced by the US agency for global media such as the voice of America, Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty to be made available to Americans upon request. It was not possible before the law was changed. Even upon request, if I wanted to get through the Freedom of Information Act, for instance, they couldn't do it. The amendment changed that. It says Gabe Rock and the director of the reporters, committee, committee's technology, and press freedom project. But when everybody puts, whenever someone puts freedom in their project, I'm like, you know, I don't trust anything in the game. Is it Patriot Freedom? You know, the Patriot Act. I just think it's so funny that government funded media was behind some sort of wall to begin with. That's kind of interesting. Well, it says there was essentially a de facto ban on the government dissemination of materials originating from the State Department. Yeah, because we didn't trust you. We trust you to just fucking make these claims. Journalists are supposed to make these claims. Right. And they're supposed to release the news if you're the government. No, journalists are supposed to go in there. Find out what's actually going on. Right. And then, you know, I guess later we find out that they're really influencing these news companies anyway. So it's like, what? It's so funny. Oh boy. Oh boy. Yeah. I don't know. It sounds like a sneaky way to get propaganda to people. But I thought there was something else. There's where they were, it was proposing that they were allowed to use propaganda if it it was for the greater good. I thought that was a part of the, whatever was the National Defense Authorization Act, which the one that allowed for indefinite detention. There was one that had like some real sweeping oversteps for people like, yo, indefinite detention. Is that the same sort of stuff that used to get the guy who made the memes in trouble? No, no. In 2013, but it explains everything we just read. It's just that. This reminds me of whatever reason, Ryan's, I want to watch fast seven. In theater. Fast in the theater is seven. It was only me in the theater. Well, it was me. It was me in this one lady. And at one point, the lady goes, Oh, walks out and leave. That's your fault. You came to fast seven. But in it, I think it's fast seven. There is this hacker that creates this thing that can see into every phone and see into every traffic light. They can get in. And the whole fast sevens, the whole fast, the various who job is to get this hacker and get her program and give it to the US military because the US military are the good guys and they need to have this. You don't want to end this up in the bad guys hands. And it's like, I just remember things like, wow, this is blatant. Like weird propaganda in fast seven. Yeah. I came to see cars jump out of, you know, skyscrapers, not this. This is interesting. Well, it's also they feel like those kind of movies sell to the kind of people who like those kind of movies. Right. Like those kind of concepts. Have you like fast and the Fury seven, you know, you might have a maggot, you know, like you might have a confederate flag. You're fucking dead.