All right welcome, blockchain boys. Thanks for having us, man. Yeah, dude, for sure. Tell people who aren't familiar with you. Tell us what you do. We do a lot, but if you ever heard a crypto, we delve into that industry a bit. We have a media company called Cryptonite, which is more than a media company, but that's what most people know it as. And this is our CEO, Michael Sessa, we're business partners and co-founders. Michael Sessa, you introduced me up to me earlier is what just Sessa. Just Sessa, don't mind what we call it. You go like Sessa. All right, cool. Sessa friends call me Sessa. And probably because where I grew up in New York was like basically an Italian neighborhood, everybody's name was either Michael or Anthony. And that's Anthony's my middle name. So you just everybody went by the last name and it kind of just stuck. Cool. Yeah. So I like your TikTok. I like your, you got some funny stuff on there. What, what do you guys do? You guys just like teach people about crypto and NFTs and stuff? You know, there's multiple creators under our, you know, company. And for me personally, my focus is more no BS crypto because the crypto industry is fundamentally built on bullshit. A lot of it is. And so I think that trying to bring people down back to reality showing them what is real and what's not is important. And I hope that my content fills a role which is not only educational, but fun as well. So I think, you know, trying to connect with the people who are in the crypto, which is also young people who are on TikTok. I was never a TikToker until I was sitting at a Cajun C food restaurant. And my buddy Michael Wang was like, Amen, you gotta get this app. I'm like, we're thinking of being that. I thought that was a good thing. I saw all those dancing, you know, garbage like that. But no, there's actually a vibrant crypto scene on TikTok. Really? Yeah. It's seen amazing growth over the last 12 months, ever since the game stopped stuff. I mean, sure, we've had our moments of, you know, okay, why are we pumping this garbage? Mean coin does nothing. But it's gotten so many people in the crypto I think it's been a genuine asset to the space. How did you get into crypto? Year was 2017. And I, you know, my mom told me about crypto. I was 16 years old. I'm 20 now. So I've been in here for about almost five years, give or take. And my mom was like, hey, this is this thing called Bitcoin. And I was always a tech guy, built my first computer freshman year, programming, that kind of stuff. Not so much now, but it was just, I, I dabbled. And I liked investing. I've always been sort of an entrepreneur. And so, you know, I looked at Bitcoin, it was like $1,000 a little bit under the next week. It was like two grand. And I said to myself, holy shit, I gotta get on this. I had no idea what any of it was, you know, digital gold. Okay, what does that mean? So I hopped right in the space and that led to a passion both on a professional level and a personal level that is persisted to this day. How did you guys meet? So, circa around 2017, 2016, I was working on this startup. I just left the financial industry. I was with Merrill Lynch for a few years. And I met my former, one of my former business partners. And we were working on this project. Essentially, it was a Dow. It was a lot like a Dow in the metaverse, but it was in 2017. Nobody even knew what metaverse was back then. So raising funds and traditional capital was hard enough to get it off the ground. And I remember we're out at this convention, actually in Tampa. And we bumped into each other. What was it? It was like right outside, it was right outside, they had like the Lamborghini's outside. Yeah, this was at the end of the arena. What was it called? Synapse Summit. Synapse. Synapse in 2018. 2018. 2018 Synapse Summit Tampa, Florida. And he was working for a guy. What were you like 16 years old? I think I might have been 17. He was 17 and there was like suited up. It's poorly fitting suited up. It suited up. And I remember you came up, you were pitching me the company that you were working with. It was this company. I mean, look, there's so many like scam artists, even locally. Yeah. And I'm not going to say that a company was a scam, but the guy he was working for was an asshole. And so he was unfortunate. But he came up to me and some amazing sales pitch. It was like the best sales pitches I've ever heard. And I could tell he was young. I didn't know how young. And that blew my mind when I found out. So I'm like, you know what, come by. We were working on a Krito Condo at the time. I was like, come by Krito Condo is like co-working space. And let's chat some more. And he came through. And I mean, the rest was history. I basically was like, all right, leave who you're working with now because they don't even have a contract in place for you. And they're working you like a dog. I was like, so I don't know why you're working for free for them. And we took him in as an intern and gave him papers. And then like, eventually, cut equity out of the deal. And unfortunately, that never kicked off. But then wrap up 2020. And I'm pitching him on Krip did. And I'm like, hey, you got some interest and going back into the Krip-Do industry. He's like, yeah, yeah, I do. I was like, I got this idea. And then Krip-Tonight was born. It actually originally started out as a trading bot company. And then it just spiraled into a media company fast enough. That's what, so Krip-Tonight is a media company? Yeah, so we started out literally I wrote a business plan for this thing. And I sent it to one of my now business partners on June 6th of 2020. And it was outlining this whole thing. I was like, we're going to build a trading bot. And we're going to market it on TikTok. And there wasn't a single Krip-Do TikTok influencer at the time, like none. So I'm scouring this out. I'm like, this is like popping off so fast. I'm like, music artist, again, the songs out on it. I was like, this is great. So I was, I took like an intern role as a COO at a nonprofit in downtown Orlando. And then I was like, once I came up with this idea, I was like, all right, we need to kick this off. Because the Krip-Do markets turn around. I saw the writing on the walls. So two months later, me and my business partner were conceptually. I called Lucas said, I got something I think I need you to be a part of. Because I slowly realized this is way too much work for me to become an influencer on TikTok and build an entire company. So I called him up and said, we had grants at the time, too. I had these two grants from my other company that I was using to fund Krip-Do-Night just to try to get it off the ground. Like it was, it was so shit. Because like the one grant would lapse. And then people weren't gonna get paid for two weeks. And I got to add that to the hard conversation. I was like, guys, listen, if you want to be a part of this, cool. If not, I can't afford to pay for the next two weeks, the grant doesn't kick in. So you're gonna miss paycheck. I'm gonna miss paycheck. I'm not gonna pay anything either. And, but I called this early 2021, the grant stuff. But we had kind of gotten into it at the very end of 2020. No, end of 2020. Yeah. Because I called him, I remember the phone call was like, listen, how would you like to make Krip-Do-Night on TikTok? I'll pay you $625 a week. To be fair. Yeah. I said, all you have to do is make content on Krip. I wasn't supposed to be the influencer or the creator or whatever. No, no, no. I was, I've only been bizzed at, right? So more professional settings. And I wasn't supposed to be on the handling the TikTok. We had a small team built. I picked it up just to see what the platform is like. And I did this sort of a side thing. While we were trying to grow the bot, while we were trying to get the brand down. And long story short, we had picked a few people. A few of my friends, few people, he knew. And we had, we had gotten to the point where we had done photo shoots with the people that we thought were the final candidates to be like, we were gonna put on a show and produced by us. And I just started making videos. And slowly, like it became more so that I was taking way more precedent than anyone else. And it was completely by accident, which is kind of funny, because I never really thought I would be the person in front of a camera or making content. Cause mind you, I'm doing this all for my bedroom with no production. Like I had an Android phone, okay? You know, it was, camera quality was not great. Let me just, let me just say that. It's rough beginning. Humble beginnings and we're now officially out of the bedroom as of Monday, Wednesday when my new furniture comes in. You know, so yeah, there you go. Yeah, oh yeah. So it's a bodge. So what you guys are kind of like crypto financial advisors or I don't know. Whoa, what's next, X-Day on the financial advisor? Definitely not financial advisor. So what do you got? I still don't understand. I understand you're a media company, but like. So when it started out, we had, we had a few different parties involved. One of them was a trading guru. And the trading guru, it didn't turn out well the first iteration. We wound up wasting a good six months. And that was rough because as I mentioned before, we had grants, they were lapsing. And so time was of the essence. It was a ton of time wasted. And I was like, shit, we got, you know, I think at the time it was like four solid employees that we knew we needed to make paychecks for. And so luckily Lucas's following was growing at the time. One of our graphics designers that we had on payroll. He came through clutch, made him awesome. The logo that he has today. Shout out to Nick. Shout out to Nick. And so he actually, he designed the current iteration, but my initial logo to show you how like little, like I gave any effort into that, it was $15 on Fiverr. And I was like, hey, make me something. Because there's a guy used to watch, did great content, but he stopped posting. So I thought, hey, maybe I'll take up where he left off and just fuck around a little bit. But it turned into so much more than that. You could really think of us like a media company and a bot company that too are quite separated, but we are under the same name. Media company focused on educational content, community and educating people like what, how not to get your cell phone. Because we're not financial advisors. I'll never sit here and tell you, hey, man, go invest in this now. Not only is that blatantly illegal because it's financial advice, but it's also not the thing that I encourage people to do. I like to say, hey guys, this is interesting. Go do your research about it. Okay, look at the ecosystem behind it, look at the partners, you know. This is what I'm doing, and you shouldn't do this. And this is where I think it could go, right? So it's like, it's not necessarily me telling people that something is about to pop off, it's more about helping them get the tools to do it themselves. So they don't need me. I want to be on a beach when I'm retired in 20, 30 years, whatever it is. And I want the next person to see my channel and get inspired and do the same thing and everyone grow in the space. That's really what I'd like to do personally. It's just elevate the crypto space to be taken more seriously. Because like, in TikTok, we get made fun of a lot. We get made fun of a lot. There's a lot of creators who are only there for personal gain and to make dog shit content. And it's frustrating because that's the videos that people see when they see crypto TikTok. But there's a vibrant community of people who we're not even affiliated with, but we do shows where they have on live streams who are really smart in the industry and have helped educate essentially millions, if not tens of millions of people in the last 12 months. It's beautiful. And I wish people would give it a chance, you know. Hell yeah. Because it's all about community, man. How do you guys explain this crypto dip going on right now? It's an emerging market, right? So you have the cycles of adoption. Crypto's in the- It was like halved in the last week, right? Yeah, let's just say my pockets are hurting, but it's okay because if you can't handle it at its negative 50% and you don't deserve the two, 300X's that come with it, right? Nice. It's very similar to the early internet, right? So we're seeing this technology come out and there's blatant rip offs and scams. This is just, it just comes with a territory. It's opportunists taking advantage, but there's also a really cool shit that's being built that will be affecting the financial industry in 10 to 15 years when this technology is done. Ethereum is still in beta. People don't realize that. Vitalik himself is like, hey guys, this was adopted too quickly. It's not supposed to be adopted from mainstream use yet. Like these technologies very early. I mean, Ethereum, gas fees, I paid tens of thousands of dollars last year just to move my money. It's definitely not ready, but we are seeing it get to that point. We're seeing major companies adopt this technology slowly but surely and just like a forest fire that burns down everything in sight, what comes back will be stronger and it will be, you know, the newest greatest thing that we can use in our everyday lives essentially. Yeah, I got some Jim Coobus in there, right? It's crazy because like, you know, when they say like we welcome regulation, like we're just waiting for it, you know, maybe because until that time, you're gonna have this crazy volatility, but you know, that's crypto. I mean, it's, I've had days where I'm up 300% of that days where I'm, I just wanna cry in a corner where he is out because my bank account is just, my crypto accounts, excuse me. But you gotta stay well diversified. You gotta stay well diversified. I put everything I had into cryptocurrency. 16, I mean, bro, there's a picture that I have that I keep in 2020 of me. I borrowed a dollar from my girlfriend who's moving in with me now and I needed to deposit it into the bank so I didn't overdraft. All my money was in crypto. Everything, I'm not saying I bought crypto with money I received from a grant, but I was buying crypto basically at the end. But you kind of are. At every opportunity and I bet literally everything I had, I dropped out of college to pursue a career in tech startups and crypto. And I knew college was not for me. I find it very frustrating because it's very arbitrary. And I couldn't see myself doing that nine to five stuff personally. And I think that we're gonna see a lot more of that in the coming years. And crypto and web three is a great space to build in. You don't need a college degree. You can, as long as you have, you know, a reputation, a foundation, useful skills, you can join a Dow, you can build cool things with cool people. And you can be really successful at it. I've met more millionaires who are younger than me than I have who are older than me in like on crypto Twitter. Really? Assuming that they're not famous. Just people I see in comments section. So we're like 18 or 19 who've liked it. These are people who have bought it when like it was super cheap and they just, that they've held onto it ever since. Specifically NFT Twitter. Yeah, or God. People become millionaires like the last 10 months with NFTs. It's crazy. Yeah. Okay, I'm not gonna lie. I fumbled the bag. I looked at the board apes. Art was fucking ugly. I was like, they are literally so ugly. I don't want them. They're dumb. And I was gonna buy 10 of them because somebody told me to. And I was like, ah, these things look really gross. I still don't do this. I don't buy NFTs that I don't like the art of. I don't care who they are. I don't care who's doing them. If it's not at least watchable. I'm not putting a board ape on my screen or on a chain. I'm sorry. I love that cube one that you post on your Twitter. The cube, the 3D cube with like the ghouls and goblins inside of it. Yeah, I just retweeted that actually. Yeah. They were in my comments. No idea what that project is, but they seem cool. They interact with my posts. So I showed them some love. There's a lot of underrated NFT artists. Guy named Sergei out of Miami. Really fantastic artist. I first saw his art in 2018. He does crypto art. And he does this. He's a do what you love kind of thing going on. And so I purchased a bunch of his NFTs. No resale value. I spent tens of thousands probably on the on his NFTs. But I bought him because I liked them. And that's what I do with NFTs personally, or they have to have really good utility. So I buy him to flip him. That's a nice flip him. Yep. Buy him and flip him. What were those called? No, it's actually. How long has it helped? There's people. I have one that I'm attached to here. Here. One. Just one. What were those ones? The opponents, how are your opponents doing? This is the problem with the NFT space. I think about this. 90% of the steak. $8,000. I think he's paying ones was the best flip I ever had. Which was? Pudgy Penguins. Pudgy Penguins. I bought a few. But I bought one for $6,000. It was like two Ethereum at the time. And I knew it was rare. He was looking at his like, ooh, this is rare when you definitely get this. I was like, yep. All right. I had to convince him too. He had to convince me. I was like, I spent six grand out of a fucking penguin. It was like, are you kidding me? He's like, bro, do it. This is probably a great move. I said, all right, fine. Fuck it. And yeah, it sold two weeks later for $80,000. Wow, to change it. Wow. Yeah. Damn. That's fucking incorrect. I'm calling him screaming. I'm like, I love you so much. I'll invest in anything you ever tell me. Yeah. I was like this. That was like ever. That was great. Wow. This is great. Wow. It's awesome. Congratulations. Lushy Penguins. Yeah, congratulations. Are the pudgy penguins still about valuable? Yeah. Funny story with that. I'd like to make it known as an example of what happens in the space. The founders, which we never did any sponsor to work. People always think that. Because we really just love the penguins. We talked about them. They were already blowing up. Like we got them views. Yeah. But they were already, they were up 10x. Well, I bought them. They were up, you know, they were up two x when he bought them. Nice. And so they were still going. But the founders basically, I don't want to say, rogged, but they basically did another mint of miniature penguins, took the Ethereum. And basically said, all right, guys, see you later. Thanks for the bag. Talk to you later. Yeah. I sold mine way below floor for half an eighth. You know, this was my NFT profile picture on Twitter. And I've always rocked with the penguins. Communities great. Founders left them dead in hanging. That's the problem. Like there's no, where's the accountability for these web three projects for these NFT projects. It's specific. And that's like, you know, if crypto is in the early adoption phase, right, where the, you know, the early adopters or the early majority is getting in, NFTs are the before the early adopter phase. I mean, if you look at who owns an NFT, right, you can see the accounts on open. See, I think it's three million. And a lot of those are probably people selling to themselves. I'm going to keep it real with you. But we will see NFTs integrated in a major way. Just like we saw crypto kind of blow up in 2021. It's sort of like 2017 for NFTs right now. So I'm probably going to buy more probably as much NFTs as I do crypto during the bear market. Yeah, absolutely. Anyone who doesn't is a fool in my opinion. No financial advice. But in some NFTs aren't just artists. Some NFTs are like, what people understand. Like NFTs are like passes for things. Yeah. Like the Yacht Club, the AP Yacht Club, like you're a member of a club, then you can get the Discord, you go to the parties. But even more so, they can, they can be make you more money past that. So like, we just, well, so me and my friend Joshua J. Who's a business partner of ours as well. We just joined as advisors to this NFT project called the Blockchain Miners Club. And you know, they minted these NFTs, right? They're really cool artwork. But they entitled you to a community reward, right? And so they basically took this mint money that they had from raising from these NFTs and they bought a bunch of Bitcoin miners. So they've got all these Bitcoin miners, hundreds of them, mining Bitcoin. And there's some, I think there's some Ethereum miners going on to, they've got all this passive income coming in that they're reinvesting and holders of these NFTs are entitled to the community rewards. It's not a direct investment thing. But you know, you get your community rewards for owning these miners. And so things like that really excite me for NFTs. This is what I'm more than anything excited for is the ability for people to actually show the utility that they have, you know, and you can actually burn two of these together to create an ultra miner, which has a token attached to it, which they're trying to integrate into a couple different ecosystems. But it's really pushing the boundaries of what is an NFTs. It just art will know. And NFT all an NFT really is just, you know, saying that you own a specific thing. And it's like a right. So I have the rights to this NFT is my buy NFT. But I can represent anything. I mean, this table could be an NFT. You have a, it's like a deed saying, hey, this is my table. Right. I think a deed. Is that going to patent maybe to that, to that, like, ticket sales are going to be the biggest thing in NFTs. I always said as we weren't doing this, I'd be trying to solve for ticket sales for sporting events or concerts or whatever else. Because as soon as they figure square that circle, like all ticket sales will be NFTs. It just makes so much sense. and it solves scalping issues. It solves royalty issues. I mean, every. We can do that now, right? We'll just get to your little Apple wallet. And they send you like the little QR code in your wallet. And it's kind of like that. So the difference would be is say you sold like, you know, you're Jay-Z and you sell, you know, the concert app, right? There's going to be tons of people who like buy up your tickets, especially when we see all this. And then they're trying to resell them for, you know, five X the price right before the show. So if you're Jay-Z, you can go in and if you sell by NFTs and each tickets in NFT, you go in and say, well, all right, that's fine. But every time that ticket sold when it gets transferred, like 10, 20, 30, whatever percent of the value is going to go back to the artist or now poor people are really good at JZ concerts. So, you know, you can't go to no. Yeah, if you're poor. Well, how much is the JZ ticket? A couple hundred bucks, probably at least. Yeah. But if he's doing it with NFTs and people are scalping them on the black market, they're going to end up being thousands of dollars. NFTs don't solve traditional issues. They they oftentimes present new ones, right? We see this a lot with projects that get exploited. And this is actually a really, so I don't know if you've heard. This is a great example. The blockchain is like, you know, bringing a bunch of meat in front of hungry lions. And these hungry lions are are biting at their cage, trying to get in and get the juicy meat. Because even though, yeah, okay, it's immutable. Great. This Ethereum is my theory and there's no bank. Everything else is still a risk. These board apes were getting sold for, you know, 1.7, 0.7, ETH recently just last week because of an API issue with open scene. Essentially what was happening is that people had them listed, you know, six months ago for that price, but they didn't want to pay the list, the listing fee, which is Ethereum gas fees are prohibitively expensive. So they would send it to another wallet and then back again, violating that smart contract, but someone found an exploit where even though it wasn't publicly available on the blockchain, that smart contract was still active. So they would immediately buy it, flip it for maybe 20 or 30 times what they bought and make off with, you know, 100 grand or less than that. Sometimes 80 grand. And so there's a lot of exploits in the space right now. And it's just, like I said, part of the emerging technology that's coming here, we're going to see these kinks. But still there's more wins than there are losses. I mean, they fixed that yet. It's open. See. Oh, yeah. The board, the board, I thought that like last week, the floor on those things was 90 Ethereum. Now it's like 118 Ethereum. It's insane. Yep. Justin Bieber just bought a board for 500 Ethereum. See, that seems like the whole value in it. It's just because celebrities buy on people think it's cool. Like Jimmy Fallon, Justin Bieber, yeah, whoever else post Malone, whoever else bought those things. And it's like more and more celebrities or people with big Twitter followings will buy them and then it makes what people want to jump in. But it also does have like all those cool intangible value, value to it. Like the discord and the parties and the merch and all that stuff too. So and keep in mind, a lot of these celebrities didn't actually buy them. They use something called Moonpay concierge. And you know, we can debate about whether or not they're actually paying for these, but I think I have a sneaking suspicion. Some of these celebrities and they were gifted it really. I think it's very likely. What is Moonpay concierge? Moonpay, you know, they're kind of a company in the space that puts together from what I understand. I'm not a huge expert. I haven't really looked into them that much. They put together like, you know, if you want to invest in NFTs, but you don't want to do it yourself. So they have a concierge service. And they've got some other stuff going on. But I think it's no coincidence. Let's just say that all these board apes started to appear. Yeah, you want exposure, but you don't want to take the time to learn about it. Yeah. So you want to be in the crowd, but you don't want to do anything for it. And I don't like a huge, I don't know much about Moonpay. I just know that they have the service. Those types of services are going to be around for a long time. I mean, that's why financial advising services are around because people don't want to learn what to invest in in stocks. They just want to build their wealth and then toss it over to a financial advisor. It's the same thing. You know what I mean? Like interesting. There's a lot of smoking mirrors in this industry, man. I mean, more than I could explain in a podcast episode, but it was the chances of the board ape is just one big scam. These guys are just going to like hit the hit the hit the frickin highway. The craziest thing is that there's a lot of, you know, rhymes with yachtsy imagery behind these board apes. People don't talk about that much. There's a guy on Twitter, like, you know, people debate. I did notice that. I did notice that. So I had this guy, I had this guy, Brett, on the Brett Phillips baseball player on the podcast last week and he taught me about the board apes literally last week. And so me and a friend of mine went and bought one. And it has a, we has this crazy helmet on it. I'll show it to you. And it's, we just looked it up today and it's some fucking, uh, it's like a German Nazi helmet. I was going to say the only thing I could think that rhymes with yachtsies. I know if I was missing a word or something like that. Yeah. So there's a lot of historical references behind the board API club. And I'll send you guys this afterwards. I was very doubtful. I thought maybe it's a coincidence. There's a lot of stuff that just, you know, and I'm not, I'm not saying that they are definitely, definitely intently doing this. But there just seems to be a lot of coincidences here. They're definitely too big to fail. There's the board apes. I would be very surprised if they did not last probably, you know, for conceivably as long as NFTs are a thing unless something drastic happened because they've got, they've hit critical mass. You can't go back from Justin Bieber, a thing. Right. They can get canceled. I doubt it for being for wearing German World War two helmets. But the powers that be behind crypto don't want that to happen. Who are the powers the be? Well, there's Twitter and then there's crypto Twitter. And crypto Twitter has a, what would you say, like a different set of rules? Crypto Twitter is an interesting set of Twitter. It's very different from anything else. But like, you know, this, you know, when I say the powers that be, it's very general topic because it's hard to trick down, track down who those are. But crypto is run, you know, there's a lot, like I said, a lot of smoking mirrors in this industry that I'm trying to cut through. And a lot of people have been made enemies of other people because they try and do the same thing, you know. But it is what it is. I think that ultimately we will see this space grow and evolve to where people can recognize that, you know what I'm saying? Like one of the things that I see a lot. So I also, I have a side thing I'm doing. I've partnered with Dowmaker, which is like the number one, like legit crypto launch pad in the space, shout out to the Dowmaker team. I'll send them this video. And we're running something called infinity pad. So I've learned how to kind of do IDOs, initial offerings and not not available in America, shout out to my not American friends. But there's a lot of VCs in this space that are just out here to just get their bag. There's a lot of VCs and LPs that are just out here to use defy and Web3 to do the same thing they did in Web2. And it's very frustrating to see that. So I think that we can build a system that makes them obsolete. And that's kind of what I want to focus on doing so that they don't have control beyond the space because a lot of these projects have that. So our base are all NFTs reliant upon Bitcoin mining or Ethereum mining, because Ethereum, the only way Ethereum and transaction like those gas fees, right, those gas fees are because you got to pay for the people that have the miners, right? You got to pay the miners to do those transactions. So Ethereum is Ethereum reliant on mining? Yeah, for now. For now, until it goes proof of stake or whatever. People think Ethereum's the only network you can have that at T-zone. That's not true. Oh, it's not true. No, no, there's a ton of different networks. This is all right. There's a lot of there's environmentally friendly. And avalanche. People think if theorems the only network you can have that if T's on it's not true. Oh, it's not true Yeah, no, there's a ton of different networks this over. Oh, there's Solana. There's environmentally friendly Avalanche that don't have the impact that a theory has Like my newest thing is is a max avalanche NFTs. I love that whole ecosystem. It's so fast so clean And it's got so many more use cases I think even even the theory I'm gonna have to use really I'm here for it I'm definitely making a transition over to give you guys some history of space like 2017 was about the cryptocurrency's right emphasis on the currency no one cares about that right now Bitcoin's one Okay, no one's replacing Bitcoin used to be Bitcoin cash and Bitcoin had a thing going no Bitcoin cash is gone Nowadays, it's about the layer ones and layer zeros to give you an example That's essentially networks like a theory and the projects can be built on top of and it's it's been a mad dash For which which layer one layer zero etc. Whatever you want to call it which blockchain platform is gonna win the race, you know I made a bunch of money Shout out to this man here off of a layer two called polygon medic. That was my biggest W last year That's the other one that you can buy shit with on on open C is polygon. Yes Which is great. I put a grand in at a penny I bailed out at 90 cents and then it shot up to $2 Look, I'm not mad about it. It was still at nine what 900x for nine thousand extra Like it was yeah, that's insane. Yeah, it was great. So you guys are just watching this shit all day long all the well for me It goes back to why why I couldn't be a creator at the time was Because building a business is it's just insane especially one that has the amount of like I think we're at 18 employees now Something like 18 employees and and we have like three different business models all under one house and all the right You know like we're really trying to be a holistic Company in the space that's doing a lot. We want to do a cool stuff. We've worked with some really cool brands We've worked with really cool creators And so we're just trying to you know scale up here as far as we're going I mean, I'm pretty I'm pretty happy with our team right now. Yeah, trading bots launching in two weeks We got the media company. We've done over I think our best month was something like three quarters of a million in deals and then And then we have our discord community which we just we broke a hundred thousand last month that took a Small dip. I think we went down about six seven thousand when the crypto market took a nose dive People don't want to see their portfolios. They don't want to think about it They don't want to think about it People they get the richest off that stuff is are the people that just forget about the crypto they have I may forget about the walls I'm completely emotionless like even though you know my portfolio goes up and down Yeah, I think really what separates the people who are gonna make it in a early technology like crypto Is the conviction that they have behind their investments? It was not easy to get here everyone's like oh my god You're so lucky you invest in Ethereum when it was early you invested in Bitcoin when it was early Yeah, okay, we saw our portfolios my hit six figures when I was 17 I saw that portfolio decimated over the next year and a half two years You don't understand like people people think it's easy It's not easy to hold an asset down 90% and then back up again It's not I watched my account go from 68000 to 3,000 and 2018 That's hard Yeah, you stayed on the train though, right? Oh, yeah didn't sell a thing Nice the only ones that get her the ones that jump off. Yeah, I mean I tell people not to I tell people to take their profits because you don't want to be stuck holding the garbage networks Lot of stuff from 2017 ain't here now, and it's gonna be the same way next time It's just it shall goes, you know, you got to consolidate into what I call the blue chips Ethereum's a great example of that. Yeah, Ethereum's a blue chip No, it's not going anywhere. It's the blue is to blue in my opinion. What do you mean by that? It means like if your name is not about to die tomorrow, okay, there's a lot of vaporware projects like stuff that is clearly Experimental and for whatever reason could fail. Mm-hmm, you know even the biggest biggest projects in the space in 2017 Our our shadows are there for ourselves. You just never know what's gonna last so the theory in Bitcoin Like the two biggest ones right those aren't going anywhere. Yeah, and look everything that I invested in back in 2018 is still or 2017 twice it's still around today and then there's some new ones that have added on that just their their blue chip quality You know that the networks are too large there's too many people using them Yeah, and the real thing is just like find use cases. It's one of the hardest things for like real new use cases to come about is So many different projects come out and they just want it. They want to build a coin and They come up with a problem to solve, but there's really no problem there. It's in it You know this gets compared to like internet in the late 90s where everybody had a website for everything And it's like that's great. You can have it up, but is it really worth anything? Let's bring a value to people how many people are actually gonna know about it See about it or if you have 50 websites doing the same thing which one's gonna come out on top and You know it's it's it makes it really hard in this space for the new projects that are true blue and like really solving a problem to be Founder heard of you know because you just have thousands of there's 10,000 shit project 20,000 coins You know to trial by fire. It's the crypto market is throwing shit at the wall and seeing what sticks for some of it and the projects They get really big will make those investors a lot of money, you know You know you you you're early investor and polygon like we were great As soon as they said it speeds up Ethereum and I was like oh I've been on a theory. It's slow as shit Yeah, this is something that'll pop off like if I can trade on this or I could do something on this and it makes my transactions faster This is it was like one cent. I was like this will be a dollar easily But there's other projects that are that are do do do the same thing or that's an example But there's projects that compete with each other and some of them die and some of them do really well That's like I said having conviction that you pick in the right one you got to know what you're doing It's the it's the biggest like if you've seen that house out and I just watched this is it's some it's like the most expensive house in America In Los Angeles in Los Angeles 500 million dollars Yeah, I sell the Jesus and I'm watching this thing and they're like doing the walk through is ridiculous like 150,000 square feet or a hundred dollars But yeah, and they're talking about like it's in bankruptcy court And I said I was gonna self-elect half price like quarter million dollar or 250 million right and the guy goes They're looking into tokenizing it like why? Why and it's they have to throw blockchain in there It's like that's the type of shit that that is Repressing good projects and like stuff in this industry. Wow You guys sure a constitution down tokenizing it You can fractionalize things you can fractionalize ownership. They did this with the original Do you think like make the house break up the house and individual like think people can own parts of the house Imagine Imagine Turn that is turning the house and to like the fucking S&P 500 or something imagine the deed But cut up into thousands of little pieces right gotcha Okay, and and constitution down was a great example of that But it it almost worked and then it didn't they were trying to buy a copy of the US Constitution They raised like oh god. I can't remember tens of millions Yeah, but you don't need a blockchain to do that. Yeah, but it makes it plus offering But who okay might see in the break up an asset in the pieces rally does that with Pokemon cards my friends are not gonna do that my friends are not gonna go to a reggae offering You know that's fair that's fair They do it what they do have is a theory and they can commit that a theory to buy the US Constitution Ultimately didn't work they were outbid on so the bees, but it's a really cool idea And you know what's crazy they ended up making a token out of it a Dow token that ended up doing like a 50-ept or something crazy Crazy shit. Yeah. What the fuck is a Dow token? So governance token so a Dow right a decentralized autonomous Organization there's three main things that came out of this bull run D. A. Oh not D. Oh Yeah, okay, and you know there are governance tokens that you can vote essentially to choose the determining the future of the project So it's kind of democratizing You know Projects and things that people want to do and you know they're doused for all kinds of stuff You know the governance token is what makes it that which is kind of cool right? So you can do a lot of really interesting nifty stuff which Constitution Dow is just a fun example of that Think of it as like a company without a C suite Just everybody's kind of you say like governance token like the people decide like true as foreign democracy Is it is that similar to like what they say with the board ape you'll be able to? stake it and earn Something probably something about you you can if you own the board apnft you can stake it and they're gonna create a token called like a coin and Then once that comes out you'll be able to earn This ape coin without doing anything you just stake Staking it means like you you you sign off that you're not gonna sell the NFT for X amount of time It's a smart contracts. Yeah, pick a time and put it in there and staking like Tim's gonna kill me for saying this staking smart in my book like you can stake tokens that are already out there Like if you ever heard of like crypto.com. It's great out. I have a lot of crypto assets on there and I stake everything through there because if you are you know like a certain tier you get extra rewards So it's kind of like locking your money up at a CD in the bank. Oh, instead of getting some shit percentage You're getting six 10 some 15% PA on your You get 30% and still considered relatively safe, you know just for holding it So yeah, it's like a seat like a certificate of deposit but for your crypto funds and now yeah It's pouring over into the NFT space right I can see how it makes the NFT is more valuable if you claim You're not gonna sell it for certain amount of time sure. I still don't I still don't understand like how they make a coin How you get paid from that I? Mean it all comes down to what they're gonna use it for I'm not a board I could I couldn't give a shit really about what they're doing, but you know I'm sure they're gonna it'll be something cool Maybe you can buy exclusive merch with it. Maybe you can gain exclusive VIP access into a club On the yacht in Miami or something crazy, you know, so there's a lot of cool utility you can do I don't know necessarily if it's a governance token But you know The use cases whatever they decide I mean I'm not gonna buy any myself. I don't think personally Yeah, but I'm sure it will be tradable like any other decentralized You know exchange. They can just list it on there and you know get it going. Mm-hmm. You any swap interesting the people still Mine crypto currency to make money. Yeah, really? It's just the the issues that with every consensus mechanism consensus algorithm Form of consensus essentially how a blockchain works, right? You have proof of work You have proof of stake you have dedicated proof of stake You have all these kind of you know you have a DAG directed a cyclic graph technology like Hedera hash graph and and constellation network And so there's a bunch of different like algorithms a ways to do it Bitcoin mining and if you're reminding for most people is not Going to be an endeavor that's worthwhile Because Bitcoin specifically you need a lot of money. Yeah, you got to buy those those crazy special eyes to fucker They called the ant miners from bit main out of China and unless you have like a handshake agreement where you can get a bunch of miners It's gonna be difficult you're gonna be waiting months to year if you don't get scammed if you don't get scammed I mean it's very tough to secure these legitimately and you need I assume another handshake agreement with a local government because I don't know You know what the rate of power is at this place, but you know unless you got some cheap energy You're not gonna make much you're really yeah, it's fucking ridiculous I'd like to get my toe into it a little bit and I bought like six of the 3090s and it makes me like $20 a day so that's a theory in your mining theory. Yeah, yeah You know this is my biggest gripe is that a theory in 2.0 is not here a theory I'm switching from proof of work Right to per state right and then the theory mining is gonna be dead in GPU mining is gonna be worthless Until I find another coin to mine right which will be a while I mean you can actually mine a couple different things going to nodes Yeah, what's a nodes nodes of my new favorite thing man I make like a few hundred bucks a day just fine running notes with the hell's a node It's basically your your your Sometimes you're purchasing a note on a network right or you're normally with nodes You're not like staking so like with staking you get your coin back right, but with purchasing a node you're actually purchasing it so like Strong block for instance Listen, what are we doing? What about Thor will do Thor network? Sure? Like Thor network Thor finance there's dubious for anybody who's new to this Nodes are very dubious there are some that are good some that are questionable You need a good strategy and you need a good exit plan But essentially you're helping like the network whatever protocol that is like improve approve transactions, right? You're validating transactions on the words and there are Bitcoin nodes too, but you're not getting paid I mean it's not a piece of hardware no you can actually run it right on your computer and some of them are This is this is my rule of thumb with them the easier they are to set up the more risky they are That's what's anything right Like hex but for some of it does make I have heard a hex that guys been trying to get on this podcast Richard a heart yes, so Richard a heart A very interesting and I know this has been trying to get on here somebody's been trying to set it up to get him on here Richard heart and they're gonna see they're gonna I know I'm gonna get tagged and Twitter in my opinion is running what I would consider to be a Project with questionable fundamentals What does say that? Hex is essentially a Clone of Ethereum you have to you have to stake your hex for a long time. It's they're also running something called pulse chain You have to sacrifice to get on the pulse chain. I don't really mess with it sacrifice what Baby sacrifice I'm not a hex expert. I've only been on the website a few times I've you know looked at their community. I've been through their stuff. I know what they're doing On their website if you want to scroll down and look at the very bottom there's a piece of text abusive tags a piece of text Oh, it's a smaller a Essentially like saying You know this is a political statement. You're you want your behind freedom of speech You know this is not investment also, you know You have to do this if you're about free speech and and this and that and like what is this man? Yeah, that work is really nothing new in my opinion. It's like and people will I know they're gonna come in my opinion Hex is just like the new big connect in my opinion. They have a very dedicated I have yeah, they have gone through all my videos and made hate clips I'm actually in a music video. I'm in a music video. You made it. They call they call us burus Furus yeah, and there's a hex rap video where it's like, you know, they actually have a few my buddies and they have them They have them in caskets They have their picture and a casket and it's like they're burying the furus. It's like weird. It's a weird Why did you guys talk about that? Yeah, because like if you're not with it you're against us I have nothing against text investors. I just don't think the network is good. I Doesn't do much. I think it's just like There's a reason. It's not a coin market cap, you know like where they say it should there's a lot of networks that do the same thing I think it's over layers of so much competition and all these crypto networks and crypto coins and people who are invested in certain ones It's like it's like such a like a tribal competitive world in crypto Especially when it fucking you combine it with social media. It's just like pouring gas on fire You can do anything you want you can fork like you can fork uni swap, right? This is what um, what's his name? Tyler Paz is doing. He has the radio shack. Oh my god. I forgot about that guy He has the radio shack brand and essentially I looked into this a little bit He's like forking uni swap and then calling it radio shack or something like that Like a radio shack decentralized exchange. He bought radio shack. He has the rights to it So he's actually got the rights to a bunch of like old companies that no one gives a shit about and He's trying to like modernize the brand nostalgic. I mean, I don't know anyone who's gonna use that Maybe like that's what Gary Vee always talks about Gary Vee's a big crypto guy, too Gary Vee's more of an NFT guy Gary Vee's with his area in a lot of ways I think he really you know if anyone if there's anyone to credit with like Showing that NFTs are not just monkey pictures. It's Gary Vee. I got to give him props man. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's a Very knowledgeable of stuff. I pretty much everything. I know I learned from watching these videos Nice. Yeah, so Tyler Paz is big into this stuff, huh? Is he selling NFTs too? I couldn't give a shit I don't know. I just saw that someone making fun of it The problem like I said with crypto is it attracts the grifters because it's easy to grift, you know and I've I've had very public beef with people on YouTube and other places Well, just you know, I'm not gonna elaborate on that but let's just say why not which elaborate crypto beef Well, there there's just people that I disagree I disagree with that and I think that are leading the space in a direction that I don't agree with and so we have our We have our moments, you know, he's no BS crypto I'm gonna tell We could pull him up on the TV and shame him right now. Oh, no Richard Hart where you at bitch. It's not Richard Hart. Yeah, Richard Hart, you know He's he's he's not actually There's worse people in Richard Hart Yeah, he looks very entertaining. Oh, yeah, like charismatic. He's got a really cool background on his videos He has a way of like, you know, he's like they've got the Charles Manson vibe Yeah, I dig that where's he live? Maybe I should get him on here That would be an interesting episode. I would love to see you guys You know, he lives God no, but I'm sure he would do it he has a thing where he'd like, you know has people on his He wants to go on people's shows to debate. He's a very good debater But he doesn't do in person though everything he does is remote well because it's a security risk He is quite you know, he has a lot of you know value in crypto and there's a lot of people who just you know Don't like him, so I don't blame him You know Hmm, you know people people in crypto are kind of weird like that You know, I was just seeing the other day. It was just kind of funny kind of off-top Excellus tracking Elon Musk's private that is so sick. That was so funny Um, I was actually I was watching that on that was on TV this morning They were interviewing him on like fucking MSNBC or something like that Like the kids go on full blown mainstream Blown up make a career at anything man. That is crazy His jacket goes everywhere, bro. Okay. Pull up that Twitter account. You on Musk's jet He goes from like Austin, Texas to Sacramento, California like three times a day in his jet. I didn't know people travel Like what what are you what are these people doing? Yeah, there it is Find his actual go to his feet so you can see all of his posts He had like 50,000 followers two days ago now. He's got a quarter million followers Bro, I was standing out of my office and we saw some crazy shit in there That's what we were like what the fuck is that it got today? Yeah, right before I talked to you on the phone Really like we're staying outside. We're like what the fuck is that? Alien looking shit Yeah, they've never seen that before they were gonna do it yesterday. This is jet and cake an apple right now I'm so glad you brought that up because we were tripping for me. Oh, yeah Yesterday they were like literally aborted three seconds before launch Just plowed through the like no no ship Really yeah, we're supposed to launch yesterday at four o'clock. Oh my god That's good go up to the 31st if it was in in Florida No He flew he flew public to get here That's funny. Yeah, and he offered the guy five grand to take it down They can't respond it. He's like I'll do it. He's like I can't do it for less than 50k Oh 5,000 dudes a billionaire Yeah, that's like me. That's it. See me for 50m's bud That's the equivalent of like three pennies that you find in your spare change in the pocket of your hair Yeah, yeah, I have grand But I understand it's about you know like like I have I've had people who squat on my domains My like my Ethereum name service domain Somebody was squatting on it for the longest time. We actually gotten to bit of a feud But he ended up giving it to me You know, I didn't want to pay him for it because it's just like I don't negotiate with terrorists like that But he gave it to me Or like I did some charity where I did charity enough to draw So like we raised some money for St. Jude's it was cool People got to hop on the phone me some people got like artwork. You know, it was like a nice little thing I partnered with David to do so you know Hmm, how do you gotten here there today his name was Rick Ross and he's on key on Rick Ross calm and I think Rick The rapper Alfred and like less than a thousand bucks for it Wow, he eventually sold it for I think around 10,000 but I feel bad I actually just curb Rick Ross He was trying to go live with me, but I was moving and I was like dude, I'm sorry He's trying to do what? He has a new NFT collection. Come on. Oh, does he really? He wanted me to do a live with him on TikTok. I was like I'm moving Too busy You're gonna be propped up on my on my hookah like to How to stand it's all about I hope he does all pictures of Rick Ross's NFTs Is this the real Rick Ross or is this Rick Ross? I want to see what looks like which Rick Ross What? We look at it did a live stream free Ricky free way Ricky What's up? Oh, he originally Oh, not the rapper Oh, no, we're gonna get the free right. Oh, the OG right? Yeah, yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah Yeah, there's a little bit of name name difference there Yeah, really Well, when you say Rick Ross everyone thinks of the fucking the hip hop or rapper Yeah, yeah That's I guess he must be like pissed off that he keeps getting mistaken for that I mean, I like I would be kind of pissed who does Original right? Yeah, I think he tried to sue him for that I think he changed his name actually because he changed it to freeway after Rick Ross No, I think Rick Ross changed the rapper changed his name Because I got out of prison. I think he sued him for stealing his name I heard that Rick Ross the rapper owns the biggest swimming pool in the United States Really at his house that he's like a house in Atlanta He got some big house remember when the Ford God does a lot of swimming I remember when Ford's y'all to blow into his big house party and they showed the big house and not my enemy but Atlanta Apparently, that's the biggest swimming pool in the world not the world the US Check that out someday. I think he does a lot of float and only he does So all right one thing I try to understand is this Proof of steak with ethereum that's gonna shut down all the ethereum miners And now there won't be any gas fees on a theory when you try to make turns out No, so gas fees they depending on you are is gonna pay a gas fee right unless you're but you don't pay it with Bitcoin right You do you do pay it with Bitcoin? Yeah. Yeah. So you know, there's gonna be a cost always to send something unless you're using a technology like Nano which uses block lattice to no fee polygon Polygon SVs too. They're just very nominal. You have you're paying a quarter of a cent Okay, and that's what's exciting is like that you know, you're paying a quarter of a cent instead of a two hundred dollar Two hundred dollar fee, you know that frustrating You know, you just have to bite the bullet because everything's on the theory It's just the biggest one. There is it's the strongest network But no, yeah, well even when a theorem switches to proof of steak The gas fees theoretically should increase They just had an update last year which was supposed to out the gas fees But all it did was stabilize them to be high consistently Instead of bringing them down to a consistent price. So my hope is that Ethereum comes to a point where Combined with a layer tos That it has like polygon that it it's affordable for the average person, but it's not so I tell people I used to tell people go get some Ethereum and hop into DeFi go You know experiment with with new technology, but it's just not feasible because you're going to need 500 bucks to do anything On a theory. So I tell people go to the binding smart chain Go to avalanche go to polka dot. What is what are you talking about? What I knew it? I don't know what avalanche polka dot any of that is different network different networks Like Ethereum like Ethereum like Ethereum for the for the for the Sort of but not really yes in this in this scenario. Yes. They okay, you can just imagine that You know you log in and you can use the blockchain Through a wallet, you know just You know there are some EVM compatible networks the Ethereum virtual machine a lot of this a lot of a lot of the tech is just a theory In forked and change slightly okay. Yeah, I see what's that. Yeah, but like Solana is non-EVM compatible. It's a good example. Solana has been like this big up in comer I think it's overrated, but really yeah centralized to take sacrifice. EVM compatible either compatible with the same Like layout is the Ethereum like your metamask when you log in a metamask It's EVM compatible. So you have to just add the network and it's seamless integration You know, but like Solana you need the phantom phantom wallet, which they just raised 106 million I think to the lana that phantom a wallet on Solana wallet. Okay, so Lana has a lot of See that I get so much more confusing than you have all these fucking wallets You got coin-based wallet metamask wallet So that's why we're saying like EVM compatible why it's so important is because if you if you play in like De-filing or that's not a real place, but you know, I mean like if you it is a project. I think is it If you The names the names kill me if you play in this space and you're connecting like in your you're doing blockchain gaming or something like that Right or you're running nodes or you're training your crypto or NFTs right You know, like for most people they use metamask right so I you know I have downloaded metamask on as an extension And you say like oh, it's compatible on that network that network is compatible with that wallet and it allows me to just connect The same address to that side. Okay, so in the future a While it's probably gonna be as common as like a social media account like if you don't have one like you're probably not gonna Be able to walk around web3 that easily and web3 is already here What the fuck does web3 even mean it's a bullshit term Botion term like what when people ask me. Hey man. What are the best web three coins? I'm like motherfucker. This is web three like we're in web three. Okay, so we're in West So it's like for three of the web well, yeah, so like we're removing sort of the the big tech giants from the equation or at least that's what we're trying to do We're not only the financial middlemen, but the social middlemen We want to essentially eliminate a lot of these Corporations with so much power over us through web three and that that sucked the profits so like your data Your like Facebook and Twitter its ownership. That's probably the best way. How is that gonna happen? Do you know how much money I've made from just using DeFi protocols like I don't even know what a DeFi protocol is from DeFi projects so like the Ethereum name service, right? Dot e you know you know e in estimates dot e You ever heard those no so it's like so so the blockchain boy dot e The blockchain boy dot e exists. Okay, and instead of okay. Okay. Okay. That's why those Twitter people have their Twitter name Dot e exactly so instead of a bullshit wallet like no one wants to use that you just type in The blockchain boy dot e and you can send me whatever you want for better for worse. That's just in the browser Any browser in a in a like metamask or like if you want to send me An address but you could also use it as a domain name You know if you want to really build decentralized websites You know I CP is probably my favorite like decentralized Way to build stuff because they do it more on the blockchain instead of Compromising on central easy use case example would be like research have you heard a pre-search? No pre-search is like Google that doesn't screw you Like so every time I search on pre-search instead of Google getting paid by XYZ Avitizer right I get paid so I cook my wallet up to pre-search and of Google getting paid by XYZ advertising. Right. Right. I get paid. So I hook my wallet up to pre-search. And now every time I search for something and search ended, it actually searches Google, Yahoo, DuckDuck, Go, YouTube, like all these other sites. And now when I search for something, yeah, I see my account go up by like 15 cents every time I search. Like, Brave browser, you heard of Brave browser? I have heard of that. Yeah. Basic attention token. You're rewarded for the ads that you see essentially and stuff like that. So you get paid to use it. We're taking, we're taking the, we're taking away the tools that made the, the, you know, the Elon Musk's the tech giants of the world and giving it to the people that use the networks in the first place. I got an air drop for having an Ethereum name. And that air drop was worth three to $4,000. I wasn't, they did a business inside our article about it. Air drops. Air drops are fucking sweet. What the fuck is an air drop? If you're, if you're an early one, bro, hey, he was construction full time. I just fucking do these podcasts, but this is like the second or third crypto podcast I've ever done. We can get really, we can get people. Yeah, they're still on web. It would take weeks and weeks. Think of it like this. Like, like, uh, you're being rewarded for using a network and providing value to that network. Who, who pays you the same people that would pay the company? So, well, no, it's just routed through you. It is. No, not necessarily air drops are a little different. So, oh, not for air drops. I was talking like with research in the advertisers. Yeah, that's, that's broadening your own data. Like, like your you, you have, you have value to like, you ever hear the term like, if the products free, you're the product. Yes. Yeah. So that's like on websites when you go and use a free product, they're collecting data about you and selling it to another company. Right. And then that version is profiting off. And it's like leaving you in the dust with no show for anything that you just provided to that company. See what I mean? So, web three is essentially a way to not be sort of complicated to explain without being too, like detailed about it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was a governance air drop. So, governance token was air drop to you, uh, depending on how long you had your name, how many you had, how long you basically reserved it for. Uh, some people made 60 grand, man. I mean, it was crazy, you know, people really make a lot of money from these. You know, we had one called looks rare. It's an NFT marketplace. And I think my air drop from that was like, five grand, maybe six. And now, like, like, like, it's not like here's just $5,000. Congratulations for holding your stuff. Yeah. Call off. I for like, we'll also like why you would get air drop. Like you said, air drop to governance token, right? So like, if I own something and I'm on that network, and they know that I'm a holder of whatever that is, right? They can then program it to go, okay, we're going to do a massive air drop, right? Hook up your wallet. Those parameters will validate that you are an owner of XYZ coin, right? And then we're now giving all the owners of this and air drop of tokens, right? In that case, was a governance token. Okay. So now they're air dropping these governance tokens. And now when he says like, oh, I made five grand off of that, he then took the governance tokens that he got and was like, I'm going to sell these right away because they're valuable. Right? People want those government and crashed and sell it. Right. And then boom, you got an air drop of $5,000 worth of governance tokens that just sold immediately. So on these search engines or browsers or whatever, are there people like people paying to be seen on there? I mean, it's just like any other, any other browser. It just, it's rewarding you for using it. I mean, I'm not a huge brave guy. I've never really used you in Josh. He's a big brave browser guy. But you know, uh, best example of this that people that is topical that people will know is this looks rare marketplace that just dropped because open sees terrible. They blew up real quick, they didn't have the staff to support billions of dollars flowing in. And they made some mistakes. And that's, you know, it's okay. Open see they've done a lot for the space, but there's another empty marketplace called looks rare that air drop to bunch of tokens to anyone who would like traded NFTs on open sea, I believe, and all you had to do was like listing NFT on their marketplace. And people got a lot of money from that. And so now they're real competitor. They're sometimes outdoing the volume on open sea. So how do you think that these types of browsers or search engines or whatever are going to take over websites like Twitter and Facebook and decentralize the powers that be on the internet? The monopolies. It's going to be niche for a while. But I think we'll see if we, if we continue to see the crypto market grow and expand, I think we'll see better alternative form. Uh, because people, there's a financial incentive for people to be on these platforms. So they are rewarded for using these platforms. And you know, it's hard to turn that down, especially when you know you're getting a comparable experience, but it's not going to be easy by any means. And a lot of what like these big, two companies are doing is they're kind of trying to co-op the movement back in 2017. It was really core defy people. I mean, look at, look at who sits on the Hedera hash graph, the council, right? Hedera is not a very good network in my opinion. Well, you can have your opinions. They're doing good steps. They're trying to decentralized at this point of a blockchain, but they, the council members on Hedera are huge corporations. Is that really the spirit of what that is? Is that the network we want to use? I don't think so personally. It's a fine line too, because you know, like you were saying, like with, uh, open C being too, too big and or, or been not being big enough to handle everything. Like with a lot of this stuff does that come up in these different protocols that come up. Um, like there's a lot of unforeseen consequences that can occur. And stuff that we can, or they're trying to hold, you know, big tech accountable for. You see the hearings and this and that and they drag like Jack Dorsey or, you know, whoever out in front of the committees. And, you know, it's like to the to the mass public, it's, it's kind of a, uh, a wake-up call to realize like, oh, wow, our politicians don't know shit about the internet. You know, they're trying to randomly layer. Yeah, it's rough. But then to that same fact, it's like those types of hearings and pressures on those guys are what stop, you know, like, like trafficking from going on on Twitter more sites. It's those type of pressures that like stop that. So when you have a decentralized network, you really need to, and why we say like, oh, communities so important, like, you need to foster a good community. Like you need to build a good community. Otherwise the project goes south real fast. You know, because who knows who comes onto that network or what the, the governance is on one of the, uh, one of the projects. I'm working with a little bit. It's called BBS network. Essentially, think of it like a Reddit on the blockchain, every post is an NFT. You can buy it. You can host your own BBS. They're really trying to stop the shitposting. And it's funny because that's when you remove the barriers, when people are anonymous, shitposting is what happens. And this what happens a lot in DeFi. Uh, that's why there's so many good memes. You know, that's why you see you people want to buy the Constitution. Why do they want to buy the Constitution for the meme? I think it's interesting to see. It's really a social experiment as much as we want to say the computers are the ones that are doing this and that. But it's really goes back to the community and the social aspect of it. We're really just doing a huge experiment that has a lot of implication on the future of this tech, you know, and to a lot of people, they just don't, they're not there yet. And that's okay. But it will come a time when this stuff is integrated. It's interesting. It is a community, but a lot of the people in the community, they're, they're also anonymous, right? It's like essentially like something similar to Reddit or for Chan. Yeah. I mean, there are some projects that are run by semi anonymous or anonymous people being doxed is very important. I don't know when you're when you're when you're the head of the projects you want to be like everyone has to know who you are in real life. But you say community, nobody knows who these people really are. Like most of the people are just anonymous. Reputation is everything, you know? And and crypto is a very small space professionally speaking. Everybody knows or at least is heard of somebody else. Reputation is also that. It's weird though because like there's so many people on like crypto Twitter, I was just talking talking to a guy there a day and he's got like his name is like some weird, I think it was like hitton.eth and he's got like 300,000 followers. I don't know who the hell he was. His profile image was an NFT and he says he's like a CEO of 12 different companies. And it's like how do you know who the hell this guy is in real life? You know what I mean? They have so many followers, many people obviously trust him and follow him. I saw like he was followed by Obama. But like he was like some made up name with a made up profile picture. Smoking mirrors bro. I told you man this industry is there a lot of smoking mirrors. Maybe it's like an omeart to the to to the like if you said who's the Jesus of cryptocurrency you'd say Satoshi Nakamoto right? Right? Who is Satoshi Nakamoto? How many people? If you're if you're you know in the space and you want to like idolize somebody you're idolizing somebody who isn't doxed right now like so. There's something to it when there's something to that though like people that are anonymous, they're more mysterious. When you don't know like what they're where they are or what they look like. It also makes them like it almost makes them like more of an idol or like a god like figure. You know what I mean? People can decide who they want that you can assign what they look like in your own head based on something else. And this is actually very funny. One of the guys who got exposed is guy named Beanie Maxie on Twitter. He sent some involvements with other projects that people you know I don't have really have a side. I just think it's funny. People got in pissed off pissed off at him and they found out who he was and now it just means of him and he's like not taking it seriously. You know because he's like some like white dude who just looks like your average guy. That's who you are. Now no one cares. Yeah. I don't know. I think it's cool. You know like it's just exciting. Every day is exciting in this space. Yeah. Well, it's like the beginning of the regular internet. Everything when everything was anonymous. People who were message boards, people posted shit anonymously. No one had to worry about it. And you know when everyone had to become good into your social security number to have an account on Twitter, then you know they start selling your data and it just becomes more corrupt. But it's a fun time, man. Like and also I think this is the best space for anyone who wants to be an entrepreneur to build in. You can build in a lot. I'm very bullish on the creator economy. I'm very bullish on crypto. I'm very bullish on tech. And I think we've had a nice merger of a lot of these. And I think it's the best space for anyone to build in who wants to do something great in my opinion. Yeah. A lot of people especially when it comes to like the creator stuff and like the social media stuff, everybody in the creator side of things complains about how the tech company is like to censor everything you're talking about. Yeah. I was almost banned. I was almost banned. Really? Yeah. I was almost banned. It wasn't just me. Everyone was getting heat. And you know why it was because the fast holes were pumping garbage coins like SafeMoon, garbage project. You know the guy originally did a bar stool guy promote that? I think so. Yeah. Do the original guy was like off the back of a cereal box on their website before they changed it. SafeMoon was a scam that got too big to fail and they had to take it legit. In my opinion, allegedly. So what happened to you? What did you post a video? You just TikTok was banning. Oh, it's TikTok bans everybody. No, yeah. But it was specific to crypto. All the crypto and we it was a huge article like 12 different people were in there. It was, but I think, you know, I think they figured out like who's legit now because one of the marketing heads of TikTok follows me now and so they don't ban my posts anymore. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It was sweet. One day I woke up. I had it. I got in permanently banned like for like 24 hours. And I woke up and never again was there a video down. So I don't know who the TikTok gods are. But thank you for doing that. Yeah. I remember being in my office and him calling me, going Hey, bro. I think I just got banned. And I was like, and this is a point where he was the only creator that we had under the crypto night brand. And we were launching a new product in our discord like we had just launched the price. And I was like, oh my God, it's all crumbling. This moment he goes, yeah, man, I don't know what we're going to do. Yeah, man, it's it's it's uh, it's not comforting having the future of your business reliant on these social media networks. No, that's when they ban you for everything. But social media is the single most powerful tool for businesses now for sure, you know, like hands down. TikTok's still very underrated. You guys should be posting clips. Can you pull out this guy's TikTok? What's your TikTok name? The blockchain boy on TikTok blockchain. Oh, wow. That was quick. I was in your eye. Damn 500,000 followers on TikTok. Doesn't mean anything. Six million likes. And followers do followers don't mean shit on TikTok. Really? No. The only thing it matters on TikTok is is your content good. It'll be seen. You don't make you know how much money I make from the creator fund. I think maybe $1,000 a month on TikTok. I reckon the tens of millions of views on TikTok. And I reckon that that that very low enough. What makes a video good on TikTok? You have to learn how to engage people. You have to learn how to grab attention. There's a certain way to make TikTok content. Have you ever made a tuck a video to the chicken and macaroni dance? No, I can't say I have. I'll make one for you if you want it. Will you? Do you know it's something I'm talking about? I have no idea. I was saying it for the sake of not getting clipped. But yeah, I've been taking a break from posting because I'm moving. So you just find the popular songs on or the popular trending songs on TikTok and you make a video to that song, right? Sort of. I mean, you know, you have to hop on trends, but you know, that's not going to build a community. You have to offer value to people. You have to create that engaging content that's going to bring people back. What are you offering them? Or you know, it's not like, well, what are you selling are you providing value? Are you educating? Are you being funny? Are you like, you know, causing an emotion and people? Whether that's positive or negative? Interesting. You have to learn how to communicate effectively and do it in 60 seconds. And that's the hardest part. But I've gotten pretty good at it. You know, like I think so. Like it. Thanks, man. Appreciate that. The craft has been slowly evolving. So when the fuck is Bitcoin and Ethereum and all these cryptos going to come back to what they were two weeks ago a month ago, that is a very open and in question because they're tied to the stock market right now. They are tied to the stock market. Why is that? Because think of it like this, like where's the liquidity for the stock market coming from from the, you know, the money printing and that liquidity in the stock market is going crazy and that provides other funds to invest in crypto. And crypto is seen as a speckled risky asset. So it's like the stock market like did a line of crack. And yeah. So crypto will mirror almost sort of by the movements of what the stock market does. But there will be a time when it's decoupled from the stock market. You see? Yeah. Even with all the regulation and they're talking about with the, with the Biden trying to regulate it and all that shit in the news about it. And I couldn't regulate, you know, to, to, uh, to damp socks. I don't think they understand it in a faraguated. And that's what scares me honestly. Probably, and you're probably right. I disagree a little bit. I think that we'll see a good comeback this year in crypto. I do think we'll start seeing those higher highs this year before we go into an entire bear market, if you will. But I think that that crypto, you know, the reason it tracks it is because so many of the big boys are now here, you know, like so much big money is now in crypto. It's like it's, it's no longer a question. People like when the Institute won the Institute, the institutional money is in crypto now. And it's still growing. But for the most part, like I think that I think crypto single handedly this time around saved our economy from going into complete despair back in 2020. Like I really do believe that that's why we started seeing that run up in crypto. And when people were like, how are we going to start, start trading things when you when you had like something like like 2020 happen, you know, I mean, having a new asset class, it's happened before like it happened in the 1970s. It happened when before like mortgages and real estate were like collateralized and being sold around everywhere. We were going into an economic collapse. And they were like, well, let's just create a new financial industry. And they were like, so we'll take mortgages and we'll start trading them like stocks. And then a whole housing market of products came out and people started trading this is obviously a much grander scale. But I think that there was a lot of a high in the scenes going, hey, cryptocurrency could save the economy. We could run this out a little bit more. And also back in 2017, the retailers controlled the market now retail market is only 30% of the volume. If that it's the institutions, the bots, the whales, and they're manipulating it. I mean, they will manipulate it as much as they can. It's very easy to do. And they will continue to do so until I guess regulations come in. And then, you know, the, you know, the, the, you know, the JP Morgan's the official official boy stepping. Although some of them are already stepping in, I mean, even with the reports, even when I was leaving, like they weren't really talking about it. I mean, there was there was whispers around it. But now they're like full on in their, like, in their company reports. They have whole crypto sections like for financial advisors for, for all that. Like they brief on how to talk to your clients about crypto currencies. How would the government regulating it affect it? What would it change? Fiat gateways. That means exchanges. No more anonymous exchanges. Well, no, that's basically dead. Coinbase reports to the IRS. Okay. And anonymous exchanges. I mean, they're already going after you. And he swap. This is already, already looking into that. Honestly, I think as much as as much shit as I give ripple and XRP, you know, I think that they're doing us a favor by keeping the SEC occupied because I think they're going to come finance finance. Finance is next up. They did, you know, finance did a lot for the space, man. I remember trading B&B at $5. They did a lot for the space. They hopped in and went. They didn't really care about the regulations. They just did what they were going to do, made a bunch of money. Another the king of the space government don't like that. You know, I'm saying derivatives markets have been closing ever since the first of this year across multiple countries from finance is a little sus activity going on. The derivatives markets really power the crypto prices. A lot of these fluctuations up and down. People getting liquid dated longs and shorts. And you know, we're seeing this kind of this kind of happen. Another thing is I'm worried about his tether a little bit. You know, tether floods been around for a while. I don't trust him. I don't hold a lot of tether. If I can help it, we'll see. But I think 2021 is going to, our 2022 is going to be quite rocky, in my opinion. I'm a little more not bearish, but I'm more like, okay, let's see what they're going to do with the regulations. Let's see, you know, what projects they're going to come after. And I'm sure it's going to have a cascading effect on the rest of us before we can actually see the industry start to grow in a more professional manner. Yeah, I don't like, I don't like guessing. And I'm not always right, which is, which is why I decided to create a bot company in the beginning. Which is like, I'm going to let smarter people build something to handle this office set set of protocols. And it kicks ass. It does. We've been testing it. We've been testing it now for I think three months. And we did an alpha test with like small group people. And it got a 90% hit which was 90% of the time was accurate, which is way more than I am. So I was super happy about that. Well, yeah. That's wild. Yeah. It tells you basically what it does is it'll break down a ton of different coins. And it'll tell you when to get in and out of them. And for the most profit, you know, so we had a guy make 300% 300% in one trade, some crazy shit, because he was just like, we told people like, Hey, you don't have to trade dog. This is just for you to reference, like to see if you like it or not, guy was doing 100 X leverage. They wouldn't let me in the chat. I wanted to come say hi, you know, but no, I wouldn't let him in. I'm a bit of a you want you in there to take talking on. Yeah. That was a hard decision. No, it wasn't you in Jackson, my homes. Yeah. It's to be clear. We're not the brains behind the bot. Oh, God, no, smart, smart guy actually, uh, we met on TikTok. All the people that I've met on TikTok are people that work with me now, you know, somewhere we found them. You know, crypto, Wendy, uh, was one of the first people ever met. She's massive. Done massive things. One of the best female voices in the space. An example, I think for women who want to get into crypto, I think they should really check her content out because she's been through a lot. Like she's the best. The misogyny in the space, man. Like it's pretty bad. It's pretty bad. Like the object. Dude, do you think like being a girl on the internet is tough? Imagine people who are chronically online who are oftentimes like deprived of social interaction, uh, and who have a bunch of money harassing women. Like there's it's a problem. I'm not going to lie after like talking to Wendy. She's done a lot. She's been through a lot. So I respect her a lot. She came on the team. We're very close with her shout out to crypto, Wendy. Oh, and we've also got crypto, whether man who built the bot, we had a discussion about TA. I was like, man, TA's horseshit. It's astrology for men. He's like, yeah, technical analysis. I'm like, these people drawing lines on charge. No, no, he sat me down. He's like, let me teach you TA. So we hopped in a zoom call five minutes into the zoom call. I knew I was going to ask him to come work for us. Like he, his brain is, is amazing. And so his personality and you put, put that together, you get it. Really kick ass guy who can do some cool shit. And so he built the algorithm for this spot, literally scrapes news sites and social media to see if it's bullish or bearish. No one else is doing that. Yeah, the bot has the bot has some some really cool functionality. And it was, we I knew the second I met crypto, weatherman. I was like, this is great. I need to introduce you to my partner. My partner is a data scientist. This guy's like level 10 genius. Amazing. And we put them in a room together. And it was just like magic. And then three months later, and a ton of dev work. And now we have some some some some working signals that we can actually put out there and help people trade and hopefully not lose a lot of money. I got to talk about Josh. Our last crater is Joshua Jake who's out here helping us run up this new company. He designed our studio. One of the smartest guys I've ever met when it comes to researching stuff. So that's our dream hands down. Yeah, two first names. Josh. Like Jake. I like them already. I was like, I'm like, team. I met him in Miami. We shit. We went out one night. We shared a hookah. And I told I showed him I showed him that business letter that I wrote to my now one of my now business partners. And I showed him that and he was like, yep, I'm in. He's like, he's like, you don't want to know how this is going to work. He's like, no, he's like, I'm down. And then a month later, he moved from San Diego to Orlando. And we're building out the studio. We were in my hotel room in Miami at 4am. I was writing a diss track to somebody that I was feuding with the time. He's a crypto diss track. I don't know. You want to look it up. Pull it up. Pull it up. Oh, my copy. I'd be copywriting. I'll just do this. So this was a story. And Josh was there hyping me out. He was drunk as hell. I ended up getting poisoning. We had to like drag him into the car. We got Cuban food in the morning. Dude was like vomiting on the side of the road from like this horrible bug. Where did you get it? Oh, God. They went to some fucking food truck. I stayed at the hotel. I was pooped. I was Miami. Yeah. This was for Bitcoin 2021. Okay. Yeah. We had a lot of spots in Miami. It was a good time. Miami is like the the crypto capital of the world. I was there in 2019 when they unveiled the Bitcoin center in Miami, the mayor. I was right next to the mayor. I have a video of him cutting the rope. And I knew from that point you were right next to him. Like like from me and the guy back there with the cameras. That's how far it was. It was like that moment I knew Miami was going to be on the spot. There was no going back. Crazy. Yeah. Crazy shit. Dude, I just saw a video the other day of this dude in Miami. He looks like a young guy and he's owns. He was like walking through his house. He owns some house on the water. And it's just full of NFTs everywhere. Make sense. You know, I saw how bad he's told. He's like Pierre. He's like a French guy. He's on Twitter. I think I might have seen a, yeah, he's like Twitter from from his house on Twitter. It was on it was on vice's YouTube channel. It was a it was a clip from vice on Twitter. Somebody re-tweet. Okay. I saw the dude Miami is like the golden like crypto kingdom. I don't know. Yeah. It's crazy. It's my favorite artist is down there. You know, who? It's named Sergei. You know, he's got a lot of like Bitcoin artwork. I saw him in 2018. First crypto conference I went to. Nobody was there. 2018. Same conference hall in 2021. Were you at the one in Miami down there in 2018? Blockchain shift. No. North American Bitcoin conference. That was a different one. Yeah, there's too many conference. Very botany thing on Silk Road. No, but I did meet Ross Obrick's mom. Yeah, I had her on here too. Yeah, she was a very nice woman. And I love to reconnect with her because we were on Skype and I was like trying to, you know, help her out. And but I was like, I was like 17. So I didn't have shit. But now I have a platform, you know, and she's she just wants her son home and isn't it crazy? The sentence that kid got. They made an example quadruple the sentence of El Chapo ridiculous. Absolutely ridiculous. Or double double El Chapo sentence. Something insane. It's just it's a little sad, man. You know, but this is what happens when you have when you have people who are kind of figureheads and they want to crack down on it, you know, the kingpin charge. Yeah. For some kid that just created some eBay for crypto, crypto eBay. It goes back to that whole like unintended consequences of what you're building. Yeah. And then people start using it for nefarious acts and you're like, but it's with everything. You know, it's like people like, oh, crypto currency, like isn't that, you know, what people use to buy drugs? I remember somebody told me that at a bar one time. It was a buddy of mine. I was like, bro, you, you smell pot, right? Because like, yeah, it's like, what'd you pay your dealer in? It's like cash. Like, yeah, the cash is used for nefarious things like any medium of exchanges. You know, so it's it's ridiculous. The same thing happened with you know, um, who burner is. Yes, he's the guy, like the drug dealer, the burn he's guy, the cookies guy cookies. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So luckily he was rich enough at the time and probably connected enough, but he had like absolute fiasco of a launch of some social network that he launched. And it was like the social network without censorship in the whole thing, like immediately blew up. And he was probably facing the same sort of charges because now he had this like free social network with no moderation and immediately was like drugs, sex trafficking. Oh, yeah. Just like the worst, the worst, not the memes, not all that. And it was like he got out of it. But like he probably would have been facing a lot of the stuff. That's so that's so crazy though. I mean, that's the craziest thing that that you make these people responsible for the users of the platform. Right. Well, like, you know, they watched so that we could run. They did the hard things, you know, even like Charlie Shrem, you know, this is another example of that. Shout out Charlie Shrem. Yeah. Like, these are the innovators that, you know, have paid the price for innovating in my opinion. What happened to Charlie Shrem? He lives in a Sarasota. Yeah. Awesome guy. Yeah. Cool guy. He was like one of the first crypto exchanges in the world. Yeah. And they ended up doing like crazy volume. And because of like, I think it was because of the Silk Road stuff this was years ago. I was before my time. I was like, 12. They got him on a money transfer, not having a money transfer license. It was something like that. And it was over something, something ridiculous that he, you know, when it was brought to his attention, he took action to like there was no reason for him to get pinched like that. It was, it was completely messed up. And it was, it was, and that, then obviously like, I mean, you're, that was at a time where it was like the equivalent of trading like. And it was, and then obviously, like, I mean, you're, that was at a time where it was like the equivalent of trading like tokens on a video game. You know what I mean? Like, and they're like, well, you don't have my transfer license, so jail. Like, how long did he spend in jail, you know? I'm not, I'm not sure. I'm not. Wasn't that long? I think he got out pretty quickly. Okay. But it was still like- It made a whole documentary about it, I think. Yeah. Yeah. It's been years since I like research this case, but we've had a few interactions briefly. But he's definitely, I would, I would consider it was absolutely a crypto OG. Yeah. You know, like when you talk about like crypto, he's like, Charlie Shramp, Eric Bork, he's like, a lot of those guys. I think the boss twins, you know, they, you know, Mark Zuckerberg, man, off of his bag, but they, they got theirs too, man. Yeah, like these are, these are, these are, yeah, their story is crazy, right? There was a like, buy your car, a bezer or something when they learned about, uh, Bitcoin or something. And they had just got paid their first billion dollars and they put all of it into a crypto. Yeah. Absolutely wild. Imagine if went the other way, you know, they'd probably be serving this fries at the drive-through. Yeah. But hey, man, that's like crazy thing about it though. I mean, like, like, you don't know where it's going to go. And you set like, it's like, you buy an NFT today for $100,000. It could be worth $150,000 tomorrow. And then you sell it, make a degree and but then two weeks later, it's worth fucking million dollars. And you'd be like, God damn it. But are you mad? Yeah. Kind of. Still made mud. Yeah, but you're still mad. But like, just got to find the next one. Yeah. It comes down to conviction. So many opportunities. It's just like betting. Yeah. There's like, there's a lot. There's a lot. There's a lot. There's a lot to that somebody asked me in my comment section, you know, do you gamble? We have a story of that. But, uh, and I'm like, no, I don't gamble. I gamble for a living. You just have to have the conviction and belief in this technology and the projects that you choose. Yeah. So that's really what it is. Like, you have to. You got to stick to it. You can't just dip your toe in and expect to win. I mean, you can. I mean, you can dollar cost average into Bitcoin and have your nice, you know, two, three ex gains over time. However, you want to do that in my opinion. No financial advice. I was going to say that. No, you don't. I like to say it. I like to say it. I've told you this too. Like everybody's talking hung up on like financial advice and like, I don't want to sound like a dick. Someone's like, yeah, everybody's crazy. This is not financial advice and like give a whole disclaimer. What are they worried about? So, so it's, it's one, you only have to worry about that. If you are an actual financial advisor and you're registered and two, if you're blanketing it on media to people, it doesn't matter. You can, you can literally tell people, buy Bitcoin. That's it. Like, but if you're telling it to a blanketed audience and it's not personalized to a single person, it's not financial advice. I think it's just one of those things where like they saw somebody do it and then everyone just copied it. Everybody does it. They don't know why they do it. They just pet feed. Well, also, it's like you don't want to be that guy. You know, that's like this cryptocurrency is going to this price and it's going to happen. And I'm certain of this. I have my insight sources. I just in that. And it doesn't happen. And you look like a jackass in front of everybody because that's what Richard Hart does. No. Okay. But, you know, this is just like some of the stuff in the crypto scene. Like, you know, like everyone's always talking about going to the moon and this and that. I liked it. Like I said before, bringing it back. I like to do realistic outcomes and expectations because it's not all sunshine and roses. You know, it's not a rose garden for y'all. It's really, it's tiled by far, dude. You're going to come in here. You're going to get your ass handed to you probably. But it's the only way you're going to learn. It's the price of your education. Too many people try to jump in and just want to get rich overnight. And it's like, you know, I have buddies who like come to me and they're like, I want to trade NFTs. And I'm like, you should not be trading. I have to start start with like small and you can make it. But if you have the money to buy one of those apes, you can make so much money flipping them. Pretty much every single ape that's for sale. You can look at it was, it was bought 20 days earlier for like 50 grand less. Well, you don't even need that much money. You can strip NFTs for come on a box, man. You know, like pull up the invisible friends, like the invisible friends right now, huge. I think it's going to be a blue chip right off the bat looking today to get white lives on open sea. It just look up invisible friends NFT. It's not yet. Okay. You can tell when these NFTs are coming and when they're going to do well, just by just by like being in the space, you'll know the invisible friends, I think, yeah, seven to nine Ethereum for price when they drop. Really? Seven to nine. Seven to nine. Are you kind of cool? Okay. Yeah. Oh, that's great. Seven to nine. E. That's super dope. Are they animated like this? Yeah. Are you white listed? Oh, no. So you can actually get white listed if you buy. Those are sick. You have to have four NFTs from the previous collections of this artist. And it costs, and it's like $28,000. So I'm sitting here. I'm looking right now. And I'm like, do I want to spend 20 grand to get your white listed? But like, do the rare ones of these? Holy shit. Meaning. So if you get white listed, you buy four of his previous NFTs, you get one of these for free. No, you get the opportunity to pay for opportunity to. And they're going to start at what? Oh, I don't know what the price is for these. I was looking at this morning. They're not like overly expensive. If all of them are animated like these rotating like these looping gifts, that would be super sick. Oh, really? Uh huh. And like dude, it's impossible to get one. You'll need the public sale will be over in a quarter of a second. And it's going to go to the people who pay 30 grand and gas fees. Like the, the hate. 30 grand and gas fees. It's front running each other. You're whoever's got the most money to burn wins. You basically have front run competition. These things I want you to go back and look at them. Seven to nine, eat is my, is my thoughts. It's like a hate beasts. Yeah. Hey, these drops seven to nine, eight floor instantly. Everybody knew it. And everybody was trying to get in on that white less than they could in. What are those worth? Seven to nine. I think, yeah. Well, they started at six. They got to seven pretty quickly. Uh, and that was uncommon for an NFT project like that. Usually the after reveal the four prices tank, but they, they're going to do their, their discord. I think had 400,000. It was like 400,000 people in their discord. That's four times the size of ours. For one project, right? That's not even out, by the way. And only 8000. I guess. So you had 400,000 people competing for 8,000 items. And my friend bought a couple of those, uh, the, um, the, the serums, you know, the, like the beaker with the, oh, shit. Yeah. Like four days ago for on Friday, I think it was he bought him. He bought one of them for 16, eat the other one for like 25, now the one he bought for 16, eat four days later is for selling for like 31. Oh, I thought you were talking about the M3 serum. No, no, no, no, that M one. He bought the he bought two M1s and two M2s. And they're both double what he paid for four days ago. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. The mutinapes. I had an opportunity to buy a mutinape for three. Yeah. As with Alex. We were together with the car. We were in the car. We, you know, ex, that Jamaica guy who was like talking about man. Alex was just not shutting up. We had one friend who's like definitely bleeding atheist and then our, our cab driver. We're a little Haiti, but we're in a little, little, little Haiti cab driver who was like full on about Jesus. Yeah. And they just, they were having a, they were having a pocket. A trumpeted up. He's like, you know, he's speeding away. He's like, he's like, he's talking to me. I thought he's never been in New York before. I'm like, bro. I was like, I'm not trying to get killed on the way to dinner. Like shut the fuck. Oh, it's so fucking funny. Oh, yeah. He was like, New York's a wild place like that. Yeah, man. It is. It is some fun times up there. Give him the gift of Jesus. This last time I saw him gone. Mm. Wow. We've had some good times, man. Like, you know, we do a lot of traveling. We're going to Vegas soon for nothing we're doing. And then we've got plenty of LA. We have coin desk and consensus. And we're partnered with Point Dustin. Do you, uh, do you spend any time in the, in the VR metaverse? Yeah. So, you know, I just bought an Oculus and so did you. Yeah. We both have Oculus down. It makes me sick. Makes me sick. Really? Uh, my tell me her. Yeah. Yeah. That's best game. That's the only game I can play with. The Star Wars game is badass. Star Wars is really good. I almost threw up the fucking lightsaber. So it's like it, it's incredible. Yeah. It, you feel it in your hand. You're like fucking so killing the robots and shit. What about Creed? Have you, have you downloaded Creed? No. It's with. Oh, no. And you got like Sylvester Stallone in there. It's like, yeah, you just, that's it. Yeah. Yeah. That one. Yeah. That's good. You know, I have an interesting story about kind of the metaverse stuff. So this is guy on TikTok. I follow a lot of people spend a lot of time in it. Like every single day hanging out in there. You already, you're already online chronically. Like most people like scrolling Twitter, when you're taking a doos, whatever you're doing this and that. But like our lives are almost, I spend more time online than I do in person. And the metaverse is a natural extension of that. Well, we, the fortnight, you know, fortnight, the big concert play all the time. Marshmallow and the, the Travis Scott, Fortnite is a glimpse into what will be the norm in a couple decades. If not, sooner than that, probably those emotes that you buy and the outfits that are like NFTs kind of, except everybody can buy. Exactly. Exactly. But like, you know, the, the fortnight concept is more than a game. It's, it's like this live events service. Like you can have these things in there and everything is, there's some pay walls to it. But it's still pretty cool. And I think that's kind of of like what we're going into. I'm, you know, I'm very, it's interesting companies looking into this. The guy following TikTok, he has a school in the metaverse in sandbox. And you can get into his school has NFT school by purchasing a virtual jacket that you can wear in the metaverse. I forget his name, damn it. But he, he had a Pepsi executive in his school, who bought one of his jackets, a Pepsi, like executive at Pepsi. Oh, God, he's probably, he's probably a fucking pedophile. It's like, you know, the story really guy from PlayStation. What? Do you hear the story about the guy who was at PlayStation? Holy fuck, bro. He, uh, he was on Grindr trying to get like a 15 year old boy to come to his house. Kid went to his house for can videotape the whole thing. The guy went down hard. Find that article about shit. That got dark fucking pedophile, the pedophile executive at PlayStation. Dude, some of those people are fucked. That's why I'm an Xbox guy. I just bought a PS five. I've never had any, you know, PS five. I just gave him my 360, you know, like I, I literally like, all right, why'd you give me the 360? So you can play guitar here. Most flame game ever made. Yeah, you should see this man shred. Oh, God, you got guitar three, five. That's what we do in the office one. Yeah, when there's some downtime, ripped guitar here. Something else you know, mm. So what is the sandbox? What is that sandbox? Can you explain what sandbox is? There's a few meta versus sandbox. Think of sandbox like Minecraft meta versus Minecraft meta. Yeah. So like everything's blocky and you can have like pots of land. You can build shit in there too. Um, I was an early investor into Victoria VR. Have you heard of that one? Mm hmm. It's a metaverse company. They're doing some pretty cool stuff. They just had their land cell going on. And Victoria VR, like that was the last big metaverse product to blow up. That was insane. That was some good returns on that one. Um, but yeah, so that was like my, my biggest metaverse bag. There's also of course like the central land, uh, and a few other places, like other meta versus and a lot of them are sort of we get, we actually interviewed net Burke, which, you know, is another metaverse company before that any of this happened. It was like a, our first, what are our first interviews? Net Burke. Yeah. I had the opportunity to buy $30,000 of metaverse land. And I was like, this is weird. I don't know if I want to commit 30 K to this. I, you know, I should have done it because it ended up selling for like 10 X. It's a painful one 300,000 dollars for property in the metaverse. Yeah. Something like that. Mm. Man, you know, it's, it's just you own any digital, any metaverse real estate now. I do. Really? I bought some plot about a plot of land in Nebraska, two pots of land in Nebraska in this thing called Earth. And Earth is like, you know, think of it like an alternate reality where Earth has been through this terrible disaster. And it's a game you can have resources in your tiles. I got Jack shit because what the fuck is in Nebraska? Like, get the fuck out of here. I bought the premium shit you gave me to Nebraska. How much do you pay for it? Oh, I think I paid like a grand for the two. Wow. I'm not sure how much I could flip it for right now. I should, check because I also invested into the coin and they did really well too. That was like another big project. Um, but I made some money from the coin. And I think I could sell my land for at least what I paid for it. Maybe more. That's insane. This is the article about the PlayStation guy, former Sony PlayStation exec under investigation after appearing in a pet of sting video. Yeah. So the kid was trying to stay in the book. Fuck. If you watch the video, he literally opens the door, the front door of his house, he's wearing that. He's like in his boxers and a PS five shirt. Oh, yeah. Here's the video. I mean, he turned the volume down. He looks, he sort of looks like the type. I'm not going to be too much of a dick. Just fast forward through all this bullshit. This is probably going to be like, there you go. There you go. Keep going. Oh my God. Keep going. Holy shit. This isn't it. This isn't it. I don't know what the fuck. Oh, that was a lot of video. This is a bunch of bullshit. This is not even it. I thought they had the fucking cops like a Chris Hansen type shit. Yeah. Yeah. Anyways, that's that's crazy. Yeah. Well, Patrick Bateman type. Yeah. Well, thanks for doing this guys. Thanks for having us. Yeah. It was a pleasure. We got deep. We went deep. Yeah, we did. There's a lot to cover. Tell everyone listening and watching where they can find your guys website. So you guys social media, all that all that jazz. Cryptonite.io. Yeah. Check us out. Cryptonite.io. You know, on TikTok at the blockchain boy, all of our cryptonite creators can be found through our website. Come join our discord community, hang out with us. We're about to relaunch some of the stuff. We're going on some educational, free educational resources. I got my my Mandy ego working on that. But yeah, this was great. I've been a fan of the podcast for a while. Like I said, yeah, yeah, thanks for working with Ben and the original. Oh, yeah. That's how you originally found it. Yeah, because I was like in high school, I was like a big, a big, like real estate. I love real estate too. I want to get a lot of people over real estate. So a lot of people are attracted to rich people online. Yeah. Well, I would say it's not about that. It's just about it. It's about that, though. It is. A lot of people, a lot of people that are attracted to wealthy type people who show it and they make social media accounts people just you're attracted to it because that's what you want. You know, that's what you was a character. That's what you're really like. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Everybody wanted to be Dan B. Yeah. He did it. He did it right. That's for sure. Then he might drop them. It's like, stop posting. Yeah, but I fall into school like 20 minutes from here. He went to a very good high school. Yeah. He got kicked out for bringing a gun to school. Yeah, I could see that. That makes total sense. Wow. Yeah. He like pulled up in his car and like pulled this AK out of his trunk and he was like showing it off to somebody. And I guess he didn't know. He didn't tend on doing anything bad. I think he was just showing it off. Yeah. Then he got kicked out. Wild. Wild. Good times. Well, thanks for having me. And this has been a cool. It's our first real podcast appearance. Is it really? Pop the chair. I'm honored. I'm honored to pop the chair. No problem. Yeah, you got to come back anytime. You guys want to talk crypto. Yeah. We can dedicate it stuff too. Like I just, this was a general overview. I could talk for hours until your face is blue. Yeah. We'll do it. All right. Well, cool. Thanks boys. I appreciate it. Thanks guys.