As you know, America just had a presidential election. It's been a very hectic and at times a very contentious campaign season. Many people have been offering their opinions, but unfortunately, most don't have a clue what they're talking about. That's because they haven't been in the heat of the battle directly, but that's not true for our next special guest. This man sparked strong reactions across the board. For some, he's a powerful voice of truth in an unapologetic champion of viewpoints, often dismissed or suppressed by the mainstream media. For others, he's a controversial figure, one who's views and commentary of spark disagreement, criticism, and passionate debate. Whether you're here as a supporter or an inquisitive observer or even a skeptic, there's one thing we can all agree on. Tucker Carlson has had a profound impact on how millions of Americans think about politics, culture, and the media. Today, he's joining us to share his insights and answer my questions in an open thought-provoking conversation whether you love him, hate him, or just want to hear more, please help me welcome the very awesome Tucker Carlson. Yeah, so let's start with what in the heck is the last three days of your life been life? Wild. Yeah. Yeah, I didn't expect that. Yeah. I spent almost 35 years being paid to make predictions about elections. I don't think I ever got a single, oh, bless you. Sorry, I left a sacred beverage backstage. Yeah, I would not have predicted that at all. That Donald Trump would not only win, but win decisively with a mandate, the majority of the popular vote. The first Republican to do that other than the post-9-11 election in 40 years. So I'm still trying to figure out exactly what it meant, but I mean, big picture, it means that the current way of doing things has been decisively rejected, most notably by young people. What was our selection where Republicans won young people? Yeah, I mean, really? You always think of like, you know, your blue-haired daughter lecturing you about, so, no, your blue-haired daughter vote of a Trump, which is kind of wild. She shouldn't have blue hair, but whatever, she vote of her Trump. You won half of Hispanics, the overwhelming majority of Hispanic men, like all the guy that they've been telling us is a racist for the last nine years. If you knew one thing about Donald Trump from 2015 until Tuesday was that he was a racist, because they never stopped telling you that. And his numbers with black voters went up, his numbers with Hispanic voters just crushed it, which is never sitting like that. And so whatever else he is, he's not a racist, obviously. So I do think it's time for his opponents to recalibrate. I don't think any of this is actually about race or sex. I think most people are kind of tired of that. I think those were cul-de-sacs in the first place. I think they were, in fact, in some sense, cyops meant to distract us from what actually matters, which is like economics and war. The things that matter that changed the course of history. And I think on both of those questions, the current administration, you know, is like reckless to the point of craziness. We're in the brink of nuclear war. Why? You know, take a poll of Americans. How many Americans think it's worth risking nuclear war to teach Putin a lesson? I mean, the whole thing's freaking nuts. And because of the nature of our media, which is just North Korean, where no dissenting view is allowed, it shouted down immediately. I don't think people appreciate the current state of the United States relative to the rest of the world, which is greatly diminished. And imperiled. I mean, we're really on the brink of catastrophic conflict, which we will lose, in two different theaters, at least. So, you know, the Biden administration did that. One was last time we read that in the New York Times or saw it on Morning Joe, you haven't. But people sense that things are not moving in the right direction. Then domestically, the Biden administration and then the Kamala Harris campaign were both convinced that inflation was not real somehow. Or that it was just right-wing media complaining about it. It was just Fox News making a big story out of it to get their moron voters to the polls or something. But actually, the data showed going back to the COVID checks that it was entirely real, although it was predictable. But it was as real as $9 butter. I mean, they just like, it even went to the grocery store and knew that. But they could not comprehend it. And instead spent this entire, you know, three and a half, four years lecturing the rest of us about trans issues and race. And you may have your opinions on those things. But they're hardly central to the functioning of a country. Like, what are you even talking about? And it turns out that there are politics where the politics of unhappy rich girls actually just to be totally blunt about it. And unhappy rich girls make them a very small percentage of the American population. So everyone else voted for Trump. So, okay. Now we can have a discussion about adult issues. And I'm really gratified. I don't think, again, that's ideological. It's not even right versus left. Republican versus Democrat. And it's like adults versus people who put signs on their front lawns telling you they believe in science. Well, people like that don't know what science is. Do you know what I mean? Yeah. Their view of science is shut up. Don't ask questions. I don't think that science actually. I think that's kind of the opposite of science. Whatever. Those people lost. People who live in Brooklyn and Bethesda and all the screechy people I deal with in airports, they lost. And I'm really glad. Sorry. No, that's great. Yeah. I love it. But if you could advise America's leaders on restoring the country, what would you suggest focusing on politically or spiritual changes? Well, both those things. I mean, first of all, de-emphasize the race stuff. That's just total poison. Nobody talks about. Like, in your life, you know, are you, when no one's around and you're just with your spouse, your college roommate or your brother or your closest friends, are you like mad about race? Probably not. Most people don't spend their lives thinking about race. Or other people's sex lives, for that matter. They just don't. And if our leaders encourage us to have yet another fake conversation about race, which is really just one person yelling at another person, that person having to take it, like that does nothing but divide the country and makes people hate each other, which is of course their goal. So stop with that. If you engender racial conflict in a population, it's very hard to make that go away. Most Americans do not want that at all. They don't see race first. It's just a fact. This is not a racist country. It's a really nice country. It's a country where people give directions to strangers and like taking straight dogs. It's just people aren't racist actually. And so stop with that stuff. Restore the colorblind meritocracy that we were promised, that is the basis of America. Innovation comes when the most energetic smartest people are allowed to do their thing. One entrepreneur is allowed to be entrepreneurial and artists are allowed to create art. And writers are allowed to write literature. And e-wands allowed to build rockets. And it doesn't matter what color they are, what gender they are. It just matters that they have the energy and the drive and the intelligence and the ability to organize sufficient to get that done. That's just true. And so dismantle the state, the kind of I hate to say it, but they're always calling Trump a Nazi, really? Is he the one who said every person in America has to like identify by race by bloodline? That's sick. We rejected that actually in 1945 and we should reject it again. And unleash the best within each one of us. You built this monument to Martin Luther King on the Mall, okay? Let's follow its precepts. Let's judge each other by the content of our character by what we do rather than how we were born. Like that is the promise of America. And that we spend all this time taking care of gearing our education system to the people who learn the slowest. We should spend a little bit of time helping the people who learn the quickest. It can't just be making every school dumber. What about like the smart kids who want to learn who want to create? Like they should be allowed to do that too. Just back off and let people do their thing and you will create an incredibly beautiful country and stop encouraging them to hate each other. So that's, I mean, those are kind of vibe shifts. These are not specific policies. Those are the first two things I would do. Second, restore order to the world. We again, I cannot overstate this. I'm going to travel a lot internationally. How close to nuclear conflict the United States has been for the past three years, almost three years come February. Like on the precipice of it and because our media don't report this, I think most Americans don't really have a sense of it. But we are truly on the end, on the edge of like ending human life globally. It's crazy. Nothing like this. Nothing as crazy has ever happened probably ever in history. And so the role of the United States, if the United States is going to be a global leader, not its policeman, but a leader, a force for good, it has to become what it once was, which is a force for order and stability, not endless revolution, which is what we have had. Let's knock off the leader of that country and hope for the best. Well, that didn't work. You know, we killed Kaddafi. We killed Saddam. Those countries became worse than they were before. Their open slave markets in Tripoli, Libya will just ignore that. The same people who did that just move on. Let's bump off Bashar al-Assad in Syria. Let's kill Putin and hope for the stop, stop. No more revolutions. This is what the Soviet Union is to do. Run around the world trying to ferment revolutions over the one government and hope that a better government would take its place. That's not how life works actually. It takes an awful long time to create something worth having. this is incremental. Destruction is instant. I can smash a playglass window in a second. Try to make one. You know how playglass wind was made? It's complicated, right? And that's true for countries too. So restore order. The United States should be a force for order. No, we're not going to blow up your natural gas pipeline, which we did to Germany. Destroy the German economy. Destroy the German economy. I don't know how many of you traveled to Europe. Europe is Germany. The European economy is Germany. And that economy has been crushed by what we did. Stop doing things like that. Reorient away from permanent revolution. And the lunatics are now running the State Department beginning with a chief lunatic who's also stupid. Tony Blinken all the way down the chain. Just reorient the whole thing. No, our job is to be paternal. When if you're a father, you come home. Your kids are fighting. Your first instinct is to tell them to keep fighting. Hit them hard. You're a monster. You're a moral criminal. You're a bad dad. No, your instinct is consistent with your duty, which is tell them to knock it off and make up, make things better. And so there are reports. And look, Trump is always, and he does a lot, I think, to feed this perception. He's often criticized as reckless or see to the pants or whatever. But in fact, the opposite is true. I think it is being reported in the last five minutes that one of the first things Trump did after winning was to speak to both Zelensky and Putin and to make it really clear that the net effect of this war in Ukraine has only been the total destruction of the nation of Ukraine. Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian men killed. Eastern Ukraine destroyed. I mean, really, just the elimination of a country, the biggest country in Europe, and no one wins. Like, there's been no upside to this at all. It's been effectively a genocide against the Ukrainians. And we're going to stop it now. We're going to stop it. And he spoke to both of them. That's what a United States president should do. And this lunatic who's been running our country for the past four years, like, hasn't spoken to Putin once because he's immoral, really. Okay. immoral. Find a world leader who's not immoral. What do leaders do? A lot of them kill people. In fact, I'd say about 100% of them do. If they have enough power, they kill people who are in their way. that's what they do. Sorry. I'm against that. That's why I'm not a leader. But that's the nature of global leadership. So it's not a question of finding like a good person in charge of a large country you're not going to. There aren't any. But you can find better people and you can arrive critically at better outcomes. And the better outcome is no more war. And Trump did that instantaneously. And I think it's going to work. That's worth voting for him alone. If you voted for Trump and there are people in your life who are like, I can't believe you voted for Trump. I'm like, I use the right best. Okay. First of all, who do you rape exactly? Or lots of people, really what are their names and why isn't he even charged shut up? Actually, what are you even talking about? Stop with that. Don't accuse someone of rape. Like, what? Stop talking like that. Running around accusing people of things, of crimes, of felonies without any evidence. Like, what's your name? They can't answer. It's all things nuts. Stop lecturing me. Adults, people who run countries, the first thing they do is try and stop pointless wars. They don't ferment pointless wars. They end them. And Trump just did that. So if you voted for Trump on that basis alone, you should be proud of what you did in my opinion. Well, so you have, you've interviewed so many people. I mean, recently Elon Musk, I mean, interviewed Putin earlier in the year. What was that experience like? It was great. It was super interesting. And I just should just say that when I interview somebody, obviously I'm endorsing everything that person's ever done. You know, it does really go back to the American media where I've spent my entire life from the son of a journalist. I grew up around it. So that makes it 55 years have been around this. And it's current state is just, it's almost beyond description in how low and poisonous and dishonest it is. I'm just ashamed to be a part of it. No, I mean, of course you would want to interview. You know, your defaults, if your job is to interview people is to interview the most powerful people and the world, the most significant people in the world. And the point of those interviews is to ask them obvious questions and then let the public in your country, in my case it's the United States, decide what they think. That's my job. And so they did that you wouldn't interview somebody because the State Department doesn't like him or the senile guy in charge of the countries declared war on him without making a rational resolution that the government doesn't want you to interview. I don't care what the government wants. I'm an American citizen. I could talk to anybody I want to and moreover I can have any opinion I want to. That's my birth rate and that's why I don't live in Sri Lanka, okay? Or North Korea or any other country. I'm American, okay? That's what it is to be American. So I'm not being defensive. I actually don't care that the New York Times call me a Putin lover. What I don't, you know, anyone who believes New York Times is like, okay. Good luck. It's just a little bit more wiltering that nobody else want to interview Putin because what the CIA tells you you're not supposed to want to. If the CIA tells me I'm not supposed to want to do something and they certainly made that very clear to me, that makes me want to do it more. I mean that's my job. And if you find yourself like on the set of morning Joe taking orders from the Intel agencies, then maybe you should just go work for the Intel agencies. Maybe you should admit that to your viewers. Well, you know, today's program is brought to you by the NSA because effectively it is. And the Intel agencies have a much greater role in American news coverage than most news consumers understand. I would say that virtually any news consumers understand. And I've seen it for over 30 years, so I'm very familiar with it. But it's absolutely crazy that no one has stopped it and I'm praying, it's very hard to stop it by the way. I'm praying that Donald Trump will. I mean that's on a long to do list, but I would say near the top you have to if you want to restore democracy, which we don't currently really have. The left is the right about that. They don't want it. I do want it. I actually like democracy because I think it's my country. I was born here. I'm an owner of this system. I'm not a renter or a serf. But if you want to restore it, you have to prevent the government from using your tax dollars to lie to you. Because if you have that system, which we currently have, trust me, I can speak of the authority on this, then you don't have a democracy because you don't even know what reality is. In other words, the people in charge are deciding what you can know about what they're doing. Well, that's a rigged system by its nature. How is that not a rigged system? How is that democracy? It's not. It's an oligarchy of the worst kind. And I just don't think people in this country understand the degree to which the information that they received over their Google machines or from NBC News or from the last of the dying newspapers. They don't understand just how filtered that information is. You have no idea what's going on the rest of the world if you're only getting your news in this country. You have no idea what the candidates are really like. It's really crazy. We have an ongoing debate in my office because we travel a lot. Does the average North Korean peasant have a better idea of what's happening in the world than the average person in a suburb of Boston? Maybe. It's actually open to debate. That's how filtered it is. And so the first step towards fixing it is admitting that you have the problem. Let's stop pretending. If you can't even go interview Putin who's engaged in a war in the middle of Europe, if you're discouraged from doing that, and the US government tried to stop me from doing that by breaking into my signal account and leaking it to the New York Times. They got caught. They admitted it. If that's allowed, no one was ever fired for it. No other, the New York Times didn't rise to my defense. I can't use an Intel agency to prevent a journalist from doing his job. No, it's totally fine. Man, it's a really, really rotten system. And it's the basis of all we know. How do you know what's happening in the world? How do you know what reality is? Well, because you see it on your phone. So you have to have honest sources of information or at least a diversity of sources of information. You don't have to trust anyone's source, but you've got to have a choice. You can't all just be, you know, me, Kibberginsky telling you what happened yesterday, because not good. What advice would you have on where to get, what to listen to, where to get a diverse or accurate, non-propagandized sort of education? It's pretty hard. I mean, I've gone so crazy, and obviously I wouldn't recommend this to other people, but I don't read any news at all ever. Period. But I was in it too long. I know how poisoned it is. It's like watching a, you know, sometimes you meet nurses who are the most honest people in hospitals in my experience. And they'll tell you like, oh man, don't get any cardiac catheter at that hospital. No, kill you. You probably believe the nurse. Like she works there. And that's how I feel about media. Like I know how it works. And so I don't read any of it. I get all my information from people via text message. I travel a ton to see things firsthand because there's no replacing that. But the advice that I would, I give my own children on this question is, go with your gut. Like I actually think we have a much more accurate sort of internal measuring system for truth than we understand. Like you know when someone's lying to you, you're born with that ability to discern truth from right now. It's, it's unerring, but it's in precise. In other words, if I feel someone's lying to me, he is that person's lying. It was like, my dog's no. Like if you show up at my house and you're creepy, my dogs have no idea what you're saying. They don't need to know they know you're creepy and they'll startle you. And then I know you're creepy because my dog's have already vetted you. All of it. No, and I mean it. And you're not welcome for dinner at that point. I don't know what you did, but it's gross. Um, all of it. No, no, yeah, I'm not joking at all. Sorry. Sorry. I'll see you. Good luck. Freak. Um, all of us have the very same ability. Our instincts are, are most honest guide because your instincts are designed only to help you. They're not trying to sell you anything. They're not trying to get elected to anything. They're not trying to scam you. They're not selling you a time share anywhere. They're merely trying to protect you and inform you. And so much of the information that we take in sort of bypasses the five senses that science tell us are the sum total of our intelligence gathering apparatuses. I mean, that's like a total crock. Intuition is not technically a sense because science is like a joke. Actually, it doesn't fully describe the human experience or even when close to it. It's absurd. It lacks imagination. Uh, it's a, it's a scam, I would say. Um, obviously. But we have been trained to believe that our senses are somehow less valid than things that we read on Wikipedia, which is totally controlled by the CIA. And the truth is the opposite is right. If you're listening to someone speak and that person seems deceptive, do not believe that person period. Tim Walz comes out who ran with Kamala Harris on a member Tim Walz. And I saw Tim Walz and I'm like, I don't, you know, I'm not going to indict him for I was like, that guy's a creep. Just flat out. I'm sorry. Yes. And I'm not, I'm not calling the, you know, US attorney trying to get him indicted or anything because I don't have evidence. But I just knew instantly that guy's lying to me. And I think we all sort of know that. You know, you can just tell. And so like when they, when the media came out and said, you know, the Nord Stream pipeline got blown up, the biggest natural gas pipeline in the world, which fed the economy of Germany of Europe, of the EU, our NATO ally. And it, it got blown up and they're like, yeah, Putin did it. Putin did it. Really, he blew up his own natural gas pipeline. Why did he do that? Well, because he's evil. So you're telling me that Putin is so evil that he attacked himself. Because he just couldn't, he couldn't help himself. Like he ran out of people to stab. So he just started stabbing himself in the face. Is that what you're telling me? So that's just the nature of evil. Yeah. That's what we're telling you. Shut up. You're lying. Like I knew instantly that they were lying instantly. They were lying. And by the way, I had the privilege of saying so. It was not welcome by my bosses. Like I fired in the end. But I said, that's a lie. You're lying. How do you know we're lying? Well, because it doesn't make any sense. And also you're lips are moving and you're a liar. And I know that you are. So shut up. Oh, you shut up. But you Putin's too. OK. Thanks, son. You're still lying. And that turned out to me really good, kind of. And of course, we learned later. We blew up the North Street pipeline, obviously. And now we're blaming on you, craniums, whoever's not even an interesting conversation. But Putin did not blow up the North Street pipeline. We now admit that. It was a lie. It was very clearly a lie. And we're in my old job. Someone said to me, well, how'd you know that? Did you have inside Intel? It's like, no. Stidding in my living room in Maine. You know, looking at my iPhone. I'm like, that's just BS. And I felt totally in power. I think what made me different from others was I felt totally empowered to say so. I don't feel any obligation to go along with that. Like, why would I? Don't be intimidated. I guess that's kind of what I'm saying. Don't be intimidated. If something doesn't make sense, say, well, hold on, pal. And I don't get what is that? So you become a woman by saying so? Like, what are the mechanics of that? Does it change your DNA? Shut up, transphob. No, OK. Great. But how does that work? Speak slowly so I can understand. Or whatever. It doesn't even matter what the claim is. If it doesn't make sense to you and the person telling you can explain it, then they're lying about it. Or they don't understand it themselves, which is the same thing. Just don't accept that. And by the way, if the whole society refuses to accept that, if the whole society refuses to lie, it's like, just make this decision. You're not going to intimidate me into lying. And in my case, I'm an adult middle-aged man. I pay my taxes. I've got four kids. Why would I go along with your bullshit? No. I'm not. Period. Under no circumstances. And I don't want to fight about it, but I'm not going to go along with it. Oh, the vax is safe and effective. OK, well, I'm not taking it. How's that? Why don't you make me? How about no? And if you're a father, like you're in the how about no business, that's your job. I've done a lot of how about no's. And does it know as a friend? Did you just say, how about no? No, we're not doing that. No, we're not getting some weird dog crossed with a poodle. I don't think so. Why? Everyone's getting this hype about no. OK. It works pretty well. And no one is just taking it. I'm sorry, not to attack the poodle mixes. But I just don't want one. And we've had that conversation quite a bit in my house. No. OK. And I think you can kind of cheerfully say no to a lot of the demands made on you. And I'll get all hysterical and call you names. And I'm just like, no, no. And I think if enough people do that, maybe like, I don't know, 200 million of them. All of a sudden, it just stops. People are like, OK. Guess we won't get the shitsu poodle mix. You know, you know what I mean? Damn, maybe next time. OK. Under the next thing. So I do hope that the next time there is this very familiar cycle where some story will happen. You know, some guy tries to pass a fake 20-minute convenience store in Minneapolis and then dies of a drug OD outside. And all of a sudden, they take that story and tell you that actually it's your fault that he died. And we need to completely change the country that your ancestors built. And everyone kind of goes along with it. And all the preachers on TV and Nikki Haley and all the people who are sort of respectful. Like, yeah, we need a revolution because George Floyd died. I think at this point, or you know, this virus comes out of China. Very clearly came from a lab that we funded. And really early we learned that the death rate's like one tiny fraction of what they claim it is. And on the basis of that, they're going to give us some drug by force that hasn't been tested. And by the way, you can't sue because the Congress granted the company that makes the drug total immunity from lawsuits. I think more people are going to be like, no, how about no? Like, go ahead and take that if you want. Like, whatever. That's your thing. You want to go inject yourself with some weird crap. That's fine. But I'm not doing that. And I'm just not under any circumstances doing that. And I read the autopsy report in George Floyd, like 100,000 other Americans this year died of a fentanyl O.D. and I feel super bad for George Floyd. I'm not defending his death. I feel sad about his death just as I do about the other 100,000 who died from. But don't tell me that systemic racism killed George Floyd because it didn't. I'm just not going to accept any more of your lies. I don't care what you call me. I don't care how much you threaten me. I'm not afraid of you at all because I have no reason to be afraid of you because you're a freakin loser. You never built anything in your life. So how dare you lecture me? I'm an adult man back off. That's a really good posture. A super helpful. It's a non-bulageant posture. You don't need to get your AR 15 though. You should have one. But you don't need to wave it around and be like, for my cold dead hands. No, maybe it'll get to that. But you don't right now need to do that at all. Just like sort of cheerful. No, fentanyl O.D., not taking the vax. Sorry. That works. So I can ask you about see nurses and people in situations where they were put under pressure or propaganda is so much that they had no choice or they would lose their job and single mothers. And what do you think's going to happen with these people? What do you hope to see happen? The ones that I'd love to really have you explain how propaganda works? Well, what's going to happen is, and I have a relative involved in one of these suits who is a commercial airline pilot. He just texted me in the flight out here that there was apparently a resolution of jury in Michigan. Just a water-to-woman fired for not taking the vax millions of dollars. And I hope that that is a nationwide trend where everyone whose life was destroyed in that fiddive lies in hysteria is made whole. I really hope so. And I do hope that Congress can immediately strip the blanket immunity from the vaccine makers. I don't understand that. I've sold products my whole life. I mean, imagine you have a product. You convince politicians to force the population to buy your product. Anyone who complains gets fired and you can't be sued. I'm sorry. And I'm not attacking vaccines. By the way, I'm sure there are fine vaccines. I don't know. I'm not taking any of them. But it's OK if other people do. I'm not mad about people taking vaccines. I'm not mad about vaccines. But that's a scam. And anyone who says it's not a scam can just explain to me how it's not a scam. How is that not a scam? You're not allowed to sue. You can sue anybody for anything in this country, anything. So we don't have playgrounds anymore. Because people made slot. Remember, Mary go rounds? Remember those? Is anyone old enough to remember Mary Grand, they don't exist? They were awesome. Of like 10 friends who have fewer teeth than they were born with because Mary go rounds. But they have stronger spirits. Because they were great. They don't exist anymore. Because the trial bar, to say, we're going to get rich, suing Mary ground, go round makers. And people who are nice enough to build playgrounds. It's like so many good things in American life who have been eliminated by the greed of the trial bar. By the way, next time in the Caribbean, go down to the yacht basin wherever you are. It doesn't matter what island you are. And look at the biggest boats. And just ask the boat guys and the matching polo shirts with the yacht names. I'm like, what is the owner of this boat do for a living? And just keep a list of how many of them. look at the biggest boats and just ask like the the boat guys and the you know the matching polo shirts with the yacht names on like what is the owner of this boat do for a living and and just keep a list of how many of them are trial lawyers like a lot you know it's a tobacco settlement a asbestos or whatever it was talcum pattern whatever case they were and i'm not attacking all lawyers though i i'd want to because i do hate them with a passion but even if i like lawyers i would say how is it that there's this one category that's exempt from the risk that all the rest of us were involved in any kind of business face every single i've liability insurance on my house in case the ups guy slips delivering a package from amazon but somehow albert borla and all the other creepy creepy billionaires who run these disgusting pharma companies are in no danger being sued because their corrupt pals in congress nineteen eighty six gave them blanket immunity like let's tear that down immediately it all well we can compete one is make a safer vaccine than has that sound when you face the same risk that every other person who can up to any other kind of commerce or lives in this country faces every single day oh we can't shut up go away and so that's the first thing i don't even know how i got off the number so mad about it so crazy and that no one can say anything about it it's like oh you're against science on that again science all which we practiced it in this country i do actually believe in science and if by the way if you believe in science let's see the numbers let's see the numbers right now do you know what i mean was so security has the numbers we know a lot about who's injured who took it who didn't about the trials are all sealed i'll just say this and i'll stop if you want to restore honesty to government if you want to get rid of corruption there's a very simple way to do that and it's with transparency it's allowing people to know what their government is doing with their money in their name and if you can't know if somehow you're being prevented from knowing then you can be absolutely certain the crimes are being committed because why else would they be hiding it from you why is it that sixty two years later after the president of the United States was murdered we can't see all the files on that all the documents that why is it that twenty three years after nine eleven files are still classified why is that a friend died nine eleven like probably a lot of people in this room i was there totally changed my life why can't i know what exactly happened like when you answer that question it's our government no federal bureaucrat is the right to tell you that you can't know what your government is doing who owns this government the federal bureaucrat who can't be fired no one will think so we do if you wind up in a country with over a billion classified federal documents you're living in an extremely corrupt country extremely corrupt and everyone around the world knows that about the united we don't know it we don't think we live in a crop country we do and we can fix it super easily and that's just let's let's do class right every nine eleven documents to be the class that oh shut up conspiracy theorists if you want to create conspiracy theories pull down a curtain of secrecy over what actually happened why are you afraid to tell me the whole story why you afraid to tell me the truth we can resolve this right away just let me see the evidence i have a right of a moral right to it they have no more right to keep it from us so if i have one hope secretly for this administration it's massive declassification and let's find out what they've been doing what happened all the hundred billion dollars percent to your craters been no audit or they don't want to be classified out why oh because it's a scam that's why and that's why i'm just so grateful that robert f kennedy junior i believe spoke to you earlier will be a part of this administration and i think you will be it could be a cabinet secretary and i hope that his presence reminds all of us the cost of secrecy to members of his family were murdered we still can't see the documents there why is that and why don't we have full transparency on anything related to public health what's the actual answer and the answer is they're lying and they shouldn't be allowed to lie so i hope that changes what about uh... couple things one uh... jeff rieff stein uh... files uh... p diddy what do you think is going to happen with all that now uh... well i'll just i mean i should just say it the outset you know i lived in d c i got to d c my dad worked for the government by the way in a highly classified capacity so like i didn't and i lived you know based on my i've got the high school and i left when i was fifty so i'm marin you know i came up in the system i marinated in it i didn't know that there was anything wrong with it i would have been the last person ever to question the Kennedy assassination or jeff rieff stein's clear clearly a suicide like i just had no idea because when it's like having an alcoholic spouse and then you get divorced and was like wow you know your husband was a drunk you know i had no idea like the closer you are to something the harder is to see its outlines and so when epsina is when he died you know i i knew a lot of people in a jeff rieff stein like a lot uh... i never met jeff rieff stein kat i certainly knew a lot of people who knew him and like a lot more than ten and so jeff rieff stein was not considered like some far out sinister figure in the world that i lived in i mean i'm just being totally honest about this he was like this kind of interesting guy who had you know had this kind of rotating salon at his house off the fith Avenue in New York and there was always the Israeli prime minister and former presidents and like interesting people you know and um... i did not understand what that was about at all and so when he died i was like oh poor guy killed himself in prison and then i got a call from his brother just randomly uh... and his brother said you know he was he did not come in suicide and that i was really shocked by that and i thought maybe his brother's crazy so this set off a multi-year journey for me that really changed my views about a lot of different things in the bottom one is jeff rieff stein was murdered and not only murdered but he was murdered in the most secure federal lock-up in mid-temon hat in the country not just in federal lock-up but in the most secure part of federal lock-up so how did that happen while clearly murdered by another inmate you can't get any answers to who the other eight inmates on his block were there was no investigation into his death they've never released it and the attorney general at the time attorney general bar clearly knew that this happened and uh... and i've said that in public and he's attacked me for saying that but it's just just a fact he lied about it and so what is that what is that think about that for a minute and i don't know the under-sled i don't know no pretend to i don't pretend to understand really anything i don't understand anything but i know lying when i see it and they're lying about jeff rieff rieff rieff if they're not where's the investigation and there hasn't been one and so that's pretty heavy do you wear the tapes wear the Epstein tapes you know i it was so funny they they released a tape but i know actually released a tape uh... of jeff rieff stein talking about Donald trump and saying we were friends once not like trump and okay this was like the october surprise was to derail trump and everyone's like how can you that i thought i'm so glad they're doing that so let's talk about jeff rieff rieff stein like where where the video tapes from his home in new mexico from his cribby in island from his place in fifth avenue always videotapes now you know in federal hands why can't we see those and we can't see them of course is like a massive blackmail operation run by various inter-legencies designed to put famous people under the control of governments of course that's that's what it was obviously never knows that but don't say anything about it and his friend of mine said we're talking with us tonight and he goes now if you think about it like if you're able to kill somebody in the secure block in federal lock up in men hatin and get away with it probably not someone you want to stick around with like that's a powerful force and that's a fair point but it's still worth saying out loud because it's worth living in a transparent honest country it's bad to have rott like that it's bad to have crimes like that can committed in front of our faces we can't do anything about it it makes everyone feel impotent makes everyone paranoid it makes everyone feel like nothing's on the level we we we want to put the society where no one believes anything and i feel like that's where we are the number people i know who are like wow it become a really deranged conspiracy theorists who doesn't believe in the moon landing i must go a hundred people who said that to me in the last two years this is and trust me if you don't feel that way you're just not admitting it because you do feel that way if you're paying attention and that's a bad way to feel i don't think i don't want a country like that you want a country where things are pretty much what they seem to be where people are honest they're straightforward when they make a terrible mistake they admit it you want a country that is like the family that you have or want to have where people are just direct with each other and kind to each other not everything is some crazy multi-layered deception designed to you know screw you are killed Jeffrey Epstein like that's so dark let's not have that any more all these companies are always telling you how much money they're giving to charity oh we're so charitable but what are the charities they're giving to these brands that you buy that you have in your house you don't even want to know very often their charities that don't have the same values your family has sometimes their charities that don't like your family at all but when you use pure talk which is a cell phone company a lot of us use you can be certain that your money is going to charities that you yourself would give to better and led companies for example to date pure talk has gotten rid of ten million dollars in debt held by veterans they've spent tens of thousands more every month to help prevent veteran suicide it is give 50 grand to mic roe works which give scholarship to veteran learning the trades after they leave military service etc etc so you've seen companies once again we're not going to name names Bud Light but that you business with lunatics again charities that run contrary to your world view that despise your world view pure talk you don't have to worry about that this is a company that supports the causes that you can support pure talk gives you the same great cell service that America's most dependable 5G networks provide for half the cost they'll support small businesses with excellent and affordable business plans they are powering us here at T.C.N. so we can vouch for it they can probably save you money too find out could appear talk dot com slash Tucker today switch to a company that aligns with your values pure talk when you sign up at pure talk dot com slash Tucker you get an additional 50% off your first month we recommend it last follow-up on that is celebrities don't appear to be as influential for presidential elections is that i think they thought they were well i think the whole point of the diddy parties is to get people to endorse Kamala um no there's a lot of there is a lot this is something i never perceived at all when i lived in washing and i thought was like a dumb conspiracy theory even though i worked in the kind of crypto entertainment business i know a lot of a lot of people in the entertainment business of course because i worked in television um and i know a lot of people at the intel agencies and in politics because that's what i did uh and you would hear people once in a while say well they're all controlled you know there are files on that person and i was like oh you sound like a freakin wacka what are you going to say like fluoride in the water is bad turns out fluoride on the water is bad it's crazy anyway um but that's that's actually true it's true and i'm not guessing that it's true i know some of the people involved like if you're on the if you're on the house you know intel committee over the committee in the congress that oversees the intel agencies okay it's your job to make sure the ci is not doing crazy like interfering in american politics or murdering the wrong people or you know getting rich it's not allowed to get rich if you're a federal employee okay and if it's your job to make sure that like the ci is not colluding with the the mexican drug cartels which they are but um you are almost certainly controlled by those agencies like they're spying on you then i'm not guessing on that i mean because i know one of the people who ran that agency is being spied and i told these things by that and some of it's come out like that's not acceptable at all and i think it's very clear that the same thing happens um to cultural influencers and why wouldn't it right if there are a lot of people um in the entertainment business but in the cultural business more broadly certainly in the news business who are controlled by other forces like obviously how many of them look independent how many of them look kind of shifty and afraid you look at you in kimmel and like i don't know what's going on there but like that guy clearly is nervous super nervous and i don't know why he's nervous but every time i see jimmy kimmel i used to kind of like jimmy kimmel i'm like wow man he's worried about something um and i feel that way about a lot of them and so you know i don't know there ever get all the details on diddy i don't know diddy never met diddy kind of glad never been to one of his famous parties um but i know a lot of people have and i don't know exactly what that was about but i know it is not uncommon at all and i at least one entertainer i know personally was controlled um that whole thing is real that's absolutely real why wouldn't it be real why wouldn't it be real to lean on somebody to reinforce um a narrative for the purpose of maintaining power i mean a lots at stake you know running the world there's a lot of power a lot of money we don't dilute yourself like people will will go to extreme lengths why wouldn't they i mean people risk life in prison to rob a liquor store for 800 bucks so you know that there's some context for you so this guy sitting here with uh seed babes in the orange and dann and blue that's dann and babes uh they run on an organization called strategic coach very high-level coaching group and he has this uh what he calls a DOS conversation and it's uh dangers opportunities in strengths and you're you're consuming nicotine right now the tail is going on yes i am okay uh this is part of the make it america healthy plan um it is actually now i've already said so many crack but things that i don't want to totally discredit myself but i think there um yeah if you you know take the uh tobacco and the tar and separate it from the nicotine you know um it's something i don't think i'm allowed to make medical claims about nicotine i think we have a agency designed to um prevent people from saying what they think is true uh but uh it's a choice that i'm happy to make yeah yeah for sure we'll come back to that maybe so um dangers opportunities and strengths so what do you think is the biggest uh danger or dangers uh that we're facing right now is the country the biggest opportunity and the greatest strengths that we have the biggest dangers were with Iran i'm just telling you that's the biggest danger there are a lot of people who want it um there's a lot of money uh that's been applied to the political system to make sure we get it it's a disaster for america it's not a defensive Iran by the way no i mean tell my say as well it's like you're working for boot one i'm not working for the shiat mola it's just okay i'm an episcopalian so um it's it's not that i have any affection for a ron is you know war with a ron would would devastate this country um and there's a real danger that we're going to get one who's saying that that's a fact you'll see um so that's that's the main danger at their obviously going to be there's going to be some economic turmoil i would have said you know a week ago that one of the great dangers is disunity in the country um but i feel like these election results were really unifying yeah so i'm so thankful of about that i mean it's just if you look at them it's just kind of crazy i mean you had muslims in southeastern michigan voting overwhelmingly for trump you had orthodox jews in brooklyn voting overwhelmingly for trump like what it's pretty cool you had you know almost entirely white right wing north georgia voting for trump you had a lot of black guys in downtown Atlanta voting for trump you had if the omeas voting for trump you had south you know central florida big sure plantations at the guys who own the ranch you're the guys working cutting cane all voting for trump so it's like there's something in this point of this is not just to trump it's like whenever you have an election where the majority votes for something you have by definition a measure of unity that you didn't have before that's what a mandate is as most people want this and that's just a great thing you know it means that that are you know our common goals are stronger and more important than our differences and it's just so nice to be reminded of that so that's our main strength and going into an economic downturn or whatever is gonna is clearly gonna happen you want a unified country you don't want a country or war with itself getting poorer all of a sudden and we avoided revolution during the great depression and um you know it was just not a a foregone conclusion by the way at the time there are some really radical movements in the United States but the country held together in a really impressive but amazing way actually from 1939 to 1941 and I've been worried about that for a long time now I'm not as worried about it so that's I would say our strength and our opportunity is you know America has a lot of problems those problems have been exacerbated gravely over the last four years the immigration scheme that the Biden administration instituted opening the borders like 15 million strangers come here totally insane um that's bad the US dollars in a much weaker position thanks to the like deranged sanctions on Russia after starting in February of 2022 kicking Russia out of swift hurt the US dollar more than really anything that's happened since the end of the Second World War but the opportunity is compared to what compared to what I mean the US dollar while weakened clearly other countries are hoping to diversify their currencies doesn't help them to have the US dollar be the reserve currency but there's no good option right now America has a lot of problems but compared to what Europe seriously Canada Australia I mean we are still in the best shape of any country that I visit regularly um and that's a massive advantage and like don't forget that if you can somehow convince Americans that their country is pretty awesome once again again it's an attitudinal question when people feel self-confident I mean this is true in your marriage it's true in your job it's true in every sphere of your life when you feel good about what you're doing when you feel like it you're doing the right thing you're doing something you'd be proud of you're way more effective and when you feel rattled and shaken and self-loathing and you know like how many productive hungover Sunday mornings if you had like zero because you hate yourself because you did something embarrassing the night before but when you wake up Monday morning clear headed ready to go and go for a run and bang it out you know what I mean if you have that attitude you're gonna kill it and so I do think a lot of America's potential is totally real it remains untapped our energy reserves I mean are just crazy compared to the rest of the world we just have a lot going for us and um if you can just make Americans feel that we have a lot going for us and that we have nothing to be ashamed of at all stop telling him it's a stemically racist country shut up stop telling him that you know they're bad which they've told us like endlessly just stop with that we're not bad we're great I don't know it wouldn't take a lot to make this a great country again I really think that yeah yeah well I'm gonna ask you about that but first I want to we'll do some Q&A with the audience here in a little bit uh your alcoholism you called yourself a functional alcoholism when you were drinking and partying and yeah so what did you what did you change what was the what was the light switch that well what I did was I um stop drinking um which I found super helpful what caused you to stop I mean in my case I was sitting at my desk in my office smoking a camel I'll never forget it which I also quit unfortunately um little short ones flavored chocolate delicious delicious cigarettes I know there's no one's allowed to admit that but they were amazing and uh but I was sitting at my desk killing a hungover Sunday morning having a cigarette and I just had this voice which I think was from god um saying you you better quit my wife was pregnant with her fourth child and she was 10 days from giving birth and I was and I just had this voice tell me you you're gonna lose everything if you don't stop drinking and I believed it you know who knows why I mean I'm just ordinary person with a slightly above average IQ not super insightful like I have no idea what that was but that happened to me and I followed it and I did it and it completely changed my life and um it's hard to talk about sobriety without sounding judgey or like one of those borish rehab guys is always lecturing you on all the steps or whatever but the truth is one of the main problems in this country is that everyone's loaded everyone's on some kind of drug or drunk I mean everyone's on pills like I just I'm sorry I don't want to judge anybody else but like everybody is on drugs it's crazy everyone's on SSRIs or that weird the meth they give you but they call it Adderall benzodiazepines you know I'm on a flight I think I'll take some pusanax what it's insane and I just am totally opposed to that weed the number of fights I've gotten in diocese milk weed every day I'm Amazon I know a lot about weed it makes you passive and stupid I'm sorry people get so mad if you say that oh shut up no I just want more weed than you have it makes you into a loser are you joking what you just face your life it's so awesome and I never say this out loud because people really hate you when you do and feel judged I'm in no position to judge anybody I could blow your mind actually if I wanted to am I going to but I'm saying like I know a lot about the subject so um I think I have the authority to say this it's like it's such a thrill to be sober it's not that hard actually and if you're not sober you're never going to achieve the purpose for what you were created that's just a fact you're not and it makes you weak it's the last thing I'll say it makes you weak the more you party the more you run away the weaker you get the more fearful you become and the more you just face up to stuff and I'm not even talking about drugs now called for men I'm talking about like a grumpy wife like there's nothing scarier than a pissed off wife like in the world and if you run away from that and just go golfing and like oh she's crazy you know it doesn't get better like man up and just like tell me what's wrong just like sit through the first three minutes and then you find out what's wrong and it gets better and you get stronger she respects you for not golfing and for looking right into her eyes and listing to her complaints for a minute it makes you stronger when you run away and when you golf or you get higher it makes you weak and it's like a process it's like the more you tell the truth the more sober you are the more you face things that have make you afraid the stronger you get this like life 101 but nobody feels free to say it and the last thing I'll say we just go full Saudi on the drug thing I mean it like full freaking Saudi one of the benefits of traveling a lot is you go to countries this don't put up with it we're like oh you're so cool like you know I mean to bring a joint you're country doors cut your hands off if you do that because we're not try to do that in Japan actually good try to do that in Japan you got a Singapore you live in Singapore they drug test you at the airport if you're a Singaporean citizen and if you fail the drug test like if you smoke weed you're gonna rehab for six months they don't tell me when where you are you just disappear you're gonna rehab that's true fact I just said dinner with the two nights ago with someone whose whose friend showed up at the airport and Singapore flying home got drug test it got sent to rehab for six months he was engaged his fiance left when married somebody else oh hilarious you know it's a pretty big deterrent to getting wasted actually it turns out yeah that's harsh okay but compared to what watching people die of fentanyl ODS on the sidewalk have you been to our cities recently it's totally cruel and inhumane and disgusting and beneath us as a nation to allow people to ODE on drugs on the sidewalk there's no kindness in that at all it's cruel you hate people if you allow that would you allow your children to do that now you chain them to the freaking radiator tell they sober up because you love them when you hate people you let them ODE on drugs and really the whole country do that and encouraging them to do drugs sending crack pipes to crack addicts giving weed to kids are you joking I just lock them up man I mean I mean and I'll just I'll be told about as a former drug user saying that and I really mean it from the bottom of my heart I hope we get full Saudi on those people including the policymakers who allowed it because they killed so many people they deserve to be punished in a very severe way hmm yeah it's interesting how's that from popular no no no it's like it's it's a bring back to war on drugs but this time we're not joking yeah well see I think the war on drugs was I believe addiction is a solution to pain so the drug is the alcohol the sex the gambling the workaholism all the pursuits of the dopamine pursuit is because of either one you're just pursuing this this feeling you want or trauma and things like that and I have mixed feelings about like for instance there's 25% of the world's prisoners are in the United States where the the highest incarcerated country in the world and there's 2.2 million people incarcerated in the US and the majority of people that commit crimes are under the influence of drugs now call and 40% of people incarcerated are committed to violent crime the other 60% of not so a lot of these people are addicts and so it's you know it's it's one of these things where I take a compassionate approach and at the same time Portugal I'm curious where they're at now because like all I can go off of is really from several years ago I don't know how well it you know they've weathered through the pandemic and I haven't stayed up to date on it but what they did is they legalized drugs but they just the money they were spending on enforcement went into treatment and it cut the addiction rate almost all violent crimes went down but when you just make I don't know I've spent a lot of time in Portugal I don't I don't think that's an accurate representation and I would say you know I know a number of people more than two who got off heroin in jail and who look back on their incarceration as a blessing I mean addiction I mean I think you have experienced with it I certainly do they're crazy you're not in your right mind when you're addicted to something you're totally crazy you're like a trapped animal you'll do anything and oh yeah absolutely people like that you know that our record on drug treatment in the United States is like a joke it's abysmal it's just abysmal it's made a lot of money for the drug treatment centers members like treatment will show me a treatment center with like an over 50 percent success rate over five years I've never heard of one maybe there is one I'd love to know we should replicate it everywhere the only thing I've ever seen that works as a a and that's because it's based in like the core truth of life which is you have to admit that you have no power to solve your problems and if you don't then you're just lying to yourself so I think that works but you know whatever opinions differ but let's just let's just apply science to it like where's the treatment center with like an 80 percent success rate where's one with an 18 percent success rate don't know of any yeah the only ones that really have really great success rates are long term you know six months a year two years like Vulcan Academy this individual they they literally have people mostly you know young adults that check in for like two years and they have a incredible thing but they it's a long time right and then I can't remember the name of a button in Italy this is one of Bobby Kennedy's favorite models of recovery where they have these very long term put them in nature put them around different environments you know and and connect them that definitely is good yeah but I guess I would also just say I left something out I'm so mad about the drug thing that I'm sorry and endorse the Saudi drug program though I meant it but I do think we should spend a lot more time on the other side of the question which is endorsing sobriety it is so awesome to be clear-eyed in sobriety as much as it doesn't solve all your problems you're still the the lumpy loser you were when you were drunk but it it begins the process of healing your soul and there's so much joy in sobriety no one ever endorses it oh yeah everyone's like oh life is better when you're loaded but that's just a lie it's a full blown lie and no one ever calls them on that and I hope I mean Trump is sober Bobby sober I've been to meetings with Bobby and I hope that you're loaded, but that's just a lie. It's a full-blown lie, and no one ever calls them on that. And I hope, I mean, Trump is sober, Bobby sober. I've been to meetings with Bobby, and I hope that people now in positions of authority who are on television all the time will just tell their own stories more often and just say, you know, I'm so glad to be sober. It's so great, because it is. Yeah, yeah. And I'll tell you, the drugs that kill people are legal and the drugs that save people's lives, like the Ivo gains in certain plant medicines are illegal. And so the whole thing is just lopsided. And part of the challenge is, you know, one of the initiatives we have with genius recovery is we want to save 20,000 lives a year, the 100,000 plus people that are dying from opiate addictions. And so we're... How many people die of Xanaxo Dees? I don't know. That's what I'd like to know. That's a legal product. They're like, every woman in America has an amazing cabinet. Every kid has it too. College campus, I mean, how many? If you've got kids in college, how many of your kids friends have to go to treatment to get off Benzos? How many people die every year from Benzos in alcohol? Many thousands. How many people die from withdrawal from Benzos? A lot. And those are legal. And psychiatrists prescribe them without thinking through the consequences. And there's no sanction. And those psychiatrists should be criminally charged, in my opinion, that's crazy. The sauclers paid a billion dollar fine for sending, you know, opioids throughout Appalachia. But psychiatrists who hand out Benzos, which are deadly and physically addictive, are just like, oh no, that's medicine is not medicine. It's totally wrong. And at some point, like we need to call out people on the individual level. If you are a psychiatrist who's handing adults to children and Benzos to their moms without any thought to the addiction and suffering and brain damage that results from those drugs, then you should lose your medical license at least. Yeah, absolutely. No. We've told you before about Hello. It is a great app that I am proud to say I use my whole family uses. It's for daily prayer and Christian meditation. And it's transformative. So with everything happening in the world right now, it is essential to ground yourself. This is not some quack cure. This is the oldest and most reliable cure in history. It's prayer. Ground yourself in prayer and scripture every single day. That is a prerequisite for staying sane and healthy and maybe for doing better eternally. So if you're busy on the road, headed to kids sports, there was always time to pray and reflect alone or as a family. But it's hard to be organized about it. Building a foundation of prayer is going to be absolutely critical as we head into November, praying that God's will is done in this country and that peace and healing come to us here in the United States and around the world. Christianity obviously is attacked under attack everywhere. That's not an accident. Why is Christianity the most peaceful of all religions under attack globally? Did you see the opening of the parasol Olympics? There's a reason because the battle is not temporal. It's taking place in the unseen world. It's a spiritual battle, obviously. So try Hello. Get three months completely free at Hello. That's hallow.com slash Tucker. If there's ever a time to get spiritually and tuning ground yourself in prayer, it's now. Hallow will help personally and strongly and totally sincerely recommended. Hallow.com slash Tucker. So looking back being a father, what is the greatest lesson that is touching? Because you have four daughters. I have three daughters in the sun. Oh, I pay you have four daughters. So I have three is a lot. Yeah, I will say. I think you might be. They're like a union. You know, you have to negotiate with them. And no, they're awesome. I mean, the biggest lesson of having kids is everything flows from your marriage. And when you have a happy marriage, your children are happy. Marriage is the core of a family. And I do think people spend way too much time going to their kids sporting events and not enough time with their spouses. I think they spend too much time with their kids and not enough with their spouses. And if you want to make your children happy, have a happy marriage. And if you want to have a happy marriage, spend time with your spouse. Don't golf. Listen. And so that's been the main takeaway for me. And there is a period in my kids are grown. My oldest is 30, but amazingly. But there's a period in parenthood that everyone in this room is familiar with where it's just so chaotic. Like there's just so much going on. So many demands from the children you never have time to talk to the person with whom you created the children. And you're really at risk of wrecking your marriage during those years, I think. I mean, you're really like an actual risk. And not just in the obvious sleeping with your assistant, though that's a thing too. But just in a much more insidious and common way where you just end up hating each other because you never talk. And if there's one thing that I'm hardly like a marriage counselor, I'm just some douchey journalist. But just having lived it, I would say. If there's one thing I would encourage people with kids to do, it's ignore the kids in favor of the spouse once in a while. And go out to dinner. Like make yourself do that every week. If you want your children to be happy and what's the measure of their happiness? Well, the measure of their happiness is their willingness to come home. Is their love for each other? If you wind up in a situation where your kids really love each other and are close with each other, you've done a good job as a parent. That's the clearest measure, in my opinion. And that's really the dream of every parent. And every parent's heart is the hope that what he or she will leave behind is kids who love each other. And if you want that, love your spouse. Because that gives kids the core, the stability, the anchor. The kids want to know that everything's OK. And that tells them that everything's OK. Yeah, that's great. So you seem to deal with incredibly serious issues. I mean, you're quite an influential person. You've got, I think it always goes back and forth between you and Joe Rogan, who has the biggest podcasters. I don't know if this is what we're going on. I created this John, Rogan created, I talked to Rogan today, actually, amazing guy. But I just want to say, one more about Rogan. I've been in the media, as I said, my whole life, Rogan was like a sitcom actor and a stand-up comedian and like an MMA fighter. So he starts to sing called the podcast where he talks like three hours. I'm in television and like a big network. And I'm looking over at this being like, that's the dumbest thing I've ever heard. No one's going to listen to a three-hour podcast from some MMA fighter. I know. Right. And this guy's not even in our business. Like, what's he doing? He completely changed, not just American media, but American history. He created a whole new, I mean, it would be like this one guy invented the newspaper or television. I mean, that's how big what Rogan did was. And I just will admit freely that I did not see a coming. I did not understand it. I didn't think it would work. And the fact that it did work says something so great and important about Americans, which is they really want to learn. They're not learning in school. They're not learning in the rest of the media. It's all shallow and dumb and about race and gender. It's all lying. And Rogan's just like willing to sit there with interesting people and talk for three hours. That was the most affirming that is the most reassuring thing I've ever seen in 35 years in media that that worked. And so I'm just thrilled by Rogan. I'm proud to be his friend. And I'm just really admire him more than anybody in media by far. Well, and I mean, and again, you are one of the most influential people right now in the world in media. And over the last year, I don't think what just happened on Tuesday would have happened without Rogan, without you, without Elon Musk. I mean, there's a series of people, but they are reaching lots of people. But the reason I bring this up, though, is that you seem to be super light-hearted about it at the same time. I see you as a very interesting guy in terms of you deal with very serious issues. I mean, you're interviewing world leaders. You're calling people out that you disagree with. And you're funny about it. You're just, you seem to just really enjoy your life. And really, you just seem to have a real strong center in the midst of it. Well, I'm not, I mean, I don't think I'm in charge of history. I don't, I have a keen understanding of the limits of my foresight and power. I don't think I'm God. I believe in God. And it's not me. So that's like the root of my happiness. I know that everything we do is basically just dogs barking. It will be forgotten. You know, you do your best. But in the end, your name will not be remembered. Your grave will not be visited. You are insignificant in the scope of history, period. And knowing that, you will die. And knowing that, and I keep that ever present in my mind, lightens it a little bit. It's not up to you to change the world. God's in control, not you. And so all you can do is your best, knowing that you'll probably screw it up at least half the time, just to apologize when you do and keep going. But it sort of lightens the burden a little bit. I see these people in Washington like, I have to change the world. And it's like, you will at best make it worse. Like, you're an idiot, actually. And so am I. But the difference is I admit it. I know I am. I know I am. And that is such an affirming thing. And also, the other thing I would say is I have dogs. I have a lot of dogs, and they sleep on the bed, and I hunt with them, and I really love them. And so it's my wife. And we sit in bed, and we spend, at least an hour a day talking about our dogs. Aren't they great? They're so great. And we have these circular conversations that are the same every single day. But despite the fact that they're repeated 365 days a year, they are no less enthusiastic and sincere. Like, we really mean it. Like, that talks amazing. Yeah, that talks amazing. We're not embarrassed about it. And it is such a great lesson that the most beautiful and the deepest and the most important things in life take place right in your bedroom. On your bed. Right in your life. Like, don't imagine that the only things that are important are taking place on your phone or in some faraway country or in a battlefield or a conference room or at the scale of world economies. No, it's a sleeping dog with her tongue out of her mouth is way more important than anything else that's going on right now, because it's happening in your bedroom. And that's your dog, and that's your wife. And there's joy right in front of you, and you should experience that joy. Every single day, don't, it's like your instincts. Don't ignore them. If you feel something really strongly, it's true. If you're driving great joy from something totally stupid like watching your dog snore, that's OK. Don't anyone tell you otherwise. Do you know what I mean? I see these people, these political people are like, no, I need to make the world safe for trans kids. And that's like, OK, great. But first, like, how about being nice to your own kids and pleasing your own wife and like, get a dog? Get so freakin' perspective. You don't even mean? Yeah, yeah. Sorry. No, it's awesome. Awesome. All right, can you take a few questions from the audience? OK, so go up to the mic, we'll go for 24 minutes. Oh, it's long. Come on now. Just introduce yourself, and go right ahead. Thank you. David Asarno. If President Trump, Tucker, asked you to be in his cabinet, would you say yes or no and why? I don't think I'm in danger of that happening. I guess I just proved I'm kind of a lunatic who can't keep his opinions to himself. So probably not the guy you want in your cabinet. You know, can you imagine me in a cabinet meeting? I don't know, you're an Epstein-Wuss murder. It's not like, I don't think so. No, I don't think anyone's going to ask me to serve in any position like that. I don't think I'm suited for it. One of the things I've disliked all my life and had no respect for are people get out of their lane. Do what you're good at. Each person is born. Most of your skills are just inborn. Sorry. No one wants to say that. It's just true. I have a lot of kids. I see it in my kids. I'm sure you say to your kids, like, that kid is good. One thing that kid's good in another. The whole point of life is to figure out what the gifts are you're born with that God gave you and hone them and stick with them. Like everyone's like telling kids, we just learn to this. No, don't learn to do anything. Take the things that you're naturally good at and become amazing at them. You'll be happy and successful if you do that. And I try to apply that to myself. I like what I do. I think I'm above average at it. I've done fine doing it. So what I'm not a hubris guy. I don't imagine this because I can do a popular show on the internet that I don't know run the Treasury Department. I just don't think that. I'm going to do what I do and I'm going to keep doing it until I drop debt. Period. And the other thing is, I just don't like political people. I just don't. I don't believe in. I just don't. I like Trump a lot. I like some people around Trump. But in general, anyone who desperately wants to wield power over other people should not have any power at all. Any person who worships money should be broke. I just don't believe in that. I don't think you should worship power or money. I think you should serve other people. I really believe that. I mean that too. And so I don't want to be around people who want a ton of power, creep. I don't want to be in the same room with them and I don't have dinner with them. I just don't like them at all. And if you live in Washington, like you have to spend, they're like next and next booth at the palm. And they're just disgusting to me. So I mean that. Thank you. Yes. Tugger. First stop, I want to say thank you. I've really got into your show in 2017 when you started on full time on Fox. It was so eye-opening, so amazing. And I don't think you take enough credit for the effect that you've had over the past four years in waking people up. I don't believe we would have had the same results if it wasn't for you, Joe, Elon, people like Joe Pollard, Steven, waking people up and making a mainstream. So thank you. I know you've had people with your doors. I know you've been threatened. Your family's been threatened. You're a patriot, brother. And I love you for it. Thank you. Thank you. You kind of shut down my question, but I'm going to vehemently disagree with you. You would be the greatest press secretary in the history of the United States. Take the freaking job. Can you imagine? No, I think I used to say to reporters who worked for me, I would always have the same role. I was given the same lecture, and I would say, you should be passionate about things. But if you can't cover your own girlfriend because you love her. So your view of her is totally distorted. I always say to my wife, it's almost 56. I'm like, I think you're just totally hot. Maybe you're not. I have no idea what you look like at this point, but I think you're hot. Because my view of my wife is so distorted because I like her. And I think the same is true for hate. If you hate someone, you should not be covering the person because you can't see their humanity. You're just blinded by rage. And I feel that way about the national media. I mean, I really mean it. I dislike them. I know conservatives always telling you how much they hate the media. I hate the media. Imagine if you're me. And you split your whole life with them. And you know them all personally. And you know just how corrupt they are, that they would, and they have, sat there and told lies that put people in prison, separated them from their children. I could not be in a briefing room full of people like that. I would just be spitting hate at them. And I don't want to be hateful. I don't want to be around people I hate. And I really mean it. I would be up there like screaming at them. You know what I mean? And saying horrible things to them. Like really horrible, personal things. You know what I mean? Because I mean I know what they've done. And I would just say it. And I don't, you know, that's not the Christian way. And I don't want to be that guy. So no, I can't do that job. Oh man. Yes. Hi Tucker. My name is Jessica McNaughton. And I just also want to say thank you so much for your courage, your leadership, your presence when you were fired and you pivoted quickly and you gave a middle finger to that mainstream media that was amazing. I've recently heard about your spiritual experience being attacked. And earlier today, RFK, junior alluded to the fact that he believed this larger issue that we're dealing with is a spiritual battle between good and evil. And I was just wondering if you could speak to us a little bit about your perspective in being grounded and speaking truth to power and what it's going to take for all of of us to continue to unite, to come together, to put down our differences and to help those that still might be sleeping, to wake up. What do you think we need to do? Well thank you for your question. I mean I could go on for ourselves. I won't. I'll just pick one part of it and say two things. One, I think our obligation is to tell the truth at all times. Everything the truth is not an excuse to hurt other people. It's not, oh you're fat. That's not the kind of truth I'm talking about at all. But I think we should be kind to each other. I think there are all kinds of things we shouldn't say. I don't think we should be banned from saying I believe in free speech absolutely. But I think we should restrain ourselves and not be cruel to other people. I violate this all the time by the way. I already have just in the last hour. In general, I think we should be kind of to each other. But I think we should never lie. I really think we should wake up every morning with the kind of nears resolution I'm not going to lie today. And if I can't tell the truth, I'm not going to speak. Don't let a lie pass your lips. And if we do that, we are transformed inside. That's when we become bulletproof when we decide to tell the truth. And the second thing that I think we should be aware of and awake to is as we watch American politics revealed is not really political at all. It's not really about politics. This is the battle. This is the eternal battle between good and evil. And I'm not of course suggesting that Republican Party is good. It certainly isn't. Or the Democratic Party is all evil. I'm not saying that. It's not that simple. But clearly underlying all these issues is the battle that every culture has described. Every religion is described from the beginning of recorded history, which is a spiritual battle in the unseen world, which is as real as the chair I'm sitting in. That's what I've learned. That's a fact, by the way. I did not grow up believing that. I grew up in a totally secular world. But I have learned that through personal experience. It is absolutely real, 100% real. And that politics are a manifestation of that battle. And I think it's very shocking to people. It's certainly shocking to me. It's like we can't believe how much evil there is. I can't even believe this. People pushing wars for the sake of killing, because they enjoy killing people. That's the fact I know them. I know this, Janie personally. Really well. That's what that's about. It's shocking to me. But we should not get lost in that and feel morose about it. Of course, evil is real. What do we think it wasn't? No, come on. What we should remember is that good is also real and it's among us. It's present. And I see it so clear in my wife and I had this conversation two nights ago at dinner. It's like you think of all the relationships that you've lost. Every person in this room has lost relationships in the past five years. This country's been divided on purpose. And that has affected all of us at the level of even our families. But as my wife pointed out, and you can't say this enough, in place of those lost relationships arise new relationships that are rooted in truth that are so much deeper. They're not shallow at all. They're not acquaintanceships that are almost like relations. Like I have conversations with people now. I've only known for four years that are deeper with conversations I have with people I grew up with. Or people I'm related to. It's insane. We're being compensated for our loss in the form of true unity with people. It is absolutely crazy. And that is a manifestation of the spiritual war that I'm describing. That's the other side of it. And the number of people, and I won't even get into it at great length. But in one sense, the number of people I know who like me grew up on the coast in affluent secular world where God was at best like an idea. Many of them on the left, including Bobby Kennedy, until he gathered in a lot of others who are all of a sudden coming to realize holy smokes. Like they weren't kidding about this. They're actually is a God. And who are coming to his spiritual awareness, people who never thought they would come to that awareness at all never even thought about it. Who all of a sudden are and are joyful about it? It's crazy. There's something totally real happening. And I should end by saying I'm the last person. Like I'm not here to represent Christianity. If I'm here to represent Christianity, Christianity will be discredited. Because I have not lived a life worthy of that faith at all. Pretty mediocre person, obviously, worked in cable news, please. So it's not about me. It's just something that I have noticed. And it's absolutely thrilling. And there's a deeper unit. You saw the election results again. In the end, Trump cut the votes of faithful Muslims and faithful Jews. What? And it's not even about Trump. It's about this moment is a moment of division, but also it's a moment of unity. And we should be really grateful for that. I am really grateful for that. Thank you. Tucker, thanks for being here. My name's Jill Hohman. And really glad that we're talking also about faith. I was a delegate to the Republican National Convention from North Carolina. And so it was on the floor of the convention. And I just want to share. We had a briefing to our delegation from Susie Wiles beforehand. And I don't think the American public truly realizes how close to death President Trump was. And if he gave his traditional speech, he would have been shot. And what they shared is that at the last moment, he had decided to put up a slide about health care that gets very excited about. And he turned his head to point to his slide. And that slide is typically shown at the end of his rally. And this one time, he decided to put it up at the beginning of his rally. And he turned his head to point. And it was at that moment that the bullet passed. And so many of us think it was the hand of God that was their present. And but my actual question to you is when you left Fox News, we're having a lot of conversation today about opportunities. And what Jordan Peterson shared was selecting opportunity is also deselecting or selecting opportunities what not to pursue. And it's also what Sam Horner has shared as well. When you left Fox News, I'm sure had many, many opportunities. And what I'm curious about is you're thinking about how to select going forward the opportunity that you did select. And what sort of rubric or lens did you think about when you deselect it or didn't select opportunities in the path you took and didn't take? Why would you say, well, I talked to Trump that any was shot. And I was really struck for a guy who's often been derided as a narcissist. And I understand why people call him that, being honest. But he was not talking about himself. The night he got you that night in July, mid-July, he was at least in my conversation. When he was talking about the people in the crowd and how proud he was. If no one was listening, it was just being him. How proud he was of them for not running. And I thought, wow, it's incredible. I mean, I try not to be a narcissist. It's an uphill battle. For I would say for all middle-aged men, particularly for me. But I think if I got shot in the face, I'd be talking about me and he wasn't. And I just thought, wow. There's something, I do think that changed him. I do. I think that I've talked to him a lot. And I think it changed him. So there's that. When I got fired, first, I've been fired a lot. So I've been fired enough that I'm always grateful for a little bit of public humiliation. Because I think it's really important, particularly for men, particularly successful men. I think it's important to fail. I'm not just saying that. I mean it, I've lived it. And not just fail in like a noble way, but to be a little bit humiliated. Because when you succeed, and I succeeded young, really young, in my 20s in television, you just become a horrible person. And you never sort of pause to ask yourself am I doing the right thing? Because success is self-ratifying. Like of course I'm doing the right thing. I'm succeeding. Meanwhile, you're rotting inside. You become a horrible person. And so getting fired, having some big public failure where you can't hide it or blame it on other people, it really forces you to look inside and ask, like am I doing the right thing? But by the time I got fired from my last job, it took me about less than a minute to be excited. My wife was thrilled. She was so excited I got fired. And as to what to do next, I'm not that guy. I'm an instinct player completely. Not a list maker. I told you that I love dogs. I try to make decisions as a dog would by smell. You often see dogs like my dogs or bird dogs, and they hunt birds with them. And they don't know where the birds are. So they just run. And they're just like, oh, they're just sniffing the bird, but they're running the whole time. They're not walking, looking for the birds. They're charging in to the spruce looking for the grouse. And I try and live like that. Like I didn't know what I was going to do next, but I wasn't going to stop moving. I'm going to keep moving. Because I am afraid of entropy. I am afraid of like, and by this point, in my 50s, my kids are out of college. I paid off my mortgage. I guess I could not work. I guess I don't have crazy money aspirations. I was like, no, I'm going to keep working. I'm running exactly short on me too. But I'm like, get up every morning time and try to do something. And I was really blessed because Elon called me, the day I got fired and said, you should put your stuff on X, or a free platform. I didn't take any money from him for the record. But he encouraged me to do that. And I'm just so grateful. He changed my life by saying that. But even if he hadn't said that, I would have done something like that. Because I just think you should just keep moving. And like, it'll become clear what you should do. But always keep your nose up. Just sniff. If it smells bad, don't eat it. If it smells good, eat it. That's kind of how I feel. If you just keep your dog senses honed, you will make the right decision. I really believe. I mean, it's not much of an answer, but that's how I make every decision. That's why I got married at 22. So I had too many kids. All the big decisions in my life have all been made on instinct. And that turns out to be the best way to make them. If I sat down with a list, like pros and those, do the pros and cons. Nah. That doesn't smile. Not put that in my mouth. You know what I mean? So that's work for me. It's all I can say. Thank you. We'll do one more question. We have time for it. So do you have any tools that you would recommend to help foster understanding with those that might have different perspectives? So whether that would be empathy, understanding, cognitive bias, like in group out group, or confirmation bias, anything that you use to help foster understanding? It's so fun. It's like, do you have a camera in my kitchen? Because we're just having this conversation. Because look, we just had an election. And I think I probably have had a very similar experience to a lot of people in this room, which is, I mean, for the first time I went, I mean, I've been a journalist. So I'm not endorsing candidates. But the Trump thing, after you got shot, I thought to myself, the stakes are kind of big. Like the country is honestly going off a cliff. I was just went all in for Trump. I never thought I would do that. I spoke on his behalf. I spoke at the RNC. I did rallies for him. I'm like, I was just like, flat out, I'm for Trump. I never done before, for any candidate ever. And of course, not everyone in our world was like that impressed by that. And there were some people who were deeply offended. Because this election wasn't about who's got a better program. It was about, you know, is Trump a Nazi or something. They tried, you know, all this stuff. And people believe the propaganda. So we had people, not in my immediate family, will say. But people close to us who were like really offended. Like I can't believe that Tucker's out there endorsing a Nazi rapist. And so my wife and I had a lot of conversation. There's people we love, you know, for real, who are good people, by the way. Not everyone who disagrees with you is a bad person. Some of them are wonderful people. And but they just disagree. Are there deluded or whatever? And so how do you handle that? And we talked a lot about it, like for hours. And my view at the end was, you know, you don't have to win every argument, actually. And sometimes, and I'm a professional debater. So I'm pretty sure I could like crush pretty much anyone and debate is what I do for a living. I just put my whole life debating people. I think I'm good at that. You know, if you're a transmission guy, like you can fix a transmission. I'm a debate guy. So I thought, well, should I just like crush him in debate and just like muster all the evidence and throw him at him and be like, actually Kamala Harris is horrible. And here's why? Like it easily. I'm a debate guy. So I thought, well, should I just crush him in debate and just muster all the evidence and throw him at him and be like, actually, Kamala Harris is horrible. And here's why? I could easily do that. That's what I wanted to do. But then I thought, you know, the only way you really change people's minds is by just loving them. And like, you just sit and take the shit for a minute. Actually, that's kind of what I did. And just sort of try to be as loving as you possibly can be. And just like, if you think that you're on the better side, if you think you have a more humane position on something, live it out in your life, like show people love, and that wins them over in the end. I don't think in your personal relationships, you win that much by didactic, pedantic debate points. Go on all Ben Shapiro on him. I just don't think that works. Or go on the lightsaber. You're me. You know, did you know that? According to the Department of Agriculture, you know, okay. So like teaching by example. I think that. I think that. Also, being happy. I think being happy is a huge marker for something really important. I mean, if there are two sides of a debate and one side seems kind of, you know, grounded and cheerful and has functional relationships and, you know, why do you respect them and kids who love them? They're probably on the right side. And if the other side is like living in an apartment, you know, screaming at MSNBC and, you know, compulsively petting their cats, like maybe they're on the wrong side. No, I'm not being mean. I'm just being serious. Like the people with the balanced, happy lives are probably on the right path. And the super angry people are calling everybody Hitler probably in the wrong path. Like if your program is so effective, then why are you so miserable? And why do your kids have weird piercings? And like they clearly hate you and your wife has obviously, you know, has no respect for you at all. You know what I mean? It's not working for you. So that's how I make decisions. I look at the outcomes. I'm not going to do a real estate deal with a homeless person. I'm not going to invest money with a bankrupt person. Probably not going to hire no beast person. It'd be my personal trainer. And I'm not going to vote for the party of unhappy people because like, that doesn't work clearly. So if I want to change people's minds, then I want to model what I think success is, which is calm cheerfulness, which is peace, which is connection between people, which is stable enduring longitudinal relationships. You know, that's success to me. And I think by living that openly, like you change way more minds than by any argument that you can muster, that's what I've concluded after 30 years of making arguments. Awesome. I thought your Kelly means, in case he means interview was amazing. Where's Kelly at? Where's Kelly? He's around here somewhere. He'll be here tonight. And I mean, there's a lot of interviews you have done that are just so eye-opening. People can learn so much and get so much perspective and learn what's really going on in all kinds of areas. Jimmy Dore, which I watch recently, amazing. Amazing. What interviews have you done this year that you think would be possible? Well, all the interviews with people I thought I would disagree with. I mean, I lived in Southern California as a child and all the organic peanut butter moms in my neighborhood, I found incredibly annoying. It means saving the whales and furry armpits and lecturing you about eating white bread. And I was like, oh, stop. Tell me again about how Woodstock was shut up, hippie. As I've gotten older, I realize actually I love those people. They were right about everything. It's just wild to see that a lot of them just went up in an alliance with them actually. And they were right about all the health stuff. I mean, I smoked until I was 45, so and I love pizza. So clearly, you're not taking health advice from me. But it doesn't mean that they're wrong. They're right, actually. So really the most beautiful and rewarding experience for me for the past four or five years is realizing how much I have in common with people I thought I had nothing in common with, including Bobby and Callie and Jimmy Dore. And like, just to nail me Wolf, I mean, just a list goes on. To be surprised in your 50s, to learn something new in middle age, to realize and cheerfully admit you were wrong and then find out all the things you were wrong about and accept things that are clearly right. Like I love that. I mean, maybe some people are embarrassed about it. I see my whole political class like, can't admit they're wrong about anything. They're still defending the Iraq War. But I think they're in bondage. They're trapped. They're fearful. They're terrified of admitting they're wrong about anything because then the whole edifice of bullshit comes crashing down and just crashes them like the wicked witch of the West. How much better is it to live in pure freedom by admitting the truth about everything than you don't have to be afraid at all? You could just be like, I was totally wrong. I got fired from my job. I was like, who cares? You're just like totally free when you're honest. And so that has just been incredible to me. I've loved it. I love, thank you for coming to Genius Network. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Talk your call, sir. Right. Yeah, yeah. Thank you. I'm at TCN to offer quality long form programming films, documentaries, short series. And we've got a new one rolling it out. It's a six part documentary series called All the Presidents Men, the conspiracy against Trump. It's made by our friend, the documentary filmmaker, Sean Stone, all six episodes available now at Tucker Carlson dot com. It's an in-depth look at what happened in the first Trump administration, 2016 to 2020. And while the rest of us sort of busy watching TV behind the scenes, permanent Washington, particularly the inter agencies and the law enforcement agencies, under the indirect, but pretty clear command of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton set out to systematically destroy not just Donald Trump, but the people around him, people who supported him. And this series explains exactly what happened. It's worth seeing as Donald Trump starts his second presidency. This series is interviews with the people who are targeted and presents it in a way that will help you understand exactly what happened. How American democracy as democracy was undermined by the people who claim to be defending it. It's in this series. And it's absolutely worth it. All the presidents men, the conspiracy against Trump out now on Tucker Carlson dot com.