Hello world! Sean Atwood is the infamous author and activist who is banned from America for life. Sean made millions in the stock market in his early 20s and by his 30s he was running one of the biggest ecstasy empires in the US, smuggling more than $4 million worth of drugs into Arizona before he was rated and sentenced to 200 years in prison. Sean's biggest competitor in the ecstasy business was the Mafia mass murderer Sammy the Bull Gervano. When we talk about this episode, we also talk about Sean's views on insider stock market trading as well as the recent stuff going on with Reddit, Robinhood and GameStop. Sean has also done more research on the Epstein conspiracy than probably anyone. He's done hundreds of interviews with his victims and acquaintances and he talks about his latest discoveries in the subject towards the end of this podcast. This conversation is packed with gems and I hope you guys enjoy. Please welcome Sean Atwood. Hey now! Yo yo what's up man? Nice to see you. Yeah you too man. Thank you. Great to see your channel going from strength to strength. How's it going man? What have you been up to? Man this year I just saw amazing growth in the channel but last year I was down in the dumps because I think I may have told you some stories about my friend from childhood the wild man and he died and his funeral was just before Christmas and he was co-interviewing people with me on my true crime podcast he was doing really well he was thriving on YouTube and then he got ill. He tried to get in hospital, they said Corona, stay at home and he had breathing difficulties and he went in multiple organ failure and he died within like you know within a day I've been admitted. Was that was it coronavirus? Is that what killed him? No multiple organ failure. He didn't he didn't have Corona they just well you could say Corona killed him because when he tried to get in hospital they said stay at home you know it's Corona virus if you're gone in and they put him on a drip and took care of him but they asked him to make in this country I think that thousands of people have died who have things wrong with them who can't get in hospital cause of the Corona? Yeah that's insane. Okay he's picture up there right behind me the big guy right? The yellow shirt that's him? That's him yeah. He was the one who we went to America and he introduced me to all the mafia figures that's how I got the criminal enterprise going cause he's you know a big tough guy versus me you know just the skinny nerdy business guy so he opened that door into that world for me to set up the criminal enterprise and when the SWAT team came he was right there with me protecting me you know in the neo-Nazi jail he's a very good person to get arrested because he was running around that jail when when we got off the bus there was like 13 co-defendants we're arriving at Sheriff Joe Apio's Madison Street jail horseshoe section this is like a horseshoe formation of cells where you go in and you first get processed and it's like Dante's Inferno in there you are sardine into these cells everyone just sat on the floor squatting down you train like getting there maybe there's a little bit of room in the toilet and the reason there's the room in the toilet is cause there's piss all over them it stinks a shit so you sit down there and then some big dude just gets on the toilet and takes a crap and the whole cell everyone's just like there's holding their noses and they're all yelling drop one flush one drop one flush one. cause those toilets are really powerful man you press that button and it almost sucks your ass off it's like a be they spraying all this water right into your butt crack so when you take a shit the prison rule is drop one flush one so as soon as that lug hits that fucking water you're like but anyway in a cell you know like that as those logs are dropping the whole cell just stinks and because it's the newly arrested people you've got people who've been in like fights with the cops people have been tasted and injured you've got gangbangers from different street locations who are KOS on site you've got homeless people you've got people just fucked up on alcohol fucked up on drugs a lot of people going through the shock of the newly incarcerated it's just mayhem when those gangbangers come in who are like from rival neighborhoods right away it just kicks off and there's blood splatter then the guards come in they dragged a salons out and if they kick enough they put them in this thing called a restraint shirt and it looks like a medieval torture device it is a black shirt tilted back and they strap you into it all of your limbs and if you like a mouth-in-off or spit in they put a spit-hoed on your head and you see people in these these these chairs just rocking back or forth and like how in like cats and shit like that like mental patients so anyway this is the absolute bedlam we arrived that shortly after we were all SWAT team-rated May 16 2002 I said I had about children people working for me on one of the previous interviews I did with you and they started to arrest those people in groups so they had the continuous criminal enterprise you know the crime family they're like a pecking order now I was at the top wild woman was number two wild man's girlfriend and wild man was number three so they had wild woman above wild man she was this tough as he was man if some people were more scared of her than him seriously their relationship it's you know it's terrible domestic violence exists in the world but their relationship was based on domestic violence you know I thought I thought of fighting sometimes he'd hit a she'd grab a knife stabbing him in the belly sometimes they'd be both be in hospital but they were like cave people I was saying you guys are gonna kill each other one of these days and then the very next day after having these fights they'd be like love you love you and it was all about the makeup sex completely off the scale so wild woman I'm setting the scene for what happens still when we get out of this van wild woman is from Liverpool the accent is so thick in Liverpool they said that if it had the gun to trial in Arizona they would have had to get her an interpreter so I'll give you an example yeah Allah gives a sickie of your new idea what that means no yeah Allah gives a sickie what does that mean what do you say means here you are my lad give me a cigarette law it's like mate so she's like yeah Allah gives a sickie so they were no anyway she was totally battle hard man she was a big woman at one point in time but she'd been hammering the crystal meth and she was only tiny but she was as tough as fuck I mean I'll tell you a story in a minute about what happens to the women when they actually got in there so we're all getting out of this van we've told you previously about the SWAT team raid what happened next was they took us all to a Tempe police station did they built this outdoor processing center specifically for me and my co-defendants so we're all getting processes this outdoor processing center then they start filtering us over to Tempe jail in Tempe jail I'm realizing the gravity of the situation because more I'm figured right you know they've read in my house I quit trafficking a year ago there's no drugs what can they do maybe they can release me but as more people start to shop at the jail I'll give you another example one of my co-defendants Cody Bates mentioned previously that he's no longer with us he was ended up in a Scientologist rehab where they put him on antidepressants which had a side effect of killing himself and he killed himself it's documented the lawsuit is online if people want to look that up scienceologist rehab yeah yeah yeah I don't know don't know but it's probably our his own our California imagine so Cody Bates shows up Cody Bates was my right hand man in charge of sensible things because he never got high but after we all got arrested he got so depressed he went straight to heroin hence he ended up in the rehab where he hung himself so Cody Bates shows and this other guy shows up I'll just call him the DJ and we're sharing our arrest stories so I tell them you know bam bam bam bam door flies off the hinges SWAT team raid Cody Bates is driving along the freeway and he looks up in the morning and sees an helicopter and he thinks this is a bit strange everywhere I'm going that seems to be helicopter it's like that's seen in goodfellas in the afternoon he's looking up and lo and behold he's he's been driving he's scared to go anywhere he's just driving he doesn't want to stop so he's driving to Phoenix Tempe Mesa going up and down these freeways afternoon lo and behold helicopter next thing he sees like a motorcade of police cars and police motorbikes and they all just whoa he's got motorbikes all around in cars and they just take him off the road that's how he got busted now the DJ it was his first day at his brand new job of so it was a fundraiser as a fundraiser for the Republican party he shows up and they come in his workplace and arrest him so I can't imagine that was the end of that all right so all day long we are just like sharing stories at the at the Tempe jail and then the comes a point in time where the van comes to take us to sheriff Joe our pyros horseshoe and I've heard stories about the horseshoe from wildman previously because he'd been deported multiple times he was a minister society and it would always end up with him in the horseshoe and it's a horseshoe formation you go in you go through the cells you don't know whether it's night or day because it's underground but the walls do heat up so you can detect you know when when it's midday and you come out at the very end and they give you a classification minimum medium max security giving you black and white stripes and you get on your way so I knew some stories about the horseshoe wildman said last time he was in they wouldn't give them his name he was in there for days and he can't sleep because he's so sad the end of those cells so we get in the van and I finally see wildman for the first time since my arrest and he said that when he was in the Tempe jail they were trying to interview my girlfriend Claudia and he was walking past and he heard him say these are very serious charges you're facing you need to tell us about atwood and somehow he broke free of the of the police man that was taking him to wherever he was taking from managed to get stick his head in the room where Claudia was getting interrogated and goes serious fucking charges my fucking ass don't listen to these daff pig bastards Claudia and then he just goes ha ha ha and yeah this big fuck-up Viking's beard and he's been up for days on smoking crack and crystal meth and he just looks like an absolute maniac so we're in the van sharing our our arrest stories and um speak into the females now because the females are with us first group was about 13 cold defendants about half female so when we get to the Madison Street jail there's like a ladder uh steps coming out the van and the transportation officers tell the women's gal first now there's a huge line of people waiting to go into the jail these are all like the new arrestees like I described earlier people you know have just been in altercations of the police people who are drunk people who are high people who've been tased people who've got injuries and as they see these women coming off the van this big line of men turned round and start heckling the women and I can't remember specifically what they were saying but it was of a sexual nature so the women you know while women who's very tough was just you know just look at these guys like assessing the situation but the other women they were really in feeling really insulted and disrespected so then the men start to get out of the van and the guards are yelling everybody to get out to get down these steps very quickly so wild man just stops on the top step and we'll be able to the cops tell him to get down he just doesn't move and he raises his Viking's beard and he opens his eyes really wide and he looks at all of the men heckling the women and he goes hey that there's my fucking woman I'll have fucking any of you guys when we get inside there in a couple of minutes because that's where we're all fucking going if you guys don't shut the fuck up right now you're gonna see what's gonna happen to you and they all just shut the fuck up right away holy shit he was a good man to get arrested with yeah he was 28 stone by the end of it and one stone is 14 pounds I believe what did you say it was 28 stone that was his weight let me just tell you 14 times 28 so he was he was 400 pounds in weight and 6 foot 2 oh my gosh his his fists were twice the size of mine and it was just all human teeth marks all the way along them now it might be um it might be an interesting subject to going might be Sammy the vault because he's on youtube now and all of anything with him on it is going viral what was the what was the story behind all that let's get into that let me just tell you one more thing so we had a guy working for us call let's say handsome mark and he started working for the gravano enterprise so he was playing both sides and one of our customers gave handsome mark money for a thousand ecstasy but handsome mark went and got it off the gravano enterprise instead of us not only that he was pulled over by the feds and the pills were confiscated so then the customer comes to us well she went to wild man first I hadn't authorized what he'd done he just went and did it himself so she goes to wild man says look just gave you know one of your guys 10 plus thousand he's saying that you got pulled over there's no pills there's nothing you could do about it so wild man went and paid him a visit and um while man just like he only needs to punch someone once and he would usually knock him out so in this case he punched a guy and it ended up with the guy's tooth stuck in between two of his knuckles despite a time I get these explaining you know this guy was fucking going through semi the ball this is why I'm just a people who go through semi the ball he's showing me he's he's damaged his damaged fist was the tooth so like dangling at his flesh it wasn't still dangling but his knuckles were all fucked up oh my god by the time I got up but it was it was later so um one of the people wild man was gonna retaliate against online was semi the ball because of what he said and um basically you know I got trolled a lot last year as my channel is grown as of the more about Epstein and sexual abuse and exposing the elites the trolls are getting more organized against me yeah you're you're in this sort of like weird universe of conspiratorial shit that most people don't know is exists and then some people are aware of it and think all you're just you if you look that deep into something you're a fucking kooku or it's just like you're in this like this weird little world of like underground criminal conspiracy stuff so it's easy I think to put you in a certain category just like right you off so the trolls contacted everybody from my past life to try and find holes in my story they contacted my prosecutor they contacted Sammy the ball they've contacted all of my ex girlfriends they've contacted everybody I've ever written about I'll put a photo about or anybody they could find a photo of me with a social media they've contacted all of my podcast guests they've contacted I mean this is just like insanity these people have these mentally ill people have so much time on their hands and it's insane so obviously they contacted Sammy the ball and said look you know Sean at wood he's made his career off you know by talking shit about you are you gonna do something about it so Sammy the ball got on a camera I said this Sean at wood he's you know fuck up him I hear it he's a journalist and he's a TV guy in England he's saying he's built his career off of my name no I don't you know I've never heard of the guy he's full of shit and if I'd a bumped heads with him in Arizona I'd be picking his bones out of my teeth that's what happens to him so so anyway that's a laugh and I'd like to set the record straight right now about this Sammy the ball situation and this is a clip but I think we'll do really good for you because this is so viral and first thing I'd like to say is I had so many aliases when I was running my ecstasy enterprise the prosecutor said she couldn't even put them all on my grand jury indictment so if someone says to Sammy the ball who's the Sean at wood guy how the hell is he gonna know who Sean at wood is because I was just the shadowy figure running this thing without my real name ever being known to anybody so that's the first thing I'd like to say second thing I'd like to say is I love Sammy the ball's YouTube channel I've said so many people over there he is a master storyteller reminds me of two Tonys who protected me in prison there are so many people out there who can't tell a story and he is I'm riveted I've been watching it and he's part of a generation and there's not many of that generation still alive these iconic Italian mafia figures so you know hats off to him for that next thing I'd like to say is that they handcuffed wild man to Gerard Graveno in towers jail in 2002-2000 free which is Sammy the bull son now on the streets you know a lot of people have been saying they were working for the bull for Sammy and I think I previously gave you my story of the the guys I met in Tucson who my bisexual lesbian porn style wife was dating one of their girlfriends we met them I sat down with them and I said it's the feds we need to worry about not each other you guys are lighting the place you know we need you need to chill and there's plenty of demand for actually we could coexist the piece didn't last long my top sales guy Skinner one click from the Graveno Enterprise enticed him to a nightclub in Scottsdale under the pretext of doing a deal with him they took him into the men's room and knocked his teeth out and took all of his money and all of his drugs and after that I moved onto that property Sinvac as Catalina foothills to Sonarazon in the gated gated guarded community so to you know as an added layer of protection against Graveno's crew at the same time at a female who had penetrated into the Graveno household was attending barbecues over there was giving me you know the layout we did some drive buys on the street and telling me about you know the associates what they look like and who was over there you know all these steroid head jock guys in the train and the track shoots sports were at these barbecues with the Gravenos so that's where it was at on the streets with the Gravenos and people are saying because Sammy de Bose is said I'm full of shit you never knew me I'm completely making all of this up but if you go to the police reports or if you go to the phoenix new times article it says that I was Sammy de Bose competitive in the XC market and I was established for so long that because I'd done it for years Graveno just came in let the place up got arrested I made him look like a flash in the pen now that's coming from the cops and the local media and people can you know verify that independently Sammy has recently said that he wasn't even running the XC enterprise so the question is were all these people working for the Graveno enterprise just throwing his name out that saying he was the boss or you know were they actually working for him and for ever legal reasons he's unable to say that back to towers jail 2002 to 2003 so Sammy de Bose crew they got arrested couple of years before my crew and like thanks cops you just wiped out the competition but all those resources that were on Graveno were then put on to me in May 16 2002 that was when the SWAT team came so they are running through the court process a couple of years before we are so when the guards knowingly chained Graveno to wildman they did that on purpose because they wanted to see what would happen they knew there was two crews that had beef on the streets now wildman looks at me like what should I do and I said because you know we don't want to get any more charges these guys have probably got some good legal information for us they're ahead of the curve on this they've been going through this for a couple of years we should just sit down with him find out what the tricks are the prosecutors are playing on them you know and how all this shit works and that's what we did we sat there all night with Sammy de Bose son before we went to our court hearing and we were fine with him and fine with him to this day and the trolls have contacted him too but he has acknowledged that he does know who I am and he was sentenced for as one of the dominant leaders of the exceering so it's you know it's 100% that you're out Graveno was near the top of whoever was running the exceering wherever the dad was or wherever he wasn't and prior to us meeting Jard in the jail my homie g-dog who I told you last time in introduce which was brothers in la Emma where they had the luck rocket well grenade launcher on the TV G-dog had I don't know if he'd been a cellmate with Jard Graveno or he got into his cell previously and spoke to him when they first got arrested this was and said look you know don't fuck with English Sean and Peter because we've got his back so that's how they knew who was protecting us or at least Jard did and then you know down the road I've kept in touch with him on email it's been it's been years now since we had any last communication but those guys all went to Hollywood they're doing the straight and narrow thing my wives became that hit TV show so you know who does the carrying Graveno for pulling that off and I've read her book and I love her book and I think what they're doing right now is they're on the positive track I offered to pay for Sammy the ball Graveno to fly to London so we could sit down and have a podcast recorded professionally here in London that would have been a huge thing and people said well you only said that because you know he can't travel because he's got this criminal record but we did the same thing with John A. Leet Matthew hit man for the Gambinos you know he admits to being involved in multiple murders and he came to the UK and me and wild man sat down with him and that's one of the most watch videos on the channel so that offer is still open if Sammy the ball wants to come to London we would love to sit down with him and get this filmed professionally and if he's got any questions for me I'd like to set that record straight because I'm not full of shit it's fully documented what we've done and there's you know the police recently I had to re get my story re verified through a TV company I'm doing something with it was already verified by National Geographic they had to see my paperwork in the beginning for Lock the Pro Broad and I'm looking at the paperwork recently it's you know it's right there about some of the witness statements the ten witness statements that led to me getting arrested were people who were playing both sides and they were just working for Sammy but then they told the cops they were working for me and started to give all this information up hoping to reduce their own sentences all 57 of Sammy the Bulls co-defendants agreed to cooperate we had over 100 and only four agreed to cooperate because we were tight wow yeah it's fucking insane that would be a great conversation I feel like between you and him two big competing ecstasy enterprises back in the back in the same era in Arizona that would be an amazing yeah has he answered you at all has have you reached reached out to him obviously has he responded yeah I reached out to him through a person who represents him rather than doing any silly online stuff and that person said presently he's not going to do it really yeah but he said he's focusing on his channel and his channel is doing great and if you like those old school mafia stories you know dark tales of blood and guts with gallows humor I urge people to go over to Sammy the Bulls channel and check those stories out couldn't you guys just do one of these zoom things yeah but it's not you know all my zoom things have not been as effective in terms of reach versus having my camera cruder yeah they're at the same they're just not like it's it's really weird you can't really like connect and build like a rapport with somebody and they don't like naturally last as long like podcast people come in the studio they always go over two hours two and a half hours no problem but when it's like this like we always hit a wall for some reason no matter who I'm talking to on the computer start a fucking screen man it does your eyes and it does yeah it really does so like all right let's go I want to talk about before you went into the ecstasy business you were huge in the stock market you're making millions of dollars you know buying and selling and executing stock options now this shit is so confused why is the stock market and obviously it's a huge it's a topical subject right now with all the game stop stuff going on and the hedge funds like you know were billions dollars in the hole because of game stop but can you explain for for dummies like myself what is a stock option and how is a stock option relevant or how is a stock option who explained for for dummies like myself? What is a stock option and how is a stock option relevant or how is a stock option? What is a stock option compared to these bets on companies like game stock failing when they bet on a company failing like this and how does it work? Okay, so let me just say that what I'm about to say, I need to do this claim now because there's laws against giving investment advice. So this is just going to be educational information I'm going to give based on my experience in the stock market from age 14. So I have what 10, 20, 36, 37 years experience in the stock market. I was trading options in my late teens and in my 20s I was a licensed stock broker. I was a licensed at the options license and at a branch manager license in the 1990s. This was in Arizona working as a stock broker. So they're my qualifications. So the stock market is an absolute minefield and people who go in who don't have a clue what they're doing will just get their legs blown off very quickly. Ninety something percent of new investors just get completely blood dry. So stay away from it if you do not know what you are doing. Stocks, you know, you buy let's say Tesla and it goes up 10 percent and you sell Tesla and you make 10 percent profit. Let's say you buy Tesla, it goes down 10 percent and you sell Tesla and you lose 10 percent of your capital. Now with options, if Tesla goes up 10 percent and you own a call option, it might go up 100 percent or 200 percent depending upon how geared that call option is. If Tesla goes down 10 percent, you may lose 100 percent of your investment depending upon how geared that call option is. Flip that over now to put options, put options when you're betting it's going to go down. Tesla goes down 10 percent, your put option may go up 100 percent. Tesla goes down 10 percent. I'm sorry Tesla goes up 10 percent. Your put option may get be completely wiped out. You may lose 100 percent. So the easiest way to think of options is as geared investments. When an underlying security moves a fraction of a percent, an option is going to swing wildly depending upon various factors which include the exercise price, the exercise date, the volatility of the underlying security and so on and so on. Now if you want to capitalize on the demise of a company and the fall of its stock price, there are two ways to do it. You either buy put options or you sell it short. So the short sellers on GameStop for example, wait, what is the difference between selling it short or buying a put option? So put options are called derivative securities and with a put option, you can make a very small investment and it's geared so tremendously that your capital can go up 100 percent very quickly or you can be wiped out very quickly. Now selling short has got nothing to do with derivative securities. To sell short, you have to pony up the full capital to collateralise that trade. I'll give you an example. Say you're a short seller on GameStop at $5 and you want to sell short 10,000 shares 10,000 times five is $50,000. Depending upon your relations with your broker is what determines how much you must put up to collateralise that trade. But back in the 90s, you had to put up at least 50 percent. So I sell short $50,000 worth of GameStop at $5 and I put up $25,000 as collateral. Now the people see that GameStop has got a huge amount of short selling on it and the people think, hey, this is a good opportunity for a short squeeze. Now what a short squeeze means is they just buy shares because of the large short interest. Knowing that if they drive the shares up, the short sellers are going to get a margin call and then it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy when they buy their shares back to cover the margin call that it sends it even higher and even more short sellers are triggered by those shares. But go back to the guy who put $25,000 down GameStop goes from $5 to $6. So now he's down $10,000. So his collateral is shrunk to $15,000. GameStop goes to $7. Now his collateral is shrunk to $5,000 because he's down $20,000. At some point he gets a call from his broker saying, you need to send us money if you want to maintain this position and that's called a minimum margin requirement. It might be a third of the underlying value of the short sale. Whatever it is, it's getting triggered every single time that stock goes up. Now let's say he goes to $10,000 and he's down $50,000 and he's got no money left. Do you know what he has to do now? He has to buy the shares back and eat the loss and when he buys those shares back, what does that do? He sends the shares higher. So a guy who got wiped out of $10, he might buy it back, sends it to $11,000 and then the guys who have wiped out $11, they have to buy it back and they send it to $12,000 and then those guys, $13,000, and off it goes to outer space and that's exactly what you saw with GameStop. Who the moon? Who the moon Alice? Oh my god, what was your reaction when you saw this happening? Okay, so this is your world, man. This is your used to live in this. I've seen these things happen so many times, so it was no surprise to me. But what it is symptomatic of is an overheating market. So we saw the corona crash, then we saw the feds just put in the monetary method of and that as lower interest rates has just sent everything skyrocketing. And then there's a saying in the stock market, when your barber starts recommending an investment, it's time to get the hell out because that means there's no more suckers left to put the money in and that's what we've got the froth, we're at the froth level right now. Psychology, however, can take things to extremes. That is why it's so hard to call the top. When I went on true Jordy about three years ago, I said, look, Bitcoin, way of a value. All it is is computer code. I think it's going to go down and it did. It went down to about from 20,000 to 4,000. Recently it broke back above 20,000. Now that's called a technical breakout. And when something does break above an old high, there's no limit as to how high psychology could take it. So we saw it, wham, right up to 40,000. It's got as high as 44,000 today. Could go to 100. I still think Bitcoin is worthless. This is psychology driving the market. It's a millennial bubble. But how high does it go in the meantime? Because I think it's worthless? Do I sell it short at 45,000 at 50,000? No, I certainly do not because like I said, you never know how high it's going to go when psychology takes over. Let's roll the clock back now to Holland, tulip mania hundreds of years ago. People were re-margaging their houses to buy tulip bulbs. Tulip bulbs were more valuable than gold. And that's just the effects of crowd psychology. If people are interested in this, the two books I read as a kid. And one is Lebong, the crowd. And the other is extraordinary popular delusions in the madness of crowds by Charles McKay. Because when I got interested in the stock market at 14, I went down witness library and ordered dozens of books on the subject. And I quickly learned this is not a pure mathematical thing. It is a crowd psychology thing. And once you tune into that, you can learn how to ride those trends. And the other thing I would recommend to people is a book called The Secrets for Profiting in Bolt and Burmark. It's by Stan Weinstein. I had that one read as a teenager. I must have read it about 10 times. And later in life, when I was a top producer, stop rocker, Stan Weinstein guru actually started mentoring me over the the phone. I was one of his corporate clients. Every time, you know, he called the office, because he's on Wall Street Week and that he was this big figure in that world. All the brokers were looking at me like it, like in our Stan Weinstein's on the phone. There's also a forum that discusses and puts out stock selections based exclusively on Stan Weinstein's methodology. And that is called stage analysis.net of which I am a member. And I think the last thing I posted on that was that Zoom had done a technical breakout around the beginning of the corona. I didn't buy any myself. God, I wish I had. If you look at the subscriber growth in Zoom numbers and the share price jump, I mean, that is definitely a company that is going places in terms of revenue and earnings per share growth, which is what drives companies, values. The short sellers on GameStop looked at the financials. They hadn't made money in years. They're still losing money now. So that valuation in the billions had no resemblance to reality. But these things are never a straight line. The people who buy them on the hype end up just getting wiped. And these things have to return to their firm market value eventually. That's called the efficient market hypothesis. And the firm market value is based on the discounted cash flow and earnings of everything that the company is going to make in the future. And the people say, well, look, if the short sellers are buying all the short squeezes, buying all the shares, how on earth are the shares ever going to come down? What happens is the company can issue more shares at any time. And they often do when share prices go up that high. The insiders start to sell all of those shares. They can't believe they're look. They've got shares at almost zero millions of them. And next thing, it's gone from five to almost 50. And they're inside of share. Believe me, they are filing reports to sell those shares as quick as possible. So these things are flashes in the pan. Stop market will always go back to a firm market value at some point. But in the meantime, psychology creates these huge swings, which if you can read the trends and forecast the trends, you can capitalize on those swings. Why do you think Bitcoin is worthless? Don't you think the concept of Bitcoin and having a currency that's not able to be manipulated by the federal government or by billionaire hedge funds, billion dollar hedge funds? Don't you think that's a good idea? Absolutely. I completely agree. So what is the value of a commodity, you know, exchange value, industrial value, portability, transferability now and supply. So look at the value of gold, you know, there's only so much supply of gold in the world. Look at the value of, you know, any other precious assets. Bitcoin has the flagship factor, but anyone could create a cryptocurrency. So the supply is potentially unlimited for people creating crypto currencies. Surely someone else can create a cryptocurrency with all the same exact same attributes as Bitcoin. The supply is potentially infinite. It's not something you're mining out of the ground that industry is going to use that has this actual value. And, you know, eventually the governments will capitalize on that weakness in crypto currencies, I believe, to bring the values back down. Well, yeah, you know, I'm not a fan of the government. I'm all for it. Everything that you just said. Well, I just think that it's a psychological bubble created by millennials and perpetuated by millennials. And it's going to have to come crashing down at some point. But right now it is on a red hot. So it's going to the moon Alice. Yeah, it's at like 42,000 last time I checked. I think it was a thing. And I mean, I've even talked to, you know, lots of Bitcoin experts and they all say don't invest in it. Just use it as something to you to, you know, if you can do transactions with it casually, no, I mean, not if you think about a lot of people say, if you think about investing in Bitcoin, just just picture yourself throwing it away or lighting that money on fire. If you want, if you want to like, if somebody owes you some money for a service and they happen to have Bitcoin, ask them to pay you in Bitcoin, but don't take a bunch of your money and put it into there because it's basically this like burning it. I saw that news story recently. I think it was the German authorities arrested the fraud. So that like tens of millions of Bitcoin and he wouldn't give him the password. So they can't access it. But they've kind of like done something. So he can't access it either. Huh. Yeah. Yeah. That's a cool thing about Bitcoin. The government can't take your money away. No matter what you've done. Yeah. I like that. You talked about there's like a wake-up moment for you when you were in the stock market. They kind of brought you into this world of activism and being outspoken about America's darkest, dirtiest secrets. And that was the 2011 insider options trading. Yeah. Can you break that? I know you've talked about it before, but for people that are watching this one, can you kind of like break down like how you experienced that and how you discovered everything that went down? Yeah. So I've already explained what a put option is. Right. Just to clarify in case you're going to make a clip, a put option is a derivative security whereby if the underlying security moves, a small percentage, the put option will move a massive percentage. And we've put your betting that the underlying security is going to go down is the opposite of a call option. In the days before 9.11, the average daily volume of the put options on the airlines went through the bloody roof when 9.11 happened and the stock market was halted and the stock market was reopened days later. And the underlying securities had collapsed. Those put options had gone up thousands of percent. Small investments were worth millions. It was headline news. It's on YouTube. You can find it about insider option trading. And the guy said on the headline news in America, this has to be the terrorists. The only people could possibly know with the terrorists. This is insider terrorist trading. These trades will be traced and we will find out who these bastards are paraphrasing of course. So it completely disappears out of the news. Now, you know, options is something I've been on for many years of my life. I'm thinking what is going on with this? This is insane. I've never seen anything like this before in my life. Headline news. Pish gone. Years later, I'm in a maximum security medicine street jail Phoenix, Arizona reading a book by David Ike. I think perhaps Alice in Wonderland 9.11. And his research had found that those trades had been traced to a brokerage that was run by X C I A. So not only had they known about it, they had profited from it. Everybody who knew about those trades at the time was visited by the feds and deputized, which meant if you ever speak to these trades about anyone outside of this interview today, you are going to prison for years of your life. So that completely, I mean, if people google it, I'm not put out all the names involved, but if people google it, you can see all the names involved. I don't want to get it too complicated for people, but it gets really deep. Now, is there actual proof that there's X C I A people that were in charge of the banks that were doing these trades? Oh, yeah. Is this some like, because I know David Ike, I mean, talk about being connected to some bat shit craziness. I know he's connected to some crazy shit. Yeah, I agree. 100% but every time you see him and his name that people are talking about reptilians and stuff, I agree. 100% that David has some conspiracy theories that people would consider crazy, but this has been verified by a number of other independent researchers as well. Okay. It's been discussed on RT quite a lot. And I urge people to go online and check it out themselves. I'm just putting it in right now on my computer. He's trying to get the name of that brokerage. Max Kaiser, he's a guy who's done a lot on it on RT. Max Kaiser, because he was involved with those brokers as well. Here we go. Max Kaiser and guest talk about 9-11 inside the trading. Oh, yeah, here it is. Here it is. Right. So it was very obvious that advanced knowledge of the attacks were circulating amongst traders, and this insider trading happened, days leading up to the attacks. Buzzy Krongard, K-R-O-N-G-A-R-D, deputy chairman of the CIA was the former head of Alex Brown. And Alex Brown was the company that had, I think, the majority of the options transactions went for them. This says, I used to work for Buzzy Alex Brown. I still keep in touch with my former colleagues. Some of whom were buzzing about the action and the putt options on the airlines. Additionally, company started in LA, a dot com had been sold to Wall Street Broadgogers a few months before the attacks. And the company had relocated their acquisition to the top floor of the World Trade Center. I was in touch with employees who were also buzzing about the putt option for Enzo Unalain Stocks, and they cited Alex Brown as a major source. I urge people to research it. There's a lot more names involved. There's a lot more companies involved. And there are some articles that really laid down, but just off the top of my head right now, I can't find them. It's fucking crazy, man. That's some terrifying stuff. And no one, it's something that no one really talks about. Because the people who did the trades would go to prison, and it goes right against, you know, what was it, Pink Floyd said? Mother should I trust the government. The government does not want to hear it mainstream media. He's owned by, you know, the same corporations around the government. There you go. You're not going to get it apart from independent researchers here in the my whole like overview of this whole situation with the stock market is that the normalization of the internet and everyone having access to so much information and everyone is living on these on these devices 24 seven. It's made it, it's made it harder for the government and corporations to keep secrets. You know, and it's kind of, it's made everything more transparent, which is made like previously like even go 10 years ago when or 20 years ago when no one had iPhones or people weren't living on the computer online. I'm sure far less far less people understood the stock market than they do today. And now because of something like this, because now you have this crazy news story about a bunch of kids on Reddit that are manipulating and making these people lose billions. Now everybody wants to learn how the stock market works. And it's going to, it's going to shine a light on all this shady shit that happens all the time. That's normal for the stock market. Okay. So what you said about technology advancing is true, but with the stock market, there's nothing new under the sun. So when you see this deluge of novices wanting to learn about the stock market, we saw exactly the same thing during the dot com bubble. And we know when that deluge happens that the stock market is getting near a top, because who's left to buy after those what the professionals would look view as idiots? What's that last wave of money comes in from your barber, from your granny, from whoever little Reddit investors wants all that money's in, who else is left then to sell shows to because the insiders are constantly unloading stock on novice investors. It's a disinformation game. When you read something in online or in a financial publication that says this company's doing great, you should buy shows in it. That information is being put out there because someone is trying to sell you the shows inside. There's a constantly just pumping news stories out telling you how great they're doing, how strong our earnings growth is, how sales revenues going to go through the roof in the coming years. We've got contracts with China. All these stories are coming up all the time to suck people into buying the shows. They are selling to them. For every buyer, those are seller. And when that last wave of suckers comes in, it's getting there a market top. And those people, you know, your barbers, you shoot a person when they get wiped, they'll go back to doing what they're doing and the wish they never got involved in the stock market in the first place. See over and over again. Such a crazy game. It's just like going to the casino. I've never been into it. I've never bought shares and individual pick. I've never individually picked stocks or day trader or whatever. Just like index funds or whatever passive stuff. Man, it's addicting once you get into that. You start watching it every day, watching your numbers go up and down. Short term trading definitely. So again, this is just an educational video. This is not investment advice. If you put some money away every month in a fund that's highly rated and is safe. Over time, you'll see that go up and down, up and down. But over time, you will make a much higher rate every turn than you would than having that money just parked in the bank at a very low interest rate. But you've got to be able to stomach those ups and downs. If you're putting the money in every month, you're doing what's dollar cost averaging. When it goes down, you buy more automatically. When it goes up, you buy less. But your growth is right there. That's the sensible way to do it for novice investors. Yeah. I think that's even what in an interview that I watched, which made me decide as I do this, Warren Buffett, they asked him what he would do if he was not in his position or whatever he would do. He said, I guess return with the least downside is put all my money in the S&P 500 or whatever, however many years, 50, 60, 70 years. I do not know who lives in that because the S&P 500 is the biggest corporations who are run by the biggest psychopaths who are getting the biggest government contracts because of that thing called bribery. Oh, sorry. Let's go contributions. That's what keeps all that in motion. That's another thing is politics is becoming so much more transparent. People like media, like we're doing now, like politicians are able to go on here and talk to people for hours. There's some that don't do it, obviously, but there's some that do do it. And they're upfront about everything. And it's hard to smear somebody by taking them out of context nowadays because if they do something long form unedited like this, you can always go back and find the source if you're not lazy. So I feel like that's changing too. And I guess I'm optimistic about the future of like politics and corrupt institutions of this country now that everything is becoming more transparent. It seems like in the last couple of years. Yeah, but look at those of us who are exposing the corruption and what we're having to go through, you know, range of controls, the black ops level stuff to take us down. Look at what Julian Assange is going through. He sacrifices life to shine a light on that corruption to get to the truth. Once you get so many followers, they take you out, don't they? They destroy your character. They used to assassinate you, but now they destroy your character or they put you in prison and give you a life sentence or they just hold you indefinitely like Julian Assange. So they still the old God still have techniques to combat what's going on with technology. And look at the Great Wall of China. Look at how those poor bastards over the suppression of information that's going on. So I don't want to be too negative here, but yeah, that's that's my response to that. No, and another thing, it's it's also insane to realize looking at the state of America right now and look at everyone's view on China. Like everyone like I think by and large, the general view of China over here is like China is this crazy communist place. There's no freedom. You know, all the protests that are going on all the terrible things that haven't in China, but look how old China is. I had a guy on here those recently recently telling me a story how he was over there doing a tour and someone was showing him a mill or something like an old mill that made that made some sort of fabric or whatever then like you see that thing, that thing's older than America. And he's like what America is going through right now China went through thousands of years ago. So I don't know, it's just it puts everything in such perspective to realize how, you know, it's an ancient civilization with so much So I don't know it's just it puts everything in such perspective To realize how you know, it's an ancient civilization with so much history and they've arrived where they are now But look at some of the modern cities now. They look like things from flesh god, don't they? They're so advanced Yeah So Maxwell yeah, let's talk about gee lane Maxwell last time we talked about gee lane Maxwell she had I think just been a Arrested and we were kind of you were kind of Telling your thoughts on what you think was gonna happen to her a lot of what we said has unfolded When Maxwell got arrested the more conspiratorial? We're saying that the fix was already in You know she would get a pass somehow and she would be let off so it's not name all of these people her coke conspirators Royalty people at the head of business Etcetera, but we've seen in the courts Month after month motion after motion go against her She offered a multi million dollar bail bond package and the judge shut that down she revealed that she's she's married and I think it was 25 million and They prosecute the said, you know, she's got multiple citizenship France Israel the UK and That money You know if she's facing life sentence she could just easily walk away from it. We don't know how deep her pockets are but we believe The money that she said a husband was putting up was her money in the beginning so You know, it's probably chump changed to her With her assets. She's got around the world then We saw as well as the denial of the bail bond which has been going back and forth We saw the authorities Put an increased pressure on Prince Andrew to cooperate in this and he's still Renagan And towards the end of the year we saw two other huge Players in one in the Epstein case one in the case of his own. I'm talking about Jean luprenell Jean luprenell got arrested in France Epstein abosted he had slept with over a thousand girls from Jean luprenell's pipeline from Europe to America including 12-year-old triplets and he was Laughing at what good oral sex they had given him on his birthday as this present from Jean luprenell So I've been doing a series of interviews with a guy called Fred on my channel He's out of France. He might be a good one if he used to get on He was an absolute expert in Jean luprenell So he's at the forefront of this group of activists in France He was very exposed in this bastard Virginia has said that at the orgy on the island in which Prince Andrew was participating with his Virginia's words in which Maxwell was participating and Epstein that they were joking that these girls that Jean luprenell had sent over were the easiest ones they couldn't even speak any English and they were from these poor families in eastern Europe Jean luprenell was running a modelling agency and you know they tell these girls we're going to launch a career come with us and next thing they get in sex traffic so the French authorities as well are leaning on Prince Andrew to give information Now is Prince Andrew you know and these other big names the sleeve Maxwell's got up her the car that Maxwell's got up in sleeve even if she does it would be in the interest of national security to prevent that information if we're coming out we're talking about Bill Clinton, Prince Andrew, multi billionaires, Leon Black it's come out since our last interview gave Epstein 150 million so Epstein when he died his network is around half a billion Leon Black who manages one of the biggest funds in the world gave Epstein 150 million a lot of that money must have gone to the sex trafficking so you know directly his money was going into the sex trafficking of these kids but nothing's been done to him so there are these huge names that seem to be untouchable so the trial is scheduled for this summer and what Maxwell has been doing is going to court every month and trying to increase her plea bargaining power because right before the trial each side then we'll try and get together and based on the plea bargaining power of the defendant a deal will be agreed to avoid trial I think that is the most likely outcome it might not necessarily happen right before this summer trial date because that summer trial date is like a a musical chair they could push that back three months six months they can keep going with that but at some point I believe that Maxwell will have to take a plea bargain so what does that mean just to take a plea bargain let's say she'd won all of these motions and she had a really strong plea bargaining power just before the trial they might offer like five to ten so she gets up in front the judge shows remorse and she's got all these mitigating circumstances the judges had the nice breakfast that day he's not you know he's in a good mood the judge might sentence her to the lower end of that range so she's got five to ten judge might give her six years if she's going to court every month and all the motions are going against them and more witnesses are found and more charges are added to the indictment she is losing her plea bargaining power so by the the time it gets to trial they may say look the position in right now the best we could do is offer you 15 to 20 now she's going to say right 15 to 20 if I get 15 it's the feds I serve 85 percent that time you know the best years of my life are over so I'm going to roll the dice and take it to trial and I'm going to name these people but at that point the intelligence agencies would come in and say look national security you can't go there so these are the forces behind the scene at play of interviewed various people and they believe that Maxwell is sat on the biggest treasure trove of political capital in the history of the world in terms of who Epstein filmed or recorded having sex with these traffic girls so if you know if she's got stuff on the Clintons royal family members whatever it is if she feels so trapped that she's going to lose the rest of her life she might want to activate that treasure trove and use that as some kind of bargaining power but Biden has come in so we've seen the changing of the guard in the White House Biden and the Clinton crime family are like that so we believe that Biden coming in will benefit Maxwell because that information will not be allowed to come out under a Biden presidency with him at the top of the feds and again just like the title of part one there's always the possibility that Maxwell will get Epstein what are they doing supposedly to prevent that she has a whole flaw of the jail to herself yeah she's not in a general population of prisoners she's asked to be moved to a general population of prisoners so she can be around people and have those benefits but because of the nature of her crimes the inmate population is likely to at the very least attack an extorta or maybe even possibly kill her she's been checked by guards continuously she's saying that you know they're waking her up when she's asleep checking that she's still alive and the place is cameraed up like crazy just this week her she started to fight back and her lawyers filed something in the courts and the saying that the only reason that she's been arrested was because of the failings in the Epstein case because of his death and that embarrassed the government so to show that they're doing the job they've gone after her and she should have been arrested a long time ago if they had a case against her but I don't buy into that at all when they arrest someone in a case of this magnitude in complexity the bureaucracy is very slow what it keeps going and going and going and going and they get more and more information get more informants they get more conspirators on the indictments and that's how they build these complex cases up we in my case was classified as complex case over 100 people it took about I didn't do my plea back until the beginning of the third they're still arresting people then so these things can go on and on but even though it is a very small chance it will go to trial I would love to see that with Maxwell did name some big names at trial certain government agencies would then have to take action upon those names but it won't get the she will be silenced either legally or she will be Epstein do you think Jeffrey Epstein still alive you know what Lynn word sense of stuff about that it went quite viral on my channel in January and I wouldn't rule out that he's you know it could be down on some island with Kenneth lay who was George Bush Jr's biggest political contribution at some point you know really yeah yeah the guy behind the end run fiasco yeah was George Bush's single biggest contributor at some point that it's a crime family you got to pay the back she's to the mafia boss if you're running your scams when they're in the White House whereas the Clintons whereas the bushes is the same old tricks the same old games and when Kenneth lay got arrested I think I was in department of corrections and I said to my soul mate Long Island I said this guy this is never ever going to get to trial this guy was Bush's biggest contributor let's see what happens next and then he just died mysteriously didn't he was his heart or something really oh yeah he was Epstein yeah oh my god yeah I mean that well the Epstein idea of him the theory of him being still alive it doesn't seem that far out of the realm of possibilities because if I'm Jeffrey Epstein and I know people are trying to kill me and no people want me dead because of all this compromising information I have on top world officials on world leaders my response is going to be if I disappear or end up dead I have contingent season place that will release all the information on all of you you know what I mean like like yeah if Jeffrey Epstein that would be I would I would imagine that would be one of the top two things on his priority list to have in place if he got locked up so how would they get around that you know I mean they it seems like the most logical answer is they faked his death and he got out and he's living on some island or they seized that information because they have the technology that's so advanced that they would get that and people I've interviewed believe that they do have that and Elaine's treasure trove already and then they went in there and if you look at the crime scene photo there's electrical cord on the floor they use that electrical cord to strangle him and that's what caused the damage to the high-eyed bone which is more common in homicide than suicide and then they strung him up to make it look like a suicide so I'm at about 90% believe in the he was Epstein and and 10% that he's on some island with Kenneth Lay yeah but even if they did get that information off of whatever off a hard drive let's say how would they be able to how do they know how many copies are out there or how to destroy they would have to destroy the other evidence after they got their copy of it all right so let's say that Epstein was working for the intelligence community as a honey trap and his boss was Wexner which is what Maria farmer the victim has said then if Epstein was just a mid-level manager in that operation Wexner was the Victoria secret guy yeah okay he was the what's the other company as well I can't remember it off the top of my head was the Victoria secrets anyway yeah I think it was sorry because yeah was one of them so Wexner is you know the boss of this honey trap operation and he's clicked up with the intelligence community and Epstein was just a mid-level manager then I think that information could be contained by the intelligence community yeah I mean I don't know I feel like it wouldn't be too hard for him to make copies of stuff and distribute it you know to have just something in place to save his own life yeah but if you had the information you just saw what happened to Epstein what would you do with it I would go leave it on the doorsteps of the New York Times or something like that you know somehow yeah without streets camera dump isn't it they will I would be shit in my fucking pants that's what I would be doing it's Epstein yeah I guess but if Epstein I mean you would think that Epstein would do something to pay those people to to figure out a way to get that to the public you know anonymously I don't know I think it would have happened if they had that balls to do that and they have information I think someone would have released something yeah I think it's been contained because they've got all the money and all the technology in the world against little players so nothing's gonna happen to her Maxwell we'll do some prison time because she's gonna have to she otherwise everyone's gonna just say there is no fucking justice in the world how can this woman who trafficked hundreds or maybe thousands of victims and participated in sexual assaults get a pass because she's buddy with Prince Andrew and Bill Clinton right she's gonna have to do something and the lies are gonna say like you know that this is so serious these charges are serious you've got to do some time it's just how much she does it's it so are you every day online just like keeping track of every document that's filed you are you I can't even take a break the minute I take a break just breaking Epstein news it's the case that never goes down because there's so many people involved and he's spreading Jean Luke Bonnell Maxwell oh the other guy I forgot to make sure was was Peter Nigard who was doing these pamper parties he was drugging girls up taking their passports and raping them annually after been you know promised these jobs as as models and whatever again another good old pal of Prince Andrew he's been down there on the island and this guy's own sons are in the in-charging him with sexual they were sexually abused the dad thought it was a good idea a right of passage to have a sex worker fuck his teenage sons so that they were no longer virgins oh my key so he bought a hooker for his kids yeah wow how old were they they were in like the I think the middle all low teens oh my god yeah and who how is this guy connected to Epstein no he's not he's connected to Prince Andrew Prince Andrew he had an island down there near where Epstein's island was as well in the you know part of the world so he was another bahameum billionaire and in charge of a massive company let me just look it up again you'll have heard of it of Canada I believe I wonder what they're doing with Jeff Reppstein's island okay so they got this thing where they're trying to give up the compensation to the victims hmm what they said they just ran out of cash so the island the island is going to have to be you know liquidated if they want to keep paying these victims and the lawyer fees that are going holy shit yeah much money to get for the island oh I can't remember how much it's worth and last time I looked at the value of Epstein's assets has actually gone up approximately 100 million since he died nighards nighards visitors over the years at his island included Michael Jackson George hw bush Robert DeNiro and Prince Andrew what it's called nighard k nighard k yeah yeah yeah a fourth in 1987 he built a 14 000 square meter compound life at k in the Bahamas passed partly destroyed by fire on November 10 2009 the k is inspired by the main civilizations architecture one of the major buildings is a 3000 square meter grand hall with a 45 ton glass ceiling and this guy's alive yeah he's old now he's 79 and he's in prison he was rated the 70th richest Canadian in 2009 with a net worth of 817 million and now he's in prison in the US or where yeah he's facing extradition to the US okay okay yeah six allegations of rate made against him all under 16 what I interviewed Ryan Dawson who just got the platform from YouTube and he was talking about how they were just taking these girls passports and drugging them up and sodomizing them jeez who is this guy Ryan Dawson you said yeah Ryan Dawson he's he's out of japan he's a good guy he's an activist why did he get to platforms too many of these kinds of videos you'll have to ask him that I'm not exactly sure what we got his strikes on what what videos oh my god although to see a podcast with uh David Ike and Alex Jones oh we need that don't we I mean I think they have done some um they did a zoom I think or something like that did they come yeah there's something the one something online but I imagine that I'll go wiped out with the great deplatforming that would be absolutely bonkers and you just did a interview with that guy uh John Sweeney and he has a whole podcast dedicated to Epstein and Maxwell and that whole story right some with like a BBC his podcast became the one podcast in the UK it was really it's called hunting galain so my interview of him is called hunting galain Maxwell's John Sweeney if people want to check that out I thought I knew a lot about Maxwell but he spent many years um dedicated to that and I learned a lot from John Sweeney really there were things I was wondering about and he filled in those blanks what was the biggest revelation or with the biggest thing that he uncovered in your mind so he talked about Maxwell Galain Maxwell's upbringing and he just went into you know a vivid description of how dysfunctional it was on the Robert Maxwell who was this charismatic media tycoon but he was also an absolute monster in a psychopath in many ways and because he was so charming people who were close to him you know when they said he's like he's a monster he's a psychopath they said well at least he's our monster or at least he's our psychopath but apparently Galain was subjected to corporal punishment and there was a selection of belts and looking at what happened later on you know books that were found in Epstein's properties like the marquee decide this BDSM stuff a lot of what happened so when we kids carries forward into our adult lives so this BDSM propensity seems that a root cause is possibly the the the the belting's and the corporal punishment that she got from her dad who she idolized and he was her favorite as well out of all of the kids who some of them became hugely successful some of them died there was all it's like a Greek tragedy what happened to the kids what happened how many brothers and sisters did she have? a lot quite a lot quite a lot let me just have a look right now we could see how her behavior was shaped by the treatment that came from a father now you know Sweeney was quite sympathetic in respect he was saying that that was a mitigating circumstance you know format as well because of this dysfunctional upbringing nine children nine nine children he had so if you want to hear the crazy stuff that happens to these these kids so Michael was the oldest brother he fell into a coma age 15 after a car crash in 1961 and died eight years later having never regained consciousness so imagine your galaine and your brother is just on life support and it can't even communicate with you so that is really sad eight years eight years Philip 71 Paul Philip he was described by as his friends became a brilliant scientist and mathematician one of scholarships who Bailey old college Oxford at just 16 but he so hated his father that as soon as he could he fled to Argentina to get a far away from him as possible they fell out when he married Nilda an Argentinian in 1977 against his dad's wishes the marriage didn't last Nilda moved out taking their daughter Marcella with her and a second marriage also failed he was last heard of living in a 65 pound a week flat that is a hundred dollar a week apartment in north London trying to be a writer and what was he writing about his bullying father and 69 became an actress and she was called ugly by her father god when her fledgling acting career floundered her dad said what have you and Pope John Paul the second got in common you are both ugly and you are both failed actors this is how crazy that guy was he's his Christ she studied Italian and French Oxford trained at a as a month to Zori teacher married an austia path and is now believed to be a hypnotist in sorry practicing under a different name she kept out of the limelight since the father's definitely 68 so i'm in sorry i might try and get a hold of her oh this is a good one christie so you saw some of them didn't be very well but these did christine and assistant isable made the sundi times rich list in 1999 after messing a hundred million pounds during the dot com bubble but then they lost it but now they back up again or something it's crazy jeez man yeah yeah where where are they all where was the uh what was the dad's name again robert maxwell robert maxwell where was he where where did he live where was he based out was he in the uk so he was out of checklists of actually oh okay and his entire family were wiped out in the holocaust well his mom said to him get to england and copy the mannerisms of an english gentleman and that's what he did interesting oh there's is a weird death is about the second twin she got together with an illusionist a third husband illusionist alseca a significant play in the california literally a cat academic and celebrity scene was famous for holding parties for the great and good and was a good friend of epsine in 2009 the two organized the science conference called mind shift on epsine's private island is the belt and second married in malibu in 2007 but the union was never legal he'd forgotten to file the papers to know the second of three previous marriages um but here's what happens to him um in 2015 second was found dead below a cliff near the home in the village of saint sirk lapopi in france's loat valley and is about still lives in the south of france was he abstained in 2015 somebody needs hb oni's to do a documentary on the maxwell family that was be fucking bonkers hasn't even said the one korean the middle sister age free in nineteen fifty seven died of leukemia oh oh no it goes man it's endless the system yeah he's a tragic and tragic history from that family kevin became britain's biggest ever bankruptcy oh oh oh oh no it goes yeah wow i wanted to ask you before we end this thing i did a podcast with wilford wong it's one like my biggest podcast got it we yeah it's got like almost a half a million views on it um you email me right when he got arrested you got arrested for apparently he claims he was trying to catch some some of one of these satanic cults who are praying on children what happened with them all right so wilford wong was arrested with a group of people including the mum of the kid that they had taken from social services and these uh these are the kind of stories that are causing problems legal problems for people so i'm going to word things very carefully i want to say that you know the mother obviously believed that her kid was getting abused in care and wilford they had a car with false license plates i think you had a knife in his possession we absolutely do not advocate that people take matters into their own hands and snatch kids from the authorities because wilford is facing a massive prison sentence now for a a doctor of doctor and a child one of his co-defendants was found dead already in the prison yeah and um i have had our letter from wilford which i read out on my channel and i also recently published a four hour 50 minute podcast with john wedger you had referred wilford to us in the first place who is in telephone communication with wilford and he has communicated wilford's story and wishes through that medium so there's a trial coming up and wilford is protesting his innocence asking people to write to the government in Wales and is going to be taking it to trial I'll come in up and Wilford is protesting his innocence, asking people to write to the government in Wales and is going to be taking it to trial. So we are waiting the outcome of that. But again, I reiterate people do not follow in Wilford's footsteps and snatch kids in the authorities and you know, you're going to end up with a massive prison time if you do anything like that. Yeah, the one thing that I questioned about Wilford, I know a lot of people talk about the SRA and the Satanic ritual abuse that happens. But the weirdest thing was there's no solid evidence of it ever happening. There's no footage or video or anything. And he's like a very devoted Christian, right? He's very involved in a bunch of Christian organizations and does a a lot of work within that religion, which it seems interesting that he's so devoted to catching these Satanists. There are some cases documented that people can find online, of people who've been charged with crimes that were a part of Satanic rituals. But it's not, you know, every day and every day thing that we see, correct? Yeah. Right. I mean, is there is there any actual like video or footage? And there's like the whole Bajimi and grow thing where they had like a fake child's body or fake body or whatever that they were sacrificing. But has there ever has there ever been any actual evidence found? Well, there's all kinds of things available online, showing macabre crimes, snuff movies, red rooms. There's all kinds of horror story stuff going on. And perhaps, people who believe in good and evil would say that those Satanic enterprises in themselves. But I know what you're saying like, there's people who love the theatrics of it, of worshiping the devil. You know what I mean? It's a fun thing for some people. Like there's metal bands who who sacrifice fake people on stage and people think it's exciting and fun and whatever. It's rebellious isn't it for young people? Yeah. So do you know, Gothic and yeah. Yeah. So, you know, how much of it is out there? I have no idea. I have no expert on this subject. Yeah. But it's fun. It's fun to investigate and talk about. It certainly is. Yeah. I've been to quite a few people in it. Well, man. Well, thank you for doing this. I wish we had longer, but this was super exciting and fun. So we'll close your. Any anything specific we want to talk, you want to have people go to like any specific videos you got going on or any new books? If you put the links in my channel in the description box, that's the thing I appreciate the most. It's free to subscribe to my channel. We're almost that coming up to 700,000 subs now. Really appreciate all the people who've jumped on the and I've got about 15 books available. They're available worldwide on Amazon. Just put my name in SHA UN, ATT word, whether it's you know, my jail story or stuff. We write about the CIA and Epstein. New book coming up by Epstein who killed Epstein, Prince Andrew, Bill Clinton. We have Prince Andrew and Bill Clinton on the front cover of that. That's fucking great. Um, other than that, you know, if it's just gone from strength to strength, um, just putting, we don't know a weekly live stream right now called at with unleashed with some of this more sensitive content. And we've got two true crime podcasts coming out every week, one on Monday night and one on Thursday night as well. So all on your main channel, the SHA UN at wood channel, all on the main channel. I know, you know, Danny, just really appreciate you having me on. And it's always a pleasure.