Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. You're good. Let's try to get a John Lee picture. John Lee, where does that? Is the car heart? No. Specific time period appropriate, no? It's supposed to be like a boiler suit. Uh, it didn't arrive. What is a boiler suit? Like a cover-all? Oh, like something where in the boiler room? Yeah, but there's the best kind of get. I would have done a mashup. Now, see, here's got kind of a pleather jumpsuit. He's got a lot of great looks. That guy was out there. The two diamond studs. Oh, my John Lee really goes. Oh, yeah. He invented the isolation goontang. Oh, yeah. Go in there and go in. It's like your space dude. My friend actually went in his tank and did ketamine with him before he went in his tank. Whoa. Todd McCormick. What happened? He jollyly shot him up with an intramuscular shot of ketamine before he went into the tank. He's like, this is what I do. You want to do it? He's like, OK, sure. John Lee's like, hey, do you want to watch my parents fucking to conceive me? I like to do that in this thing. Let's go back in time. I had to go into the fucking, what do they call that Buddhist thing where you go and watch your parents fuck you? Is that a real thing? Yeah, you know, in this I forget the afterlife, they're home mapping the afterlife thing. But can they do it like with meditation or something? Is that what you're saying? Yeah, but they say if you could choose to do that, what if you could go back in time and watch something, but only one thing and that thing is your parents fucking, you could be back in 1976 or whatever it was you were born. I don't know what so what do I get out of that? Nothing. Just I read it. It's not like you research. You only get one trip back in time. Everybody gets a trip back in time to do it. That's it. But that's the only thing you get to say. It sounds like Tibetan Buddhism what you're describing to me. Pretty sure that's what I really call it when you go the the place you go to watch in parents. Look, Jamie, are you a Buddhist? The boat act is not called that. Um, how do you like that Nicky Minaj? Huh? Really? Uh, what about her? Would you watch? You know, we've been covering a TPUSA always. Okay, you're deep in the woods. I'm not. I stay out of that. It seems like such great. It seems like that the right wing of this country is in some sort of a weird gang war. But it was a fucking United. Right. It was much people need some shit done. They didn't get done. And now they're upset about it. And so the thought. So because here's the scramble to be in control of the narrative to the party market dudes have some network. There's also like the show I sold called the cutout. They do these cutout things or it's like you pay a company to put up or when Elon showed what countries all the the tweets are coming from. Right. Okay. Why the fuck are Indians and Sri Lankans tweeting about Israel Palestine shit, right? Well, it's because there's these bounties they put up and you can get invited to like a circle. Remember when you show me those things people get of like, hey, say this shit and we'll give this money. Well, now there's a bounty system. It's on Jimmy Channel. It's fucking amazing. So all these. So a bunch of people that I will watch them just like flip and say a thing like it's their job to say it. It was their job, but they're trying to hit a certain amount of engagement and then you get like 50 grand. I can't remember the name of the guy that pointed out, but it's really good for. Oh, should I show it up? So it's not just bots. The Barto. Barto of becoming to Benton teaching after death consciousness passed through several Bartos culminating in the Barto of becoming where karmic visions of one's next life arise during this phase. There are increasingly frequent flashes of the environment parents and circumstances in which one will be conceived and one is drawn towards these as a kind of refuge or new home. That's interesting, but not as interesting as the influencers. Thank you, poor plexa. Oh, yeah. Thank you. Thank you to our sponsor perplexity. You can always tell who's getting paid to say thing because they'll use. Like I just say that. I just say that. Well, it sounds like a fair. I thought it was very interesting and informative. I'd like to learn if you have a brochure. How many people are doing that? This is the thing. The conversations always been like other countries are doing it. Yeah. And then they have bots and fake accounts, which is definitely true as well. But it seems like also they're paying people to say things. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of people that seem like they're doing it like it's a job. Me assuming someone either is a black male or MK Ultra is me being kind of positive because really a lot of these people just sex or shit that are going for a bounty. So if you are MK Ultra, that's like kind of cool within that, I think. anything some of them can just sort of justify that bounty that, you know, whatever countries paying it, you know, hey, you know, they have their own rights. Specific, specific like billionaires and shit, right. And it works both ways. I'm sure. I'm sure a lot of people will be what anti Israel stuff people being paid a bounty. Don't you think? I don't know. There's certain people involved in that as well that are probably being paid. That's from all around. That crime that God done in Gaza and they're done now. So they could relax. They got it done. Yeah. Oh, yeah. It's done. So watch only think, I'll see. It helps me too. But so that crime that's done now, the reason that the frantic buying up of the media by Larry, the shadow president of Larry Elson is because they lost the next generation of trauma controlled fucking mind-slays because on TikTok, these psychopaths bragged about crimes they did to people and all the young zooming's are on there, including in America where we were forced fed woke bullshit by the oligarchs who are now suddenly horrified because they didn't take it would blow back that their kids would absorb that crap. Guess who has not had woke programming for the last 12 years Israel? So you can tell who's involved with the propaganda now because they have no concept of the sensitivities of these gender blobs that were made in this country. So now they lost the next generation. So now they're frantically buying TikTok to put a very white and charged. You're fucking, that's going to work out great. I bet you's already out based on the town hall alone that we covered. Well, worst things I've ever seen. I didn't see it. Well, you're lucky. Yeah, we covered all. I gotcha. I'm trying to stay out of most of this stuff because every time I talk to you, I get dragged in and I get paranoid and anxiety. Oh, yeah. No, you could be killed. I mean, so I went out into a drug. Oh, no, you easily could be killed. You know, yeah. I don't know. Jimmy worry about that. Jimmy got his phone hack with Pegasus that time. Yeah. He got the premium growth thing is hilarious because he's so funny because he can tell you as one of 12 kids because he feels left out of shit still in a way with things. Why do you know that thing? I'm like, well, you got an opportunity and then you brought that Nixon joke about him. He didn't grow. You know, they're Nixon quote. Yeah. He goes, you heard that quote right and they go, no, they're not heard it. They not come on. And he said it. Then they didn't laugh. Ha ha ha ha. They didn't nobody love. Let's play the recording of Nixon saying because it's even funny. Hey, we're back. Hey, we've got an issue. What happened? Two podcasts in a row, the podcast. Yeah, we got a software glitch. What were we just talking about? Oh, yeah. Sweet audio. His own voice, the faggot, you know, stamping I've ever seen. From time to time. By far. Yeah, that's how for us. Let's go crowd. So I think there's always been places where dudes go to get their free gun. The loss Nixon tapes. Here it is. During this discussion with Hittleman and Kissinger about, what's about youth conference, annual youth conference, the subject turned to homosexuality and society. And as it always does, give me some of those. We'll make sure it's right one though. I mean, the other guys are born that way. No, it seems different. You mean, grove. Well, Nixon was progressive. Gaze are born. He's a really lady. Googas. You know, the whole Nixon getting booted from the White House story, right? You know, the White House story has been my. You know, the White House story has been my. Oh my God, how crazy is that? Wow, you're naveling telling your first big break is that water game. How crazy is that story? Well, complete stories. It's the template for all of the media for how long, dude. Here it is. Yeah, president was you boy. Now guess what? From time to time. This is that quote. It's the most faggy cocktail thing you could ever imagine. You know, it's funny, a successful road. He kept saying he wanted to make bundles of men, you know, like a bundle of sticks of men in his round tables. So bundle of sticks is, of course, a faggy. That's not the. Sure. But the goal of these roles was to create secret faggy. It's all out the world secret ones. Yeah, bundles of men for turn of organizations. The names don't matter if you're dumb group, whatever. Everybody's in a stupid fucking the Knights of the Order of some gase shit, right? Skull and bones. Yeah. And look, when he's saying the F slur like that, I don't think he just means a little bit of a man on that action. I think he's talking about the ceremonies of the dress up. Oh, yeah. The dress up the whole Renaissance fair thing. Yeah. Like, the whole thing. Like, never mind anything you heard they did. Okay. That's just nonsense talk. But just the things you know they did. The video that Alex Jones got, the video that Alex Jones got is, and he did it by the way, back with John Ronson, back when Alex Jones. Yeah. Yeah. So Alex Jones and John Ronson sneak into Bohemian Grove. Alex Jones filmed them to everybody. He's like, he's crazy. He's a cook. He's filming them doing this fucking wacky ceremony in front of Molek, the Owl God. No, well, it's not Molek. It isn't. No. What is the owl? I mean, I'm for some, from what I understand, Molek is a type of sacrifice usually to be all, which is like a rich band, you know. Well, I thought that owl, the big owl is not Molek. Molek was one's owl. Molek. I heard the owls called care, like that cremation of care. So, but it's supposed to be the Artemis owl from what I understand. Athena, Athena Artemis is the same thing. Doesn't have a specific names, but it's a symbol of Minerva, the Roman goddess of wisdom representing the club's values. That's what they say. Yeah, the club's values are so, whenever they say wisdom, that means magic shit. That's an image of what that statue, large owl statue looks like. Oh, they make a big deal about misidentifying it as mole. Man, that is weird as fuck. Okay. So what, what does Molek look like? Just pull that up. Let's find out what Molek looks like. I think, I think now they no longer think Molek was an actual God and they think it was a type of sacrifice. An ancient Christian, oh, Molek looks like a bull. That's Baal. That's Baal. Well, there's a bunch of bails. There's Baal, Haddad, Baal, Aman. Okay, but which is Molek and Baal connected? Because every all these Molek pictures show me. So, the sacrifice itself, from what I understand, and you're probably somebody on that, correct it. But at this point, they kind of think, because there's only this MLK in the original writing. So it's a type of sacrifice to the bull God. You understand? Right. It's a Molek sacrifice. So you get material gain for your firstborn, like, that's a Molek. Oh, God. Look at this one. I think that's what it is. Look at this one, the statue of man that's stuffed with men. What's the big deal? We do that. Do that. Do that. Burning man. We commemorate it. You know, can't rich old fruits have a burning man of their own. They already do. It's called Burning Man. Yeah. It's called blowing people up. Can and I day it, associated with, in biblical sources, with the practice of child sacrifice, that derives from combining the consonants of the Hebrew, Meloch king, and the vowels, Beauchett, shame, but later off from being used in the Old Testament as a very deep to the popular God Baal. So maybe they're calling it, was he calling it Molek? Because that's how Alex Jones was referring it to it. Is it because it was a child sacrifice? Maybe. And also keep in mind just because it's an owl, whatever people that do goofy, pagan shit, you have to be like, did he change in his name every time he does a crime? Right. That's how these gods work. So it'll be like, no, his name's not that. It's this other thing. And you're like, wait, they're all. And so you can mix and match them. It's called alchemy. You could grind them in their constituents and mix and match them all kinds of great ways. That being said, they're doing something weird. They're wearing robes. They're chanting and they're carrying a bundle of sticks that's supposed to represent a body or something like that. And then they're going to talk about any in effigy. The whole thing is fucking bizarre. If somebody invited me to that and then that's what we went and did, I would never hang out with him again. I'd be like, what the fuck is wrong with you? What if you have to make a decision to be a fucking mass murderer on the order of any mass murderer? They told you it's bad. And so you need to cremate your care. Or you want to sell natural gas and get that pipeline to open up. Yeah. Is my dull care about the bad things I'm doing away? Because I can't not do it. I'll be killed. Also, you want to be compromised. Because that's how you do business. That's how I do business. That's how I met my dolphin wife Shoshana Rothman. I know she looks young, but she's a Vage. My favorite part about the Lily story is the experiments that the lady was doing to dolphins when she was living in the house with them and she had to jerk them off otherwise they wouldn't pay attention and people found out about it and they shut the science down. Made them more complete. It made the dolphin more computer. He had a name show. It's Peter the dolphin and he took his own wife right there. He took his own life. Peter the dolphin, told him something. How did he do that? I had, it's really dumb and obvious, but I didn't guess what it was. Did he just inhale all the water? Yeah, just drown himself. I thought he jumped out of the water. It's like a big fan or something. I could say how they do it, but you need to drown. Tied to defort himself and flip it over into the crowd. It's really true to tell me about all the, how they would drain dolphin georys. Oh yeah. Oh, we had dolphin georys. We had dolphin georys. We had dolphin kamakazis. We took dolphins, we like, we love you. Hey, I'm going to just give you a little collar. We'll find the Russians. Let me tell you if you wanted to more like, because I, I text out you some real dolphin info. You did? Well, let me just, when you text me, you text me so much, I can't read it all. It's not possible. It's good because this is going to be a real treat for you to hear. Okay, you're still going with the old school white background on your texts. Why do you think I should change it? No. No. All right. Is there a bad background? Okay. So, you know, they always say dolphins are a little amorous as the term. They use in dolphin handling. Yeah. I'm allowed to talk about this as long as they change your name of the person and the dolphin. I was told. Oh, you told me, yo, you did send me that. That's right. Okay. Because I was like, you know, they always say dolphins are like, don't say your friend's name, but tell the story because it's crazy. Yeah. I always feel like they're smearing dolphins. Like how we did to a great man said, I'm who's saying, remember we smeared that guy and he was the best president of Iraq they've ever had. Well, what about Gaddafi? I don't even want to bring that one up because that's really depressing. That's a crazy one. The most prosperous country in all of Africa. Yeah. Screwed up through the country is went on real. Yeah. It does a great clip of, clip of Russell Crow explaining all the things Gaddafi did on this podcast, explaining how we're supposed to think Gaddafi's the bad guy. But he's right. He's exactly right. Russell Crow is dead on with that. Oh, yeah, 100%. Some like maybe dolphins are just another Gaddafi. Gaddafi gave everyone free education. Everyone when they reached a certain age got a home. If you had a specific skill, they would send you to another university and pay for it wherever they had a send for it. Terrarium. Well, that too. But so are we. Yeah, shut the fuck up. It's all pretend. Well, I hate to bring it up. But ISIS is in charge of Syria now, even while morons will tell you that ISIS is attacking Christians and Nigeria. Listen, is everybody retired? You're always a glass half empty. At least Netanyahu got a pardon. Did he from who Trump Trump? How could Trump pardon Netanyahu for? Well, how does that work? I don't know. You asked me. No. You OK. Someone should cue the America fuck. Yeah, I'm using it right now. We're bombing Venezuela too, by the way. Just hate, hate, dude. No disinformation, drone bombing. Where are we? No, we got a grant. We reported yesterday. We got a ground people. Oh, really? Netanyahu says Trump's going with the first. He's talking about Israeli to receive Israel prize. Oh, Trump got a prize. The first non-Israeli announces Trump will be the first non-Israeli to receive Israel prize for tremendous contributions. Yeah, well, they should be the second prize. You got to make deals. You want to make omearts? You got to crack a few eggs. There's no one to come. I'm like the prize. Nobody gets it. But Israelis, I want to be the first. There's no omelet ever coming whenever someone says that. What did he pardon Netanyahu for? I didn't know that Netanyahu was in trouble. I do. He was not to be overthrown before October 7th happened in the country. Let that go. But right here. But what are we pardon for here then? That's what I'm saying. Oh, that's right. That's what I'm saying. I wonder if there's anything in it blacked out in the Epstein thing. But didn't. Well, let's hear my insult, huh? This is now the pardon has been their disputing it. Oh, they're arguing already. The radio's president denies telling Trump a Netanyahu pardon is quote on its way. But he's not an American citizen, is he? Wait a minute. Hold on a second. Say that again. Say this to him. He's the headline. Israel's president denies telling Trump a Netanyahu pardon is on his way. So what does that mean? So Netanyahu denies saying that to Trump is what it sounds like. Dylan, it sounds like that. Oh, Isaac Herzog. Well, wait a minute. Oh, the prime minister. So they have prime minister and a president. OK. I'm so ignorant. Swiftly denied President Trump's claim on Monday that he had told US president he would pardon prime minister Betignon, Benjamin Netanyahu. He's into what is that saying? I think he will Trump said when asked if Netanyahu would get a pardon. How do you not? He's a wartime prime minister who's a hero. How do you not give a pardon? Oh, wow. He's going to pull his ass out of the fridge. I think what he's saying is that he would get a pardon from the president of Israel. That's what I think he's saying. Yeah. OK. So this is why it's confusing. Yeah. How do Israel hates that motherfucker, by the way? OK. And he was about to be overthrown. NFL playoffs. Let's go. Draft King Sportsbook and official sports betting partner of the NFL makes every moment feel bigger, a running back cuts through the line, a strip sack flips the field, a tight end hauls in the kind of touchdown grab you'll talk about for years. Post season games shift fast. And with Draft King's live betting options, you can stay right in the moment. Plus Draft King's has your back with early exit protection. If the player in your eligible NFL prop bet goes down at any point in the first half, you still get paid in cash. New customers bet just $5. And if the bet wins, you get 300 in bonus bets instantly. Draft King Sportsbook every drive, every play, every moment, download the Draft King Sportsbook app now and use the code Rogen. That's code Rogen to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with Draft King's the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1 800 gambler in New York called 877-8 Open wire text Hope and Y 467-369 in Connecticut call 888-7897777 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of the food hoke as seen when resorting Kansas has to have per wage or tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario restrictions apply. That must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinnamon odds required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio. Limited time offer. Well, there were certainly large protests in the street the day before October 7th happened. Is it true that there was a stand down on October 7th? The idea of people were talking about the day at week. It's on Jimmy show going to show the news so that people that don't know what the fuck we're talking about. They know Belize make they'll say John Lillie's a lot. Why don't you say it? They'll say John Lillie's a dolphin fucking lion. No, no, no, they wouldn't say that. They wouldn't say that. What are you looking at? Um, oh, because I we got into this because I was going to tell you the truth about dolphins. Okay, dolphin like a net new Yahoo like fish. They're all the dolphin experience. Because this is like, yeah, this is one important thing. is they're a measly genocide in the. Okay. Okay. So I asked if they just ran dolphins, right? Right. So she said what they say about dolphin rape, it's true. All caps. They are very sexual animals and even masturbate. Young males can get very horny and it's like they go into a trance. For some reason they like knees. So I was doing a program with a very nice family and I saw flippy name change. I dropped to the lady's knees. I started buzzing on them. That's like a location. So groom your knees with their eco location abilities. Oh, so I'm like fucking great. That's all caps. So I followed protocol and put myself in between the dolphin and the gas and asked them to get out of the water. So you understand there's a protocol in place. Where will flippy start to go locating your knees? Okay. Oh my God. Flippy then started circling me fast with his dick out, hooking my leg and dragging me into deep water as he's doing it. Literally looks like the scene in jaws are short sitting the girl. She's like ripping around and she's jerking around and you can't see what's happening under the water. Obviously I'm fucking terrified and I'm trying to play it off to the guests. Like everything is fine. So I'm laughing and saying, you know how dogs get a little rough when they play. That's what she's saying to the guests. She's whipping like jaws like dogs. Okay, that's protocol by the way. So I guess it's good work. Then my shoes come off and start floating and the guests try to get back in the water to get my shoes for me and I yell, no, I'm out. I managed to get away and walk out only mental scars. They got all caps in. I was wearing a wet suit. I would have felt that slimy dick hooking my legs. It's like a Japanese anime hanging out with dolphins. But you know what? Look, it's terrible, but they're prisoners and they didn't do anything wrong. That's what's weird. Well, I know core work in victim. That's what I, John C. Lilly. They're just dolphins. Why are they in prison? They're a lot like they just got unlucky. They're basically dolphin slaves. Yeah, they're kind of like the dogs of the sea. I don't think they're like human intelligence. Sounds like they're like a little. They have a cerebral cortex. It's 40% larger than a human being. They have language and dialects. We don't even understand what their language is, but they can understand ours. Like they can learn things. Look, I'm trying to defend dolphins from the rape charges here. You want to say it's there. Well, do you know what else they do that's really often? They kill the babies. Yeah. There's, in Fantricide, in dolphins is really common to the point that it makes dolphin females permissiveness. Because the female tries to mate with as many men as possible so that the men won't kill their babies because they don't know if it's there. It's a real 60s animal, you know. They do things are only in the traffic. Yeah, man. Hey, man, you don't get dolphins. They just don't change their environment. We don't think of it as intelligent, but they're fucking smart as shit. Well, you know the thing of pushing people on the shore that are drowning? That's bullshit. No, they will. But it's not like they're saving you. It's like, when you get your trash out of my space, please? Not all it sharks here as well as a guy. Take your shit back. Who was it that had that theory about sharks? And I think he's right. He was like, sharks are not just targeting people because they're hungry. They're targeting people because they're pissed off that people in their water and they're getting in the way they're fishing. They're getting in the way they're eating seals. They're pissed off. They're not supposed to be this. So they just bite you. They'll fuck out of here. That's part of it. A little nibble from a shark is probably a real strong message. They just lost a lady in Santa Cruz, triathlete. She was with a whole group of people that were swimming and someone saw her get taken. Someone saw this shark breach the water with a human body in their mouth and then she was gone. And then they just found her remains yesterday. But Santa Cruz, like that whole coastline is filled with great whites. There's great whites all over the place out there. I think they breed in the outside of San Francisco. I mean, I never surf. So I never fuck that. Yeah, like a fuck swimming in the ocean and rolling the dice. But a monster just decided to just snap you in half. I just, the worst way to get grabbed. I just like it. Not in your environment. It must be so teary. You're so weak and slow there in the ocean. You're so helpless. But you know what? Let's see a shark take me up here. I bet I could take him. That's what I'm saying. Not so tough. Zero shark attacks on the shore. Remember that, uh, Santa's live sketch Land Shark? That was hilarious. It was so stupid. The shark would just knock on your door. I had a shark. It was so silly. Santa at live, he's definitely great sketches, man. He used to be so silly. I haven't watched it in forever. I mean, what I could wish I could find is, and you can't get it. It's like not up anywhere. But the one with Norma McDott is who's the most grizzled? It was Norma Donald, that country singer, that Thompson girl, he says to him, she's a good guy. Who was very good in the sketch? Garth Brooks. Garth Brooks. And it was like, he's like, and Robert Duvall, OK? And it was just like a game show. And they have to give grizzled answers. It was funny, you shit, dude. Really? Yeah. Oh, that's funny. And Robert Duvall gave the most grizzled answer. Oh, you found it. This is a real show. Yeah, this is one of my favorite. Ha, wow, I was trying to find it, not even that long ago, dude. Let me hear something. Can I hear it? That's great. That's not ready. That's great. That's very funny. That's very funny. That's a good sketch. You know what? What's his name again? Garth Brooks? Garth Brooks? Well, he's a man of a million faces. That's not Garth Brooks. Yeah, it was Garth Brooks. No. Am I wrong? Those Garth Brooks and Robert. No. No. Was it? Yeah, it was Garth Brooks. Was it really? Garth Brooks and makeup? Yeah. That was Garth Brooks. Yeah, you didn't recognize him. That's crazy. I didn't recognize him at all. Let me see that again. Maybe that's how he kills people. He joins us like that, dude. That does not look like Garth Brooks. That's crazy. He's a while ago. He's kind of bigger now. He's been enjoying that good life. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. Do you know people are repeating Tom's idea that joke about Garth Brooks being a serial killer as if it's like true fact? Yeah, well, it's weirdest thing. But I would say I don't focus too much on one person having an alter ego. But Nicki Minaj has that. Yeah, but the Chris Gaines thing was nuts. In the middle of being the biggest superstar in country music, he decides he's going to be emo and wear a wig. Yeah, he's a man. It changes name and let everybody know he's doing it. It's just a lie. At least Stephen King, when he wrote his Richard, the Bachman book. Yeah. At least he just said, listen, I'm writing too many books for people to buy. I'm going to write them under a different name. That's how crazy was it. That's what cocaine will do to you. Yeah. Yeah. Those are the good days. So I sent this to whatever. I was looking up. So have you ever heard when you came in and I would talk about there? He just fucking fixated on Nicki Minaj. No, because of the alter ego thing. Oh, she's got an alter ego? Let me raise my skeleton. Yeah, name Roman. Roman is a crazy boy who lives inside me, who says the things she doesn't want to say. He threatens a peep people and he's violent. I asked him to leave, but he can't. Whoa. She also notes he was born just a few months ago and born out of rage. This is like in 2010. His last name is Zolanski. Roman is a landscape. Angry outspoken, often homosexual British character who delivers raw aggressive verses featured heavily in pink Friday, Roman reloaded. Right. Then the Harajuku Barbie, which is the dolphin. Hold up. So these are her alter egos? Yeah, no, but don't worry. They didn't do MK Monarchship. Go up to the top again. This is Nicki Minaj. Okay. Famously uses several alter egos with their most prominent being Roman Zelanski, a fiery aggressive persona used for intense rap versus and Harajuku Barbie, her softer pop oriented side but others include Martha Zelanski, Roman's mother. So when Zolanski, Chun Lee, Nick Lewinsky and Cookie, each serving a different voice or purpose from therapy to explosive lyrical delivery. Huh. I mean, it's just fucking around though. Yeah, I think so. I mean, it's like you're right. I mean, most people normally take the alter ego of a series of like Polish, Lithuanian Jewish names. That's what I'm about. Which is like whooping over. Oh, well, that's it. Roman Zelanski and his mother live in there. But that must be great in there. That's be a party. Zolanski, that's weird shit. Is weird. Oh, the one that says it was to help her cope with her traumatic childhood, the one personality. Which one? I don't know. It was on the face. So Lansky that's weird shit is weird. Oh, the one it says it was to help her cope with her traumatic childhood the one personality Which one I don't know is on the thing a guy no, but there's more than that even I've got I grocko You know, I'll grock lies. You gotta go grock Did you look it up? You're like no, it didn't can you go and do that grock? Yeah, I got Proplexity to admit something that I did that it didn't want to admit initially I got I Decided other sources on it says this true. It was about the the Temple of to note chit-lawn mmm. So when they there's it's attributed to the Aztecs But if you ask the Aztecs they said they found it and so yeah, that means no, it's not even all they don't even know I think there's a term that they use for it and but was there when they got there they say I know that Yeah, I've heard it out. Yeah. Yeah. There's a term that they the way they describe it as It's very interesting because it's they describe it as like the city of the gods or something like that or though the land where the gods Oh place where gods were born mm-hmm. So here's the crazy thing And I heard this before but I wanted to make sure it was true There's a Spanish guy named Diego Duran who was a chronicler who said that they killed 80,000 people over a four-day ceremony there they say really it's probably like 20,000. Yeah, that's an exaggeration So well 20,000 that must have helped the smell and they just cut their hearts out to celebrate the fact that the temple was completed Hey, I'm holy shit man So but it didn't want to admit at first that they didn't build it and then I had to like cite these sources where they say that they didn't build it They said they found it and so then they wanted to make sure that they're attributing it to earlier people of the same Nationality you know, it got a little it got a little weird and I've realized well That's because it's drawing from all these sources that are online so it's drawing from all these Academic work all these books all these sometimes it just documentaries Sometimes it'll do that some AI will do that. I don't remember what I said quoted Seymour Debuts now sunny house and quote. I think it's like I think it's Seymour Debuts or some shit like our Seymour but no debuts and it was when Biden did all those pardons on his way out She goes well Seymour he pardon his nephew see or his brother-in-law Seymour Debuts and that the trashy pd just made that up So people were like oh, that's hilarious. Yeah, but she was a judge Because I don't over child trafficking cases is that fill you with hope Yeah, but that was good to have her and she's just probably tired from a long day of hard work at the view and Chet gpt lie to her look cut her some slack the point is this is why Jesus won't be an AI because Jesus is a fucking liar That you got it tell to go back and look stuff up eventually he'll get it right Also Jesus wouldn't be made by a tech freak with a weird dick. I think the AI is gonna make Jesus I don't think it's Jesus now. I think it's going to make okay if an AI makes Jesus by the end This is just in lore. Mm-hmm. Yeah, I'm not Chris. I'm I'm out in lore You know my religion Christ Penelope which I disclosed your scientist. No, I'm in a follower of Christ Penelope Though guy affords in your nostrils to get the thing out I think you should be Penelope Christ, but whatever Anyway, I'm sorry. I was thinking about Christ Penelope Yeah, I might need a healing from Penelope Christ What were we talking about oh yeah, yeah, so that would be automatically that would be an anti Christ Is the cards now? You're free. He literally sits on your heels number one. It's the true it has to go in the nostrils and he's very specific about that Yeah, got a trust man. Look at them Messiah Imagine if that really was the way and the only thing that's holding you know in Chris is it looks so silly Yeah, but if that was like I mean things weird things that people can't do wear things animals can do You know animals can they could shoot poison skunks shoot smell at people Imagine if your farts contain just do something about the bio Like the biome of your own farts that it gets into someone's nostrils and it activates your DMT Well, I don't have to imagine because that's a real thing as name is Penelope Christ It's one of the most amazing Is that him? Eric we hear what he says. I don't even notice that. Oh, he was saved Christ can help anything seven fold holy ministries Oh like what he's doing he drinks that that cran apple juice to get his farts tangy is that what that is That's secret it's good for the farts. Yeah, it gives a little tang Look, oh he puts his bank up there. Oh nice. Oh, so I can't pay him through any of the normal So send him some money wire transfer this man some money little fart your face What if we had him off for a podcast would you let him fart your face for money if I how much money on a fee? If he had a fee I mean, let's say he's gonna pay him more than 500 bucks No, but I mean to get him here. I'm sure he needs a travel fee as well. Oh Christ been healthy. Yeah, he needs a travel fee that guy. My guess is he's nothing high and when you say no We'll drop significantly. Okay. Will you negotiate for him? I don't know now, but you have to be honest about what that fart does for you Well, he's got his fart in your nose. We have to know I collect fart jars So It's a scene. Yeah, celebrity fart jars. I got an original Yeah, I got original scar Joe from the set of That Bill Murray movie there are girls out there that's still fart and jars, right? Don't they oh? Yeah, but I I mean they used to be a thing. That's the common mark. I only get the finest celebrity Celebrity fart jars. Yeah, I got one of I got a couple of good ones I was on a plane once and I was flying to Europe and it was a long flight overnight and was a little lie down flights and Melanie Griffith was on the plane. Yeah, and there was this big fat guy That was right alongside Melanie Griffith So Melanie Griffith was lying down sleeping and the way these seats line up they stagger Yes, so her ass was right by or his ass was right by her face. Okay, and this guy unloads He healed her he unloaded and I'm like when in life? Does a man get to fart one foot away from Melanie Griffith's face like that? Where you literally have her right here Here's the ass. There's just a aisle way maybe two feet two foot aisle way Pretty pretty narrow and then he just opened up Just opened up. I was writing and out so I was awake and I was like oh good Lord Then as soon as there's a fart on a plane you always play in the fat guy Yeah, always especially when it's so convenient that his ass is right near her her face Yes, I wouldn't take responsibility for it. I had an ex-girlfriend one time years ago. We were at the supermarket We were ringing up and there was some kid you know some little kid right as kid was standing directly behind her right and I just look over and she's like just gait so she would pretend she didn't fart ever But then I knew she was fart on the kid. She I guess you couldn't hold but there's a kid sitting there like this You know lollipop. I just saw her like like holding it a laugh. I'm like you monster. Did you? She was on a slally pop. I go. She likes it. She couldn't hold it Sometimes you can never have not hold it. You ever have shit your pants and you think you're just gonna not hold it? Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that when you're out. That's not nice and you get in a hot car And you gotta sit there. I was trying to help pee and hold one in my girlfriend's gonna say and I just farted and I went no Actually, cuz did you just You just fart you'll know because I didn't want it What's that guy doing so this is a different preacher at his head banging as you do it same church Why's that guy dancing like that? He's been he just you got healed. Thanks. Oh Knowing it must be when you know people are acting You know when we go to church and just people just put on there. I just got healed acting Flop around well if you're going to a church that where you're getting into that rolling around the ground and shit Everybody's gonna feel like they got healed because you're doing a group hypnosis ritual. Yeah, you're doing Like group mania like look at this guy. He's throwing people to the ground Run through crowds pretty entertaining though be fun, but he's just getting a lot of attention, right? Maybe he believes it maybe you know Have maybe it's real where being skeptical because yo, so burn see burn was there this weekend What you see burn what Steve burn was that Steve burn? Okay? You did I didn't get I wasn't wrong We're gonna say he was at this He was you recently by Christ I couldn't understand the name you were saying you were you were so I'm getting to your point because I forget if I don't get too fast. I'll get I'll just gonna forget it Steve Burn was at the mothership so I'm sitting in the grooming out and I look up He's like up some bitty does at the end. He by the way As long as I know him he was always very charismatic guy chicks always liked him always And I asked him I do did you take a hypnosis class at all? No He naturally does it, but I look up at the screen and he does his sausage party bet And it's not any kind of hypnosis thing, but when I looked up It's like a lady sitting in chair and ten guys and music and lights and I'm like oh well guys gonna start acting like a chicken Or so you know that's what it looked like, but I think he just does it unconsciously without even realizing what he's doing Some people just got the voice, you know, why think don't you think comedy is kind of a kind of a hypnosis? Yeah, when you're in the zone, right? Or when you're in the audience like if I'm in the zone I I did it to myself and you know, yeah, and then I like became the room There's no way to like you can't really I wouldn't worry about somebody heckling or something because on the room, but he can do you know what I mean like it Don't you think you get it when you watch someone too like if you watch someone great like a tell if you watch an a tell and he's killing you're locked into his brain Yeah, it's still main projection What is going on projection domain? Project well, I what is domain projection exactly so like all that stupid of cold shit that you know that into perplexity Jamie yeah, what is domain projection? Which is someone called yet. It's a cult well and LP you know what an LP is neural linguistic programming if you look on Wikipedia It's a pseudo science. Yeah Well, no if it is wise everybody use it non-stop off the time it doesn't work Why would they be using it on me all day long and every time I turn on something when I go and I hear some fucking catchphrase That I hate do you think it's called neural a pseudoscience because they wanted to credit it This isn't what we're looking for for an answer domain projection No, that's a mapping data or functions from one domain So use it as put in what is domain projection as an MK ultra? Well, I'm not saying that some phrase from it. I'm not saying I know nothing bolts of it I want to know what happens when you say that what to put in for a Mind control tool used by MK ultra Yeah Let's see what this is the one for my find something oh God, they did do it domain projection is not a documented MK ultra term. Yeah, okay So domain projection appears in technicals fields software engineering searches of MK ultra. Yeah, okay So this is handing about m domain projection as a form of mind control. Yeah, I wouldn't well It's just if you got a show and your control is crowd control in a way Right, but it looks it does okay So how do I dress up for how I want to control you? That's how people got think when they do whatever like a pickup artist or a con man or maybe magician Right, that's what like a close-up magic or something they got a They got to put bring you into their reality with whatever they're doing right so whatever it gets people there or you'll hear about gurus where There's that guy that weird cult That's like deep inside Google from that weird gay guy and people coming the room and his light would be gold around him And I you never heard of this This is what dirt does he tells you about something crazy and he goes you never heard of that You don't know. Oh, you got me with that good one with that guy from the Sentinel Island I didn't know they had it's that is that why they're not that cool. I guess yeah, Maurice of a doll port them So you tell me another explorer Yep, yet another explorer found a land of kids where they could do weird shit with kids Well, not just kids guys he would dress guys up like Roman soldiers and he would measure their testicles Like that's just science like one of his quotes was like describing one of them They had testicles the size of a sparrow's egg It's like the way he's talking about. I was like this lovingly eccentric homosexual fascination with these good or mine here so He gave a bunch of him diseases. They all and a few people died. He kidnapped these kids I think I think kidnapped the kid and their parents or their grandparents and the grandparents got sick because they were all they all had Cuties and so they wound up dying and so then anytime someone showed up There's only 30 90 these fucking people on this island So they have this story in They're they're spoken word tradition. They don't have a written history So the story of why people show up start measuring your dicks and everybody dies That's their story So anytime someone pulls up with a Bible this is the reason why they want to kill them That's why you can't show up on that island. It sounds like a alien abduction story. I mean Just like that. It's very easy is a much darker Same thing. It's from an alien civilization You show up in these wooden boats to people that were stranded on an island for 60,000 years Imagine like that's why I understand Peter the dolphin I always say take it because imagine you you never You just have flippers so you never knew what you were missing and then a beautiful alien Just jerks you off every day and that's someone puts you in a fucking cage for no reason and keeps you there your whole life And you're horny all the time and you know you have hands So what are you gonna do? You want to hope for a co-ed you gotta go locates knees. Yeah, yeah to use her knees You don't even have a female dolphin in there. That's crazy. It's like they didn't do anything One day we're gonna realize how smart dolphins are and we're gonna feel real bad Well, and we don't feel bad about all the people we blow up some doubt that dolphin I do a weakening well No, I don't mean some people do some people feel bad about the people the United States blows up Well, we only have school I always like to bring up public school kindergarten because 70% of guys They'd want to pull the trigger and battle and that had to be fixed with the Prussian system Which is why it's called kindergarten the Austria, you know Prussian word To get you away from mommy at age five instead of age six and they could teach you about war Well, they could just the state can get everything. Yeah, they can Industry right well that's I mean indoctrination of children is a real thing That's why when people scoff at it being used for like trans indoctrination like why would anybody do that like stop They do that to try to get you on an Android phone, okay? People try to indoctrinate you with everything everything is ever existed people try to get you to do well That's where why sigils and brands are so important. Yes absolutely They try to get you to wear what they're wearing they try to get you to do what they're doing Well, you also it helps if you have a few gatekeepers like in art I can remember the guy's name, but there's like one guy who and the reason he's like the guy is because the investments He picks pay off I guess in the art world Be some famous like he was like been around forever and I'm sure he's some kind of hack and whatever But why are these people installed there? We already know that Rothko and all the modern art American abstract modern art was launched by the CIA That's right. That's public record so you think they stopped at that you don't think they got involved all the arts Well, they definitely got involved in that because the Soviet art was so valuable Soviet art was more skillful and they tried to prop up American like Jackson Pollock That's one of them that they connect to being which when you look at the Jackson Pollock artwork that's worth fucking millions of dollars No disrespect to anybody who's a fan, but shut the fuck up like just shut up Just shut the fuck up. It's bladder and the idea that on this one guy Anybody splattered. I mean there's nothing wrong with splattering paint No, I never recreate. Yeah, I mean shut the fuck up Some there's modern art things all look at and I can I'll be like oh, I like it I don't like it, but the thing it the thing with it is it's not that there's no I'm not saying there's no art to it It's just why does one thing become a thing and one doesn't if it's in some worse for sure because there's something It's all about the names who's who's got the work whose What whether that work is valued very high? What is that guy in Manhattan? We showed a photo of this painting that he had it's worth like a hundred million dollars It's fucking insane. It looks like nothing Usually decooning is when everybody trash is the most because you know it's a factory of people making it Oh, I don't know if that's that one this this guy had a large painting by this guy And it was insanely valuable. I don't remember the real problem. I might have been it might have been 50 million But it was like but it's just you're looking at it You're like what the fuck are you even talking about? How is that worth anything? Well, I mean maybe it's worth something I'd give you a couple hundred. Who is it? What's that one? I just pulled something up. That's record auction price for Barnett Newman of for real is That real to blue squares. That's real so much go to jail do the guys come with a 43.8 million for two blue squares See this is just proof that just because your rich doesn't mean you're smart Just because you figured out how to throw your entire life at acquiring numbers It doesn't mean you're even remotely intelligent. Well, it depends what value you are stored in that I guess no No, no, no, no, no, no, no, you don't have to depend that one's great though That's only 165 million. That's a bargain. Look at that. Look at that. Look at that fucking painting. She paid 168 million How do you like that lady is involved? It's what art is it? That is a money-long completely insane that is completely insane that that's 165 million dollars that is completely Utterly totally insane. There's no there's no way you could look at that and go I get it Dude NFTs they were selling right and left for well a dollar now no, I know but that's still you still because there's some kind of item there We could still store your value in it. Well that probably she when she gave it away Well, it's probably an awesome tax write-off So if you have a hundred and sixty five million bucks Like if you you got that kind of money. She's probably worth billions baseball cards for the ultra wealthy is how I look at it Or Pokemon cards for old rich people. It's that's what they are. They're like baseball cards I looked up all the wealthiest people in the world. Yeah last night. I looked up all the wealthiest women in the world It's all inheritance the top ones are it's all like these families Well, they're not gonna tell you who's a trillionaire right they're gonna pretend we don't have those Well, they don't have to be public. So that's the thing. Those are oligarchs, right? Those are yeah, those are people that are that are a part of these royal families that are getting that oil money They don't have to tell you jack shit. No, they probably mock Elon Musk's wealth. Of course Well, every time somebody goes he's the richest man of the world I go do you think you get to know who that is? You think you're they're gonna tell you in Forbes the rich man world like tell everyone that to me. Well other countries do not have to disclose Ridiculous not paying taxes to anyone they literally own the country like these royal families own the country the whole country's my house motherfucker just think of the amount of money that's missing in this country. Yeah, we're just in fraud, right? There's right millions of dollars. We're 10 years just trillion. They can't account for this always true Millions of dollars in fraud. There's trillion dollars in waste just that now imagine if you own the whole country How much money do you have? There's no way you don't have trillions and you have it stored all over and then everywhere Oh, you're buying real estate in Manhattan you're buying like those crazy sky rises that are all three quarters empty My buddy Eric Hacker the guy using Antarctica was the guy worked at the Raytheon. Oh, you know that guy? Yeah, yeah, okay I saw that guy on Sean Ryan show and I was like wait What's my first on him? Yeah, he's it's a neutrino detector that's also a direct energy weapon that can make so I was quick I was already aware of ice cubitrino detectors. I just like looking up side shit and you know neutrinos are wacky So when I first heard of it they had built this detector in Antarctica They didn't mention its Raytheon, but that's who built it neutrinos are passing through us all the time Almost massiest particles. Yeah, the thing is They'll come from space but for some reason Anomalously neutrinos seem to be coming out of the earth at that part in Antarctica was the big mainstream science mystery of that the neutrino detector is gonna fight but uh Anyway, he started saying you could use neutrinos for all kinds of shit like FTL communications if you had to or you would have FTL faster than light communications Through entanglement you do it with neutrinos you could send information through neutrinos Apparently, I now look I'm a dolphin expert not a neutrino So I want to make that clear. I get a couple claws in me. I told dogs But uh, he had no seeing an alien stories or something no um also He has like you could explain its identity to you But I already think it's a weapon because I already know what harp is all the things They told you are not that is a fucking lie. I mean just a lie There's a treaty to not use weather weapons from 75. Why because they have those you don't make a treaty unless you have those weapons There's no nuclear treaty before new. Right. Right. Yeah, good point. We use it in nam Iran accused W is using weather weapons on them really yeah, I'm a dinner jacket. That's my guy the guy who wrote that He used them of using that drought that a drought and so anyway with you left way of starting the drought Yeah, it's not can see controls. Maybe a misnomer It's like uh how you people talk about a controlled burn that can I ask my my girls brothers and firemen out there Firemen because we don't call it a controlled burn because we really only control it at the point where we said it I got what because we call it a prescribed burn So they can prescribe weather. Let's put it that way you could stimulate a thing It gets certain effects and it's all like eel f waves and shit. Well, I don't do by just have another fucking flood and they From over geoengineering and they banned people from taking video of it at the time as a big embarrassment They just had another one now. There's a recent one. Oh, well, I I know that's uh Because uh I heard some people talking about it our saw some people What a eel f waves you could do all kinds of stuff with those ways right the cloud seating is 100% real Of course they cloud seed in the United Arab Emirates. I believe I believe they do that every week I think they make it rain there every week in more ways than one. You know what I'm saying But uh They make it actually way in there They actually make it rain there once a week remember the kid with the mullet They blamed the mystic camp drowning here in Texas when the flood happened. Yes It wasn't that kid. He got set out He got hung out to dry like it was on him But no nothing he did and Jesse Michaels is right He was right. He told me and he was dead right The whatever cause that was something so much more sinister and that kid was like his easy guy to You know so would you think that that was man-made weather that caused that storm? I did I came in the guy's name We had at the time on Jimmy show the dude came on and explained exactly what it was and the loophole that Which them because there's a treaty tonight. So I assume they just violated but no, there's actually a loophole to test this shit out here It's so fucked dude. It's so fucked and Also, but what evidence is this guy have that they created that storm because I thought they'd been tracking that storm I thought this was like They created it but Hold on I thought it was a convergence of two storms That was very rare and it caused his flash flood. No, I don't remember his details. I just know I Feel at this point especially have that Epstein shit that they should have to prove They're not guilty this episode is sponsored by better help New Year's resolutions are great and all But sometimes I don't want to up end my entire life to create a new and improve me If you're feeling the same way I've got a tip for you to let go of those big New Year's expectations and start small Focus on one thing that's been weighing you down lately Maybe you want to stress less about what you can control or put less pressure on yourself at work or reconnect with an old friend Whatever goal you have better help can help you get there therapy in general is a great way to discover more about yourself from an unbiased Outside perspective it can really help take a weight off your shoulders better help makes connecting with a therapist Straight forward and simple and with a network of thousands of fully licensed therapists They can connect you with the right one Like they have for millions across the globe according to those same people better help works great too Their live sessions have an average of 4.9 out of 5 rating So do yourself a favor and try better help better help makes it easy to get matched online with a qualified therapist sign up and get 10% off at better help dot com slash JRE that's better H e lp dot com slash JRE done with the whole done. Yeah, sure but also Storms a real like Katrina. There's been always been fucking actual real hurt the climate change shit is not real That's been a lie the whole time a study published in world whether a tribute attribution group found the global warming caused by fossil fuel emissions most likely Exacerbated the intense intense rains that last the UAE and Oman last year, but this isn't last year So last this is from the recent thing you just asked off in two weeks ago. Oh, okay So two weeks ago there was a flood right? Yeah, it wasn't as bad as one before but there was okay So this was two weeks ago that the two weeks ago one. It's still fucking big gates has already walked away from climate change You saw that right? I did yeah, so they've been lining you for how long about that bullshit Okay, here it is the downpour worsened by a lack of storm drains hobbled Dubai airport the world's busiest hub for international passengers So they're saying it's climate change that's causing it to rain more there's my proof that it's not that but here's the yeah Here's the thing they absolutely do Cloud seed yeah, so why don't you Search that put that into perplexing engineering is the Yeah, put into perplexity does the United Arab Arab Emirates Cloud seed To make artificial rain or when it's not artificial. It's real rain. It's just they're forced rain. What's the word? Whatever search that you'll find it Jamie They absolutely do do that Yeah, cloud seeding is widely used in the UAE to enhance natural rainfall But it only works when suitable clouds already exist and typically increases rain by perhaps 10 to 30 percent Not by creating storms from nothing the UAE runs one of the world's most active research-driven rain enhancement programs using aircraft ground generators and Experimental methods like drones and electric charging to boost water security So they're just doing it a bunch of different ways over there so that the blaming it on climate change when they are one 100 percent making it rain there all the time is Bananas mm-hmm. It's bananas like you don't even know what the fucking weather would be like if they didn't do it if they're doing it all the time If they're doing it all the time you literally don't have a control group Remember chem trails the thing that was those stupid people thought was a real thing, but it was a conspiracy Right turns out that that was real and it's called geo engineering They did the thing they always do a change in the name of the thing to not as true but a lot of the trails that you see in the sky that look like artificial clouds are just created because of Condensation in the atmosphere of the moistureing the atmosphere hitting the hot jet engine an incredibly cold climate Yeah, literally creates clouds But it should be all of them there shouldn't even be 20% of the time you Spray and shit. We already know. I think but they definitely do spray shit That's the problem the problem is when everybody thinks that every fucking southwest airline is spraying things to keep everybody docile Which are miss that's that's the promise that's easily Disprovable and what you do is you open the door for that allows them to do the real shit So what you got to recognize Playing it way because if you think that every fucking American Airlines flight overhead that's making artificial clouds is doing it because they're spraying things on you You you that's easily disprove it and then that I don't Hold on that makes all the other stuff seem silly too Right because I think they probably are spraying some things with some planes And there's there's real data the shows that they've tried that and practiced that yeah, I mean they they Here's my favorite one that I told you the stratospheric atmosphere was it it's called Satan in England They're that one the geoengineering England because you know to fight climate change. We're gonna We're gonna call it Satan we're gonna dim the atmosphere much like it's to England. Yeah, that's really bad We're getting all that climate change from England's lot of burns process fires these these boys swamp people are gonna be fucking and Then and then to call it Satan are you just like they're gonna make more you are it's gonna literally look like more door It's gonna be black skies and What a saur on live where the highlander to where we learn not to do this where to saur on live? Or it's going to literally look like Mordor. It's going to be black skies and what does Sauron live? Where do the Highlander too? Where we learn not to do this? Where does Sauron live? Oh, Mordor. Yeah, Mordor. State is the name of the tiny UK balloon experiment that released very small amount of sulfur dioxide. Literary Satan smells like sulfur. Sulfur dioxide in this stratosphere over England as a proof of proof of concept for solo, geo engineering, not a large scale on going weather modification program. It has nonetheless become a focus of online conspiracy claims about UK geo engineering and weather control. How funny is that? It's become a focus of online conspiracy claims about UK geo engineer. So them actually doing geo engineering has become a focus of online conspiracy claims about geo engineer. What is ranging to put a balloon called Satan? It's spray sulfur on. Is everybody like I love how the gas station is fucking things. Oh, it's not a big deal. They make him an object just has a great sense of showmanship. Satan was not a part of a major UK development program. It was led by a private researcher and later UK funding announcements for solo geo engineering research focused on some other small scale outdoor trials. Example sea ice thickening cloud brightening with formal oversight. Yeah. So what so they're doing sea ice thickening? Okay. So let me translate. The stuff has already been developed militarily. These motherfuckers are trying to make an ice age. They're doing ice coming back. You know, the ice is coming back. I know. Yeah, that's weird. I was told there's going to be all the coral reefs came back. There's more rainforest than there's ever been. Did you know that? We're in this procession of the equinoxes thing, right? What is the procession of the equinoxes? It's like every 20 something thousand years. The earth doesn't just spin. Right? It spins with a wobble. And that wobble is called the procession of the equinoxes. That's how they when they look at some of the ancient sites and, you know, like Egypt and different places where the sun at the summer solstice would have come through this. And they use that to determine around the time period when it was built. It was it's a theory at least because they know that the sky moves and that they attract this. The ancients had tracked this. The procession of the equinoxes. This has to do with the space. But this is the thing. It means it during the wobble is when the earth gets colder and warmer and colder and warmer depending on where you are in the wobble cycle. So the the equator kind of stays the same, which is why there's all these ancient sites on the equator, the Mayans and the Aztecs and all these incredible civilizations. They existed in a place where it didn't fuck it up too much. Whereas everything else, it's like ice age and it gets hot. Ice age and it gets hot. I thought we were in technically an ice age for the last however long because they're normally historically weren't ice caps. So we're still technically in an ice age as well as I know if you look it up. That's what they'll tell you. I think that's true. I think that's true. I think it has gotten warmer and it has gotten colder, but I think technically we're in a nice age. I'm still a little bit or about it because I used to get I could think of like I told you three or four things on the top of my head where I went to bed like oh no. These fucking eggheads that are talking about spraying things in the sky freaks me out though because the scariest thing that could ever happen to us is an ice age because you can't go anywhere warm. See if it's if it's if it gets hot out you move to the north. That's the people have done from the fuck at the beginning of time. We're like we're here. We're staying here forever. No, if the ocean rises, you have to leave. If people didn't ever exist, the oceans moved back and forth fucking thousands of miles. It's going to move. You're going to have earthquakes. You're going to have things change. Brought it by by if Obama builds ocean from property or not, that's that's my guiding all of us. Vineyard. They all buy ocean front. So that yeah, the insurance ever changed on it. So it's been bullshit the whole time. There's still people that are like, no, you can read and they've invested everything. They've invested everything. They also have cats and they live alone. I mean, there's a lot of that. A lot of a lot of people like taking care of the earth like it's their kids because they don't have a kid. I tell you crackpot theory I have. And I know it's hard to believe is a respected dolphin scientist. Um, I think that oh, he had one. It looks like in the video of John the Sea Lily. It was going to love. Yeah, like this. Okay. Yeah, I don't know that the the goon tank told them to do it and he did it. The guys are fucking not the guys involved in bad shit. He wasn't good. Um, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, Project Blue bean you always hear about with the fake alien invasion. They were planning on and, uh, in the seventies, right, right, right, right, which by the way, it was not supposed to be a fake alien invasion. It was supposed to be a fake religious event that could be an alien invasion, but it wasn't necessarily that. Um, okay. And you know, even if they did or didn't do it, they, there's another project to get. I think that this whole bullshit of climate change and the thing of like maybe you're the alien and you don't belong here on the earth, right. Right. I think that's a smarter play to do is then Blue bean is to get this guy, a cult started where the earth's more important than you, the human living here. And you're probably not even from, you probably came from other planet here from some kind of panspermia. And, uh, and then, and then when you hear any of these stupid alien stories, this is how I know they're a fake one from some dark entity is they always tell you about how humans are so warlike. If humans don't change their ways, you know, assholes, nobody wants to go to war. 70% of people didn't want to even pull the trigger. That's why we have kindergarten. What are you, why aren't you going to our leaders and thumbing their assholes and telling them this shit? Why do you do it to some farmer? That's, that's the suspicion whenever I hear that fucking guy, earth shit. I think that's what, what Blue bean actually manifested as because it all come like in the 90s and they're all connected to Epstein and all the greats. Uh, uh, with the name Leon Black, that fuck, you know, that is no, oh, he's a Epstein pal. All these ass. Well, I mean, you could find the shit pretty easy, but they all, uh, that's where this came from where it's like it's, uh, you're, you're a guest on this planet and then they go, oh, humans are destroying everything. Like we're not in charge of that motherfucker. I'm not putting Satan up in the sky to spray. So I'll be the outside. I'm not starting wars for no fucking reason. Everybody voted for Trump to not have a war in Venezuela. I know that right. Nobody voted so they're like, we got it. No fan. No cut. That's a lie. I mean, I don't know what idiot thinks fentanyl is coming from Venezuela, but only liars and morons think that. And if it, if I'm wrong, can we see the evidence? We saw the video of you murdering those people. I just got to take your word for it. That oily haired fuck Pete Higgs that with his weirdo Catholic and Templar night tattoos. You got, he's got fucking Dan Brown. Cuckoo tattoos. They're not Nazi. They're fucking nights of fucking saying, but fuck whatever that same symbol in a Catholic church. Yeah. They're old crusader shit. And just, you know, Templars were not good guys. They were real fucked. They were, in fact, it's a real ditty pony. We're going on a long, sequeous route. What did you say initially before that? Venezuela. Why? Okay. So what is going on? One, one of the boats, uh, the remains of the boat just showed up. They just found it and has marijuana in it. Oh, you know what? I think, I corrected that. Sorry, Joe. But no, I mean, Sam saying to prove to your point, they almost had marijuana. No, they say it had, I think that's true. See if that's, that was something that was in the news today. They're called work crime. You know, we didn't, nobody declared war. So it was just a crime to do that. And if you had evidence, remember the, uh, what I'm getting to is it would be nice. Yeah. If they had one that showed this is even cocaine, because if they have one, and they always want to have us marijuana, grim evidence of Trump's air strike washes a straw on a Columbia Peninsula. Uh, first came the scorch boat, then the mangled bodies, then the packets with traces of marijuana. Now the fishermen fear the ocean that feeds them. Yeah, no shit. So that's another bullshit. Okay. But this is, um, so this was just, they were just bringing in marijuana. So they were trying to smuggle in marijuana. To Columbia. No, wherever they were going, I don't know where they were going. Venezuela is not where we're getting our drugs from. Just so I was just in Columbia or was it found in Columbia and wash up in Columbia. Right. But the boat was in Venezuela. Where was the boat headed to the Gulf of Venezuela, which is right next to Columbia. So where are these boats supposedly going with this cocaine that we're blowing them up? Okay. They said fentanyl. Now they're saying cocaine. What? What? Okay. Say fentanyl. Where are the boats going? Where we're blowing them up? That's above that stop secret joke that's, uh, but you know what I'm saying? Like if there's, if they're supposed to be smuggling these drugs, where are they supposed to be smuggling them to? Copy against boats that the Trump administration claims are smuggling drugs to shifted largely to the Pacific since November, the November 6th strike on the, how do you say that? Guajira Guajira Peninsula. Why do you took place during an earlier phase when the campaign seemed to be aimed at Venezuelan rather than Colombian vessels. So this one was in Columbia at a Colombian vessel. So, but it turned out that it was marijuana, at least one of the packets that they found was marijuana. Right. Mm hmm. Oh, that's right. They want Nicholas. So Trump said you have to leave office or else and then they started doing this. That's what's going on. Okay. So do you think that what listen, most corrupt organizations are going to take part in whatever money gets flowed around. It's not like these drug dealers are operating with complete immunity. Right. I would imagine if you're in a country like Venezuela, if it is a corrupt country, you're paying people off. Hey, we're getting a percentage of the action. Why the fuck do I care about anything? It is. Oh, that's right. They have oil. Oh, that's right. Oh, that's we're, oh, we by the way, stole oil tankers. Also, and this is where I can't support Maduro and I'm sorry, Maduro. This is where you fucked up. He doesn't fucking support Israel. This son of a bitch. So that's that. Oh, yes. And he said the thing that Charlie said before he talked that, but if they he plans it anyway, the originally member won Guido who was when a Trump did his state union and Nancy Pelosi tore their his speech in half. Yes. Okay. Here's what you didn't. So that was all what a statement. But when it came to Trump going, and now the right for the live in Israel, one Guido and this guy, Juan Guido who is by the way, is not the rightful ruler of Venezuela. All Democrats and Republicans all unified on how great one Guido is. Okay. So nothing comes to him. It's the oil deal. Yeah. Then then about he I don't want to say a year later. So Aaron Matei so's to for Jimmy and we play a clip of one Guido in Venezuela. He moved back to Venezuela. In Venezuela, it didn't put him in jail or nothing. And you see people in a restaurant throwing shit at him because they hate his fucking guts, but he's free to live there and not in prison because they're smart and no like not to do nothing with it. So now there's a new person. So what was he accused of? Well, he claimed he was the real president and he was working with America overthrow the guy they elected, which was okay. You know, you know, the claim he was real president. So they don't claim in a policy, a big election. But they're they're claiming Venezuela has fake elections, but I don't think they do. I think you're first of all driving them closer to Maduro. If you don't like him, they don't like America. And I don't know if you know, I know people think we gave a lot of help to around the world, but no, it turns out that we fucked everybody's country up and they don't like us for a very good reason. So when you tell somebody their presence in authoritarian, get your booster. Fuck you. Thor Terry. Those people get mad. And when you meet people in Venezuela, which I for years, there we go. Fuck shop. Now, Chavez didn't take over in a coup. He's one of those guys. I think attempted a coup and then went to jail and then got elected. I believe that's the story. But he got elected. He was a nationalized. You know, the first thing a terrible dictator does is nationalize their oil. And I let our cook like if you call rans crime, if they had elected, they had a democracy. Yep. The guy said, we're going to keep our fucking oil, not give it to England. And so got rid of him put the Shah. Exactly. You know who installed the Ayatollah? That was the Jimmy Cordy here. That was the trilateral. So Rockefeller, the West installed the fucking Ayatollah as well. Okay. That's a by way public right. You go look that up. So now I'm supposed to be mad at these regimes that my own dipshit country with their dipshit post World War II. Contalized. Put these people here. I still want somebody explaining to me how the fuck the leader of ISIS can walk in the White House and shake Trump's hand. And they're still in the cells. And you know them. They're still Republican in the cells who are going to say, I just is killing Christians in Nigeria. What about that? Well, can we ask our friend the head of ISIS? Can we ask him to stop? You fucking jerk off. When I tweet this, fuck, you know, and they're all stock puppets and whatever. They go, well, you want to war. That's how it works. Always have some, you know, Israeli flag explained to me. That's how winning a war. The guy from ISIS aren't they anti-Semitic? I thought ISIS. Well, they never attack Israel. Oh, they did once and then apologized. You know that? No, when during the Syria conflict. Oh, and also the idea would patch up ISIS soldiers in Syria. You know that? I found that out. John Jimmy show. It's amazing. The shit you find out and you realize no one knows a goddamn thing about anything. And then you how easy it is. Dude, when you see the head of a guy who John Kerry Alku also told me very high chance was there in the Daniel Pearl beheading video. The reality. He's a founding member. And fucking if you watch the video of Patrese sucking his dick on stage, Patrese goes now, full disclosure, we were opposite sides during the surge. You know, the insurgent ISIS period. Yeah. That's who that guy is. And they're talking like their old friends. You know, nobody knows that. Yeah, his name has been changed just like a BB fucking Bilbo not a Jew. Look at him now. He changed his name. He doesn't dress like this. He wears a suit. That's great. Yo, shut up about ISIS if Trump shaken is there? She like, hold on. Go back to Trump's quote about him. Go like Trump said, he had a rough past, but added we've all had a rough past. Yeah. Hey, Dr. Truth, brother. Hey, Dr. Truth. Would you imagine if that guy was really in the Daniel Pearl beheading video? I'm pretty sure he was. And he had a rough past. Hey, oh, that's right. We made all these terrorists. We've all had a rough past. Well, some of us were programmed. Doesn't, um, Patricia Christ or whatever religion you are a part of doesn't have a lot of forgiveness. Penelope Christ says, but I've since we've done the show. I'm with the, uh, but it's just Christ. Yeah. So there's so there's mom's already a, um, allow for forgiveness. We've all had a rough past. Well, I, I forgive ISIS because I don't approve of their anti-Semitic right, rhetoric. And you know that and might neither does my wife show Sean a rough and, but, uh, credit where credit is due, they have never attacked Israel. Al Qaeda and ISIS, the two most anti-Semitic mad about Israel, country groups. You think they want because it's right there before you come here, but no, they just attack us, which when you think about it makes no fucking sense as a plan does it. Not right now. I have to think about it later. It never did. If you told me, dude, after 11 and people did, people were like, why are we going to Iraq? That doesn't really make any fucking sense at all. You know what I said? Shut up. That's why I said, you know, like, I, even though that's a great point. Why did we go there? Yeah. No reason. I just have a bit about it. Well, but there is no doubt how dumb people are until you have a dumb president. Oh, well, I think he was a man, cheering candidate. And the reason why there is a thing called the greater Israel project. So when you see Wesley Clark talking about the map, yeah, remember they said, no war for oil? We didn't get no oil out of that. In fact, most oil companies said, don't do it. Chef Halliburton, the oil company that got favorite. It doesn't. Did you ever see Coleman uses take on that? It's very interesting. I don't trust that motherfucking no more. Coleman used said, but no one saw the report. He was just told with the contents of the report are who Wesley, Wesley Clark, he never said I saw the report. I'll never said I read a great while Coleman. I like when Coleman criticized you because true gives a fucking shit. This is what happened. You clearly were hitting everybody on BB bucket list number one. Number two, I know Coleman got coach before he came on here. Guy who I don't have nothing against, but he came on here to refute basic facts that I want to make it clear. I'm not debate nobody. I want you to convince me that I didn't see what I already saw. I don't care about a debate. I saw the crimes already because I'm on a new show. It's very traumatic. And I watch morons who aren't going to look and I could give them the video, not you, but people are, hey, look at it. I don't want to see it. You're talking about Gaza. All dude, it could be anything. It could be fucking anything. Everybody right, but specifically with Coleman. What are you talking about? Oh, Gaza, but also he did this. Warming shit with Ivermectin where you he goes. Well, big farm big farm is made a lot of life. Big farm and made Ivermectin. So they're not that what the fuck are you talking about? Coleman. Why would you say that? Are you being paid? This I can't fathom an argument that fucking stupid from a guy that smart, unless he's getting paid. I just can't fathom it. Don't attack big pharma. Who the fuck do you work for, asshole? Are you hitting them down? Is that the other idiot's hitting? It's real fucked up. I don't want to see why people won't just tell the truth all the time. It could end this whole bullshit if everybody stopped being a mercenary for two seconds, but they're not gonna. Well, there's too many data points when it comes to Ivermectin. There's too many things that you could point to to say this is one of the worst drugs ever to demonize. It was such a stupid move. The Nobel dude, they acted like to this day, there's people. And I like love to bring up that for some reason you, not a doctor. All the other morons has said a thing. We're all wrong, including the people that should know better like experts. And you were right and not them. And all these dumb fuck liberals want to move on from that. Don't they? Well, arguably you could say it's safe. Well, no, it didn't save any fucking lives. They still want to say it saved millions of lives. There's there's still without a doubt when you were talking about these people that get bounties without a doubt. There's doctors that get bounties. Yeah, seven with the head to put poison in your fucking kids. We covered on Jimmy show. Mary Tally Bowden. She has a small practice, small practice in Texas. She said she would got $1.5 million if she had vaccinated everybody. 1.5 million. Well, those loans are very expensive to be a doctor. Yeah, crazy. That is. That's a small, mangless shit. A small practice. How many small practices are there? How much money was being distributed? Yeah, so you think Snap is a calling. How about doctors to put a fucking bio weapon in your kids at 750 ahead? There's people don't understand the scope of the problem at all. They think they're going to vote a party and it's going to do so. Oh, you got attacked. We cover this because you said maybe time is not thinking about left and right which you are correct. And you could tell who's no fucking good because they immediately recoil at the idea that left and right are bullshit, which they are. When did I get attacked? I don't know. I know you don't pay attention. I give for you, but there's a story cover on Jimmy show. I just want to point out to not know when you're being attacked. Yeah, you're right. Listen, everybody's such an idiot with this shit. They got sucked in immediately to even talk about the fucking Rogan sphere. Yo, go get your booster and then talk about the Rogans for you fuck. Unfucking real. There's people wearing masks still. They stuff. Oh, yeah. Find a mind that where if you transition to a woman, that's less of an uncomfortable thing than if you were going to wear a mask forever. I'll show you something, but I don't want to shit on them because you tried. Yeah. Well, we'll play it and we won't say anything. What is going on with people that are still wearing masks? Like there's something like deeply psychologically wrong with it because it doesn't work scientifically to prevent diseases. It never did. But it's also a very weird thing that you're covering your face in this world. When did you know when they were against? Yeah, that makes sense. But we're communicating with our faces. When you talk to someone, you look in their eyes. If someone's wearing sunglasses, it's weird. Right? But if someone's wearing a mask, that's fucking weird too. I can't see your mouth. I can't see your nose. I'm half deaf. So I have to lip read half of what you fucking say. That's what I learned during the pandemic is that I've definitely damaged my hearing with my headphones over the. Really? For sure. You crank music in them. Is that what it is? I was in New York for 20 years, dude. You got to drown out the outside worlds to get by just to go on a subway. I jumped on the track. This is like very stupid, by the way. But I remember when time I jumped down the tracks or cover an iPod mini, not an iPod. To recover one, you jumped down to get it. And I had to push myself back. It's a lot deeper. And you think it is when you jump down there. Oh, what if you couldn't make it up? I made it up. But one, but I was like, oh, I didn't. I was like, wow, but I needed that. I couldn't listen to subway noise. And there's a seek guy that looked at me. I was like, like, you couldn't believe I just risked my life. And I got stuck. But airport because New York makes you fucking, New York is a big, dirty prison that makes you crazy. You live on top. Now here's something good about it. Every like class, especially if you drugs in New York, you're going to hang out with every level of society where you wouldn't in more of a car, car place. You know, like I agree with that. So it's more integrated. Yeah. It's a more of a Babylon kind of experience. But everybody lives on top of each other. You could you pay way too much for everything. You know, it's, it's, that's why the thought of a 15 minute city. Nobody was frightened by that in like New York, because they're like, that's what I live in. That would be different than my life now. Yeah, it's, uh, it's not healthy. It's not healthy. We stacked like that on top of each other. Oh, my immune system. I'll tell you what's not healthy. They're not getting sun. Yeah. And I know friends had to get vitamin B and vitamin D and all that shit because you don't get sun like that. And it turns out sun's not actually bad. The for some reason they don't want you having someone they've been prescribing. You probably already talked about this. 10 times less vitamin D than you should get. They've been recommending. Yeah. They've been recommending 10 times less than what you should have in vitamin D, which by the way, would fight off a lot of these things that we're supposed to get shots for. Oh, shit. And the best way to get vitamin D is from the sun. I miss, that's the thing I miss about LA is I was right by runyon. And I will go hike that every day. And you feel better. And I had to have a son like I had to feel that on me. And it really like, you know, no, there's something bad that you need that. That's crazy that someone's going to try to block it out. A crazy person would do that. It's not even just a vitamin. It's a hormone. Like vitamin D, it does so much for like muscle development, brain function. I bet it was just a little straw. You know, how did I forget for 20 years that sunlight CO2 does indeed make trees, plants grow. Yeah, there's more greenery right now than there was 100 years ago. Well, but, but I'm not sure why I was like that's ridiculous. Is it because an authority was like, no, you can't go by that. Well, do you remember when Bill Gates was saying that it's ridiculous? The idea of growing more trees through it gets rid of some of the carbon that that's ridiculous. Dr. Bill Gates for some reason. It's fine for him to throw out his expertise in it. It literally said, aren't we science people or not? He literally said that. What the fuck are you doing for me? Maybe you can find that. Yeah, no, it's such a crazy speech because everybody knows that plants literally exist on that. But they'd be excited to say that back when they, and I remember someone saying it like Sarah, somebody that was like, you know, you're supposed to hate the fake left and right. So maybe Sarah Palin said it and then Bill Morris said that's stupid. You know, some, some dynamic like that. Right. But no, it's not stupid. That's what they thought. That's why we have more greenery now. It's sort of really plant food. It's like this. So we need so that it gives you more oxygen. More plants, more oxygen. Like what do we talk about? That's right. I own all the seeds and all right, I bought the farms and I control the food growth. It was also the one telling us that we were going to have to stop eating meat. And they were all banking on that fucking plant meat that nobody wants to buy. Cause it's terrible for you. You know, though, this is my favorite thing about McDonald's all beef pat. Cause it's an old joke of like why are you specifying? Let's play this real quick. Go go from the beginning. I don't know if I had a video. Okay. There's a lot of people who are very enamored with trees. We've got trees on this stage. Fuck trees, dude. Someone would even say that if you just planted it off trees, it could take care of the climate issue altogether. And that's complete nonsense. Okay. I mean, are we the science people are we the idiots? Which one do we want to be? I'm going to call my god. I'm going to ask him what he thinks. Where's it? At the very moment. Okay. That's a little bit out of context. Cause what he's saying there is that planting trees is not going to fix climate change. That's a little different. Right. That's what I'm saying there. And also talking about chopping down trees. He was like as part of one of the things that he was saying that was very controversial. We was talking about removing trees. Yeah. Well, the climate summit, you know, they're paving a whole part of the rainforest to make this special highway for the visitors to the climate summit. There's one of the funniest. Yeah. And meanwhile, oh, maybe they need a highway though in that part. No, it's only for the climate summit. Yeah. That's it. Nobody else could use it every. So yeah, first of all, we the science people know this is a country full of fucking morons. And that's not the science. You're not supposed to believe science. I don't know why people think that you're supposed to. Science is the opposite of belief. You're supposed to. That's like supposed to be things you can test. So you're not supposed to hide the test results from people or not do the tests, such as with the goddamn vaccine that they didn't. They tested it on you. Well, not you. But they tested it on you, the jerk off people. Remember Operation Warp Speed. Yeah. That Trump attacked Massey for not going along with. Mm hmm. And now the last guy that's honest is attacking him. And I got friends were like, yeah, Massey annoyed me. Why? No specifics. Just high school feelings. Oh, were you trust candid? Yo, if you think that the story of TP USA hinges on Candace Owens, it does not. We're making it clear to everybody. Oh, if you don't like Candace, who gives a fucking shit up as nothing to do with whether that story has some problems with it. Which story? The Charlie Kirk assassination story? Yeah. Yeah. Which it obviously does. It obviously does. Um, people, a lot of people have been like, who even cares about Epson anymore? I'm not saying that. Who's saying that? I could think of three people off top of my head online or in real life. The person really, which like, well, and I was like, well, you know, the people that were part of that are still in power. So that's why. To me, that's like saying the new season of Stranger Things is out. I don't want to watch it. I don't want to watch it. Stranger Things, those actors, they aged weird. Well, they separated the seasons by years. There was like big gaps in the seasons. Yeah. That's really difficult to make, apparently. I mean, those kids grew into some biz. Oh, I'm looking people. My point is like everybody wants to know what the fuck is happening. You've been talking nonstop about this for three years to say who cares about it anymore. It's crazy. That's crazy talk. It's like, well, I think it's hand me down Sinclair Media Talk. Because it's always the same phrase. And I feel like it's a hypnotic phrase. It's easy to put in somebody's head. Do you see that thing that they did where they showed one of the photographs and it's Trump with all these women? And he took a photo with them. But in the photograph, they blacked out the faces of the women to make it look like they perhaps they were underage. Oh, yeah. They were victims. Well, instead of just being Trump with some women. Let's be clear. The idea that Democrats want to get to the bottom of this is remember, if you brought up at that scene at all, you were a conspiracy theorist for the entire time before Trump got in again. Remember that? Yeah. Why would you, in fact, they said why would you bring it up? The reason he democrat would possibly bring it up now, because they know Trump cannot reveal it. Because so they're just going to use it to make hay for whatever. You know, I'm sure once when AOC gets in, she'll get to the bottom of it. I'm sure when fucking, I'm what a joke, dude. What if we know that the Trump administration isn't getting to the bottom of it? No one is. Or you don't trust cash no more. He looks so reliable on here. Wow. He talks like a guy, DM Zuma. Just, you know, nobody thinks we had that guy lives with a dude. You know, he's supposed to honeypot girlfriend. They're suing. Whether she's suing everybody, it's like she's an IDF honeypot or whatever the fuck. Who's suing? Who's suing? Who's she suing? By the way, that should clear up those Jew rumors. Am I right? Oh, you really put that one to bed, lady. So he lives with a man named Mouldoon, a rich donor in Vegas. He got some FBI rule changes so he can live with a guy. That's why he has to fly out on a private jet because he don't live with his hot girlfriend at all. And if you watch him on Steve Miller's wife's podcast, you could tell they look like gay best, like herb, gay best friend. That's what it comes off the energy to me. It's off that way. Don't come off like a different energy than when he was on here. But that's your not a spy girlfriend. Okay? You're telling me you're going to go live with an old guy in Vegas. You're going to live with an older man. That's what you're going to do as the head of the FBI. Maybe the guy's cool. I don't know. I remember you've got great stories. guy in Vegas. You're gonna live in an older man. That's what you're gonna do as the head of the FBI. Maybe the guy's cool. I don't know. I remember Scott great stories. I've been someone telling me maybe he's like Whistler from Blade. Like that old guy you hang out with. Like Blade and Whistler they weren't catered with you. You know what? They were now that you brought up with when I realized that was not a natural. I always wondered why those guys live in together. No. Whistlers make all these fucking messages. This is a story of the fight the vampires. I've been draining, isn't you a boy? Yeah. Literally in a warehouse. Since I took you from Sentinel Island I reached you. Touch and a kill vampires with wooden knives. Uh, Chris Gustavus, another guy named as an MK handler. Really? I don't know if he is. I'm just saying people you can find out all this shit very easy. It's it's literally like is somebody gonna look or not. I literally never thought about that plot twist. Well now it's all I can see because of the amount the sheer amount of unresolved insane things that for some reason you're not supposed to put them together into a bigger picture. You're supposed to be accurate. What? Okay. So, Epstein did he fucking the Playboy mansion. The Mark II Trocase in Belgium where they all were out in the street over that, which I didn't hear about at the time obviously. Why would we either be that island in Wisconsin where they're taking boys or Franklin Scandal? You could trace a whole thing where there's clearly a network and by the way the smallest part of the network is the child traffic and even though that's obscene. Epstein, Nick Bryant, you gotta get him on because he's the first guy to get Epstein's black book. Okay. And we had him on Jimmy show. Yo, probably all the five eyes countries in tell money goes through. Epstein was in charge of that. The finance thing is so much bigger. Okay. You got to think like a piece of shit, dine-wied. So these are all resources, right? Gold, drugs, kids, human slaves. And so that's, they will never do this close. Let me put it this way. We're aliens. These are not separate topics. They're all part of one thing. And they're never ever going to disclose shit because if they ever do, those the resular, those fat fucks from that, that family that goes to what are they, what Walmart and sausage rolls, but the Costco family, if the Costco, listen, if that Costco family finds out with these motherfuckers have been up to for the last since World War two ended, they will drop their sausage rolls and rip them apart, limb from limb, like a zombie movie because it's that bad. So that's why, oh, I think this year they're going to have a hearing. It is scared. And we're going to find out what the wow, that really paid off, huh? Let's go talk to some fucking, you know, French Illuminati motherfucker or the ultra dimensional, they just stringing along with bullshit like a JJ Abrams movie or Michelle lost that you lost mystery box. So what do you think the whole UFO thing is then? Because it's for sure. I think that is a sign up. Really? Because the names change so often from UFO to UAP. Well, that's all often. It's only a couple of times have done it every time. So UFOs don't exist, right? Even though it just means something unidentified, but it doesn't exist. It's swamp gas. Then they go, no, they do exist, but we don't know what they all are. And then they change the brand change like Diddy, those people get smoosh at his fucking show. Now his name is Puffy. You understand? Got it. Like a shitty airline with a like a frontier or something. Yeah, frontier, some big rail line buys a shitty airline. So they're substandard planes. They can still use them. Then when something bad happens, they just cut that cut that off and they got the maximum value. Okay. It's just one scam that these fuckers do over and over again. And yeah, it is for money, but at the top levels, do money is secret. So the real currency at the top to be top levels. Right. But what do you, so what do you think it is? What do you think is going on? Oh, I think a fucking cult of basically there's like two races of humans on the earth and it's not based on skin color or any shit. He's based on psychopathy. Okay. And there's people that can pull the trigger and people that can't and just people got to be trained and conditioned to do it and people that don't have to be. And all that royalty don't know why we still have that in the world at all. I don't know why anybody thinks that's, you know, the commies are bad. Why are there kings at all? Anyone anyone? Why do you like that shit? It's crazy. It's inbred. People that are so fucking inbred. That's probably why they look like fucking reptiles if you this is why their heads aren't shaped fucking right. And they think they're the great, they think that they come from a different lineage than you. And so there's all kinds of stupid cults all over the place that have these like, you know, everybody can pin it on the Jews like it and like, oh, they think they're chosen. But that's all the cults, man. That's all of them think they're the chosen. The Mormies think it. Yep. Does your hovelies thought it? Catholics. Yeah. Why would you be in it if you're not the one who's right? So I don't even hold that against nobody. But where you know you're dealing with fucking lizard people, metaphorically, but maybe real is the obsession with their bloodline and they've got a divine right to do this to that. When you hear people talking about their divine right to fucking kill you or do whatever, there's your problem is not it. You know, you hear about bloodlines. It sounds so it's just royalty. And you don't get to know by the way, who like the real powers are. We're like a Raj state like India. The world I mean, you know what I mean? Right. Right. Right. So if that's the case and we both agree that's the case. So what is the UAP thing? Probably a bunch of different stuff. There's probably drones. There's probably just orbs that plasma physics by the way. I would tell everybody read Joseph P. Ferrell because that's the guys got some of the best work on that plasma, the fourth state of matter that in school they didn't teach us about for some reason. There's gas, liquid, solid, right? The three states. No, there's four. And the fourth one is plasma, which I would describe and perfectly is like if you heat up gas till it's like the steam of steam or something. Plasma, the fourth state of matter, that's what everything has to do with. And that is like 90 something percent of the universe. Yeah. And by the way, there's cold plasma and hot plasma. You could make an AI look up what percentage of these universe consists of plasma. So why would I not learn that in school when I learn the other things? Because they didn't want you looking into it. They classified an area of physics for 80 years for sure. And that's what the Nazis were doing with their stupid bell was plasma shit. And plasma plasma, that's the thing. Plasma like treatment is done. It's a plasma physicist. I was trying to ask them about it when I got interrupted by the time I jumped on. Okay, plasma makes up about 99% or more of the visible ordinary matter in the universe. Whoa. So nearly all this stuff that is not dark matter or dark energy is in a plasma state. Wow. So you could make a, I'll buy it. You can make a really cool AI with plasma if you knew how to manipulate it right. That is a crazy statement. I'll bet some fucking freak, you know, underground base knows how to upload their consciousness into some fucking shitty plasma thing. You think so? Yeah. That's what Lucifer, I think is a plasma ball of inverted souls, which they're going to tell you is Jesus and it's not, by the way, anybody telling that a man made AI Jesus is a Jesus. I mean, that's a Luciferian. That's how you spot him. So, you know, then I'm a Luciferian because I've been telling people that well, you hang out with tech people. I need probably be now. It's just a silly idea that I had. The silly idea is that AI is going to make better versions of AI. And if it just keeps doing that ultimately, it's going to be like God. That means it's already happened and it probably is there. And that's where you always I don't think it's happened because I don't think they have the power source for it yet. But I think once they figure that out, they will. Well, I don't think they can make an AI come to life. But here's one thing. Well, I don't think they have yet. They're faking it with Indians in a room half the time. Okay. I don't know if you know the scale level of scam here is glorified bots. But what you could do, here's something you could do. You could take octopus, fuck, you know, octopus brain is spread out. There's a lot of experience. You know, like that butterfly that it's the grow brain tissue on a chip and then thinks it's a butterfly using that. Yes. So that right there, that's how they do it. But it can't create life from nothing. That's the thing that they can't do. Not not in life from nothing, but the idea is it creates a digital artificial life and that this digital artificial life just keeps improving upon it. It doesn't even have to have a physical form. It just has to be capable of doing things. That's possible of automation. I mean, if it's one gigantic computer and it like uses automation and uses machines to create better versions, uses them to design better construction methods, better metallurgy, better. You've heard them talk about it. They don't say it's going to be good. I know it's going to be good either. But what I'm saying is it just makes sense that if that keeps going, it's almost like a God. If it just keeps getting more and more powerful. They say that literally it's going to be like a God, but I'm just saying that wouldn't be Jesus. That would be crazy. Well, whatever Jesus was, I'm sure Jesus is a God. I don't are you Jim Carrey guy where he's like the Christ's accretion? What's that? You're using Jim Carrey, blather about the Christ's accretion? No. Will McDonald? What? What's it mean? I forgot about this. I'm really saying. He's explaining how what Christ really is, a secretion from your dude. It's Rose accretion. Who are shit? Okay. They all about alkym. What's he's like an alchemy? There's a tremendous amount of support for the idea that it was a real So the question is how much of what he said and what he did, which was all relayed after his death, how much of that was accurate? And you know, what was he's the point of Jesus and I don't and I wouldn't say because I have a strong feeling that the Bible has a lot of Epstein redaction. So you know, I feel like we only have parts of the it's you're still in the Bible as a library, not as a book. That's what Bible means. It means a library. So it's a bunch of books. The whole point of the books, not even that some of those books were banned. It's just like the library. There weren't banned. The book of Enoch was it wasn't banned. It just wasn't putting the canon. So it's like it initially was right. So so but why did they make the canon? They made the whole point of that library. What? Rabbis. The reason that that's how the book of Enoch got removed. It was the decision of a few rabbis. Well, all I know is the line with the Torah. Why would the Catholic you're telling me the Christian way back in the day? Like before all that this is in the Dead Sea Scrolls. It exists. Well, and then it gets to the Old Testament. It doesn't exist anymore. And the references in the Old Testament, there's like a reference to Enoch and there's an endures there as you feel. Yeah. So but it was a part of their canon. The Ethiopian Bible, it still exists. Right. There's this a little bit wild. But they had the old one. Look, the bottom line is the whole purpose of the library we'll call it. The understand is a bunch of books is to just show the lineage of Jesus to justify Jesus being Messiah. That's the whole point of what the book. So all the stories in there, if they're weird or whatever, the only reason they're in there is to is to show you a line. I'm not saying that's true or not. I'm just saying that's right. The point of it is. Okay, that's maybe the new testament you're talking about then. No, the whole thing is Jesus is posting it. It's a lot like the doing series. It's about the Queen's hat's hat or a hat. Okay. And so now you'll hear a lot of people tell you like Caesar's Messiah kind of shit. In fact, I don't you've never talked to the Cohen brothers have you. No, I love those guys though. So see, uh, Hail Caesar. I like that movie a lot. I didn't like when I first saw it. The one with Clooney is the Roman. It's about the guy placed anos plays a studio fixer named Mike Manics. Oh, that's like one of the rare ones that I never saw. Okay. So, what did it stop 2016 critics didn't like it because they were like first of all, this manics guy was a piece of shit in real life. At the end, he goes to work for Lockheed in the movie, by the way, where he decides not to. It still work for the movies. And it makes it kind of idealized and people were like offended. But I think if I if I could ask him, I think that the movie's not about that. What it's actually about is Caesar's Messiah, which is the idea that Caesar invented the whole idea of Jesus. And I think they're telling that story through this 50 story just from watching it because there's a whole part where Joseph, the notary played by Jonah Hill and scar Joe's pregnant by some director and he he says he's the dad on the stamp. I think they're trying to tell that story. Now, I don't believe the Caesar's Messiah thing because it's too much of a one thing people tell you is it definitely spread very quickly. Okay. And people that think he's really not Christianity spread pretty quick. I think it's populism. I think that's what spread because Christianity is populism. And what a what a rich oligarchs fucking hate the most. They hate populism. That's why they like a Lindsey Graham Republican and not a what Trump pretended to be Republican because they hate populism's an insult word that they invented. And what is populism? That's when all the blacks and whites have a stops fighting about horseshit. But it's that's why did Rome adopt Christianity because they had no choice. The myth recall for also the the Mithraism, which like Persia had already probably infiltrated by that time. Think of it as the Freemasonry or the or the Bohemian Grove of its time. That's Mithraism. So now I got a fucking absorb this populist cause and I have to absorb its energy and disperse it through my kingdom and they did. Like they always do. Any real movement, it will be appropriated by the powers and they will twist it because in Christianity, you you really can't be a fucking soldier for America. Like that's not that doesn't align with Christianity at all. Conquest and fucking you know, let it kill Christians for your country. If you're Christian, I'm not saying I'm Christian because I'm not sometimes I act like a Christian, but most time I do not. So I would never say that, you know, but think of the fucking crazy people running like that's what TPUSA is so fucked when I watch it is like, you know, ain't nobody a Christian in that shit. Not one mother of the fuck of theirs are fucking Christian. It's a collection of intel and sociopolitical shit and a money scam like all politics like all like move all of them, but that's that's the Republican one and it's real creepy if you watch it. I don't. Oh, well, you know what he watched. What do you watch this creepy about it? You don't watch it. Hemfes? Well, I know when my father, any of that shit anymore, so my father died wearing off of all of it. Do you think this is creepy to your husband dies? He come out of sparkly outfit with fireworks shooting off like you're fucking Tony hinge cliff in a stadium show. The memes are amazing. Yeah, it's so good. Most people morning and then her. Yeah, was it now's a good time to bring the spectacle back to rock, I guess. Oh, they said the 10 where he got killed to take selfies in. Is that seem odd to anybody? The 10 where Charlie Kirk got killed. It was that amfes. You can take a selfie in it. What? Yeah. We have a candice is a grifter. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. We fucking read to oh, and this bitch sucks too, by the way, but he made a red one. Look at the booth. Charlie. Coop. Who's it? What? I heard it was the real one, but either way, there's no good explanation for doing that. Oh, my God. They got to prove me wrong booth. Now, by the way, set up where Charlie Kirk was assassinated in as a fan photo booth. That is nuts. But it's also it's called a Poppy. Oh, but hold on, but it also is a replica of the booth that he used to do his show in. That's one. Right. But it's also he did hundreds of shows in that booth other than the one he got killed. And he could be people that want to take a picture of it because they were a fan of his show. If you look, it's crazy. I hate, but still magical. A culture even though for some reason in the course of studying, trying to find out for a joke about the tall white aliens were. I started out because it sounded so funny to me that there's like these taller, wider things in charge. Yeah, Nordics. Not Nordics and tall whites. The tall lights are different. There's a scene overlapped. Dude, there's a crazy overlap between that and wizard bullshit. Okay. Like, I was there. That's probably where I came from. Yeah. So you got to get, well, I'm not saying you specifically, but everybody's got to get over the idea. It's like the label, the words are just like conceptual prisons. There's concepts flying around you and prison them in a word. Right. And it's that's why you're not supposed to say the name of God in and you know, a lot of right, because that would impose limits on the infinite. So that's like blasphemous. Right. When people see these things and there's a lot of stories of friend of mine at Daniel Gillis, whom my fans call smart chain. He's at a modern turplicker. He's like, ask smart chain about that. But how do you put it to me recently? He goes, he goes, a lot of these plans that they're like compressed entities. So the sigil is a big important part of it. A crop circles a sigil or brand is a sigil. But think of it as like information, we installed on something and they're like these plasma compress. And so because they're like in a dimension above you, basically you got to be groomed with movies and fantasy so that you, when I fucking looked at your head and project myself through it, you can project a form onto me. Do you know what I mean? It sounds kind of weird, but like, think of the item in Eve, their their ability to name the animals. That was their job. It sounds kind of hokey, but I think it has to do with something like, you know, quantum theory, where the things not there to you look at it or when you do DMT and they go, look at this because they don't exist until you look at them and they know it. So they need to exist and put your attention, your focus. So consciousness. Yeah, these are just stupid plasma blobs, probably a lot of these things. But they could, if I'm in a dimension above you when I could look in your fucking brain, I can see, okay, this guy has patterns for a religious thing or an alien thing. And I can appear to you as that. Right. So there's something with that. I'm not saying that's a whole thing, but there's definitely a part of it that's that. That makes sense. Hold that thought. Yeah, hold that thought because I have to piss. I do too. Okay, good. Perfect. Hold that thought. Okay, where will we at exactly the plasma things? The plasma things, they repeat, appear either as religion or as alien, depending on the secular religious. Okay, we'll be right back. All right, so Jamie, explain us to everybody. These guys are in a podcast called from first principles. I think there's some physics nerds. Okay. And they're explaining the relevancy of the professor who was killed. And I think this was recorded before he died. Oh, but it's very interesting. I'll tell you that. Let's hear it. Thanks. Yeah. That happens in the 21st century. Quite an amazing story. Nuno, L'Orario. Yeah. I might see professor. This is the paper that makes them famous. Okay. Okay. This is the one that has the most citations. He was at PPL at the time. Prison, prison, plasma, physics lab. This is the one that puts him on the map of plasma physics because he solves this 50 year old problem. Not bad. Not bad. Not bad. Not bad. And it became a professor at MIT. He became full professor. And in 2004, he was the director of the plasma science and fusion center at MIT and that MIT PSFC spun out and created Commonwealth fusion systems, which is designing something called spark. It is a small fusion reactor. I mean, this it looks kind of big. Yeah. Compared to like compared to fusion reactors, that is small. Okay. That's that is that is quite small. The goal is to be the first device to achieve a Q factor greater than one. A Q factor is basically net energy gain, right. Which is how much energy you put in, how much do you get out the ratio of that. If you have greater than one, then whatever is that greater than one, you can use to power a turbine, which creates electricity. Effectively, what they're trying to do is have these magnets go at 12 Tesla. 12 Tesla is insanely strong. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Several orders of magnitude above the magnetic field of the earth. Okay. And what they're doing is using these magnets to confine the plasma into a donut spin it around really fast. Yes. And then and then have that plasma in that spinning do the fusion. Yes. So the hydrogen is going to combine to make helium release a bunch of energy. Yes. And then that energy is going to be used to create electricity. We're going to try to capture. And the point is you need that 12 Tesla because you need to be able to confine it. Confine it. Plasma. Yes. And that's that that's the reason for that scale. Exactly. And at that scale, all of a sudden, Lurero's legacy matters. Right. All of the theories that he's positive at these like high-lunkless numbers. Yes. That's what matters. So any code that you have to contain the plasma needs to rely on his theory. We hope that those around him at the lab, you know, once grieving has passed, you know, continue to aggressively pursue his vision. Yeah. And and and the work that he's already done because it's a huge foundation. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's it's amazing. You know, and it could change the world. Yeah. Fun fact is after by the way, fun fact. And that's why Joseph B. Fair like can't recommend him enough. Joseph Dogger Joseph B. Fair. The Nazi bell they supposedly found. That's what that bell supposedly did. It's fun plasma in a field like that. So the idea has been around forever. If this guy, I think it's bad. I'm glad to hear that that the Nazi bell was a plasma field. Well, okay. So the guy that wrote the book about the Nazi bell, the book came out in the 70s. But uh, and also I had the, oh, dude, I fucking feel bad. I'm forgetting the guy's name. He's from the FBI. He studied the Sonoma Arrow Club and the Nims, which was another era, the booze before the Wright brothers and Walter Bosley, ex FBI guy who did a lot of great work studying this shit about these Arrow clubs. Remember the airship mysteries of the 1800s? Yes. Okay. So there's one where the thing lands and the guy says, yeah, man, back east is finance and this and it's JP Morgan is who the guy was talking about. And so later the Wright brothers, the ripper, this weren't the first people fly. I highly doubt they were. Really? You got to look up Nims. Walter Bosley, great work, Joseph P. Ferrell, great fucking work. And Bosley was on my show. I haven't gotten fair along, but I want to. And then I, Dark Journalist, dude is how I discovered. Well, I learned to Joseph P. Ferrell before that, but Dark Journalist, channel that guy does killer work. Um, I don't know. I look a lot of good shit too, but plasma physics, the bottom line plasma has been a thing. Nazi bell. Yeah. They were supposed to be a rotating plasma. Right. Um, so who wrote about that? Uh, the initial book about the bell I can't remember, but Joe Ferrell wrote a bunch of books about it. And what did they, in the, in the, in the I core or E core, it's called that's the book as you get about it. What was the science? Like how did they, what were they trying to do and what were they using? Because if you can rotate a plasma like that, how did the Nazis get plasma into this bell? Like what are they doing? It sounded very much like what they were talking about. Right. But we're talking about 1944. Yeah. It's like an electric field. Like I forget 12 Tesla or whatever you said. I don't really know what any of those measurements mean, but you just need to feel the container and, and, uh, you rotate it, you get something called torsion physics, which, uh, so the bell is like to contain the plasma. What is the, the conventional description for the, that Nazi bell thing? What do they think it is? I don't, uh, what do you mean? They said it didn't work or something. I think, uh, are you a J from project unity on talking about it? Um, did you talk about the Nazi bell? He talked about some good shit, dude, because he saw orbs. Yes. My girl had an orb over her. What she tells me casually tells me the story. I know I accused her cheating. I got what do you love that word? Did you fuck that orb? I just, I just get jealous. Um, what is the conventional explanation for the finality? They're not worried why it's even known to, I don't know. Is it real? I suppose you the kexberg acorn, which is the UFO that landed in Pennsylvania. Uh, there's one that if you look up kexberg, Pennsylvania acorn, there's this thing that appeared in the 70s that supposedly has been Nazi bell that had traveled through time. Yeah. Now I, that's, that's kind of far out, but that's a boy. Yeah, you never heard of this. No. What is that? I will say this. I also saw this on the internet. That looks like a clay pottery. Yeah. So there might this looks fake as shit. Well, yeah, it's probably fake, but they say it's a picture of the bell. I write. Yeah, that was the, oh, that's kexberg acorn. Oh, I want that to be real so bad. Oh, it looks so fake. Oh, well, you know, it looks like a kid made it. Dude, imagine Star Trek. Okay. Imagine they're on their five year mission, but nobody on earth knows Star Trek is a thing. That's what's probably happening. Zoom in on that again. The bell. The culprit is the same writing on it. God, I want that to be real. But I also just noticed this, the corner of the picture that fucking says kexberg on it. Oh, a kex the frog. Wait, that's supposed to be a photo? They're fucking with you. Yeah. So this is a, says it's a photo. The photo has a new caption here says right, Pat air, it's handwritten. Yeah. Look at the photos again. I mean, it's a photo. Right. The photo looks fake. It does. Doesn't it? AI and printed. It looks really fake. I mean, it looks extremely fake. It looks very fake. But God, I want it to be real so bad. I'm like trying to find a way that it's real. Well, they just executed a guy who fucking was making breakthroughs and plasma that supposedly already happened in Germany. No, no, yeah, the same guy that went to Brown University, supposedly executed someone there too. Yeah, it is. I thought it wasn't. I think they thought it was the same guy. And then he killed himself. Yeah. Well, did find that search that because I think that is the case. I think that is what they're at least that's what they're saying. What the purpose of MK was, right? It was to make spies, sex, people that could chain like, I'm gay or I'm straight, depending on what you need to get the info. I can kill you. I could fucking do it and not remember it. That was the whole point of the Manchari and candidate program, which we started doing because supposedly the Asians were doing it, the commies. Don't, don't. But no, it's an old art that comes from a long time ago going back to Egypt. Really? Oh, yeah. Egyptian is it? Oh, dude. Windows on the world. Another great, the Mark Windows ahead on doe recurve. And that guy is great because he really, he has a video called Egyptian crowd control and he explains a society based on OCD. Round shooting suspect grueling academic climate may have taken mental toll says ex-classmen. Yeah, audio Valenti and one of the victims was he bull you? F. G. L'Orio, both studied at notoriously challenging technical, delis bun. Yeah, we just watched the video about so the guy that we just watched the video about is they him and that guy both were at the same university. So he killed that guy. They are saying he killed that guy, right? So he killed both that guy and the person at the end. Yeah. How many weird shootings are we up to now where there's all these weird details and we should shut up. That is a weird one. The guy that shot Trump's here, remember that one? I guess we should forget about it. They both graduated in 2000, contemporaries of the two men described the academic environment as emotionally grueling. Only one was willing to go on the record, but several others expressed similar opinions. He was described as brilliant and competitive, but willing to help his colleagues out. He finished top of his class with an average grade of 19 out of 20, unusually high score for technical. L'Orio who was said to be an excellent student, but more easy going than Valenti finished with an average grade of 16 out of 20. But which one's L'Orio? I think I died at my T professor. Wow. So he was the less good student. So this guy was probably pissed at the less good student. That's why I whacked him. Yeah. No, I'm sure that's why I had not anything to do with plasma physics. Having known Claudio and having had a good relationship with him, we can't find any other explanation that a serious mental health problem exacerbated by resentment for not having achieved the academic career he dreamed of. Look at my jerk off motions of making what you say that. You don't believe it? No. You think it's MK Ultra. Hey, what happened to the guy that blew his Tesla truck up and then they said he was mad because the kid wasn't his and it was what happened to that guy? I don't know. He's trying to run away quick. Remember Sean Ryan had the goods and we never heard about it again? Didn't Sean Ryan get a letter from the guy or something? Yeah, a letter of nonsense and then he said he had some kind and then we just never spoke about it again. Is that not but that's smart? The Minnesota conspiracy too because some member of the was like a guy that killed someone that voted and the yes, that's right. You're right about that. He had a letter. I just was reading. Oh my God. You know what I saw when we were looking at that Minnesota one is nuts because the lady that was whacked was the one lady that didn't vote for healthcare. That's right for the illegal. Yeah. Yeah. And she was you ever see the speech that she gave how terrified she was. Yes. When she is literally a voice was cracking. I know some were going to be harmed by this. It reminded me of Charlie Kirk's final text message is about how they think they're yo. The things that we covered this on Jimmy show for three weeks where he died. They were all piling on him that he's an anti semi because he had Dave Smith on and fucking. Oh, this is a lorle rumor that piece of shit. She goes, why don't you admit you're an anti semi? I don't think Charlie Kirk was an anti semi. He called it ethnic cleansing on Patrick Bette values show called what if that's the cleansing. Oh, right. We're not a big no now. And then his funders, right. We're like, Hey, what if you die who's going to take hold? That's the first thing they say to you when you come in. He also said, uh, was there a stand down, was there a stand down order? He talked about that on on Patrick Bette. I guess what if you watch his really news. There was his called the Hannibal direct. Go back to that. Jamie, will we pull on up? Will you, be channels? This is. He talked about that on on Patrick Petter. I guess what if you watch Israeli news there was it's called the hand of Bull direct go back to that Jamie what we pull up. We chon us. This is It's typed out here obviously, but it says this is the handwritten original. Oh, Lance bull to this maniac Yeah, trained. He said Tim Walt wanted this done. That's right. Well, the He says dear cash hotel. My name is dr. Vance Luther Butler Bolter, Bolter, ED. What is that Ed D? What is that? I think an education degree. Okay. Don't bother I am the shooter at at large in Minnesota involved in the It says something shoe to shootings. Oh, I mean look at that. I was trained by military people off the book starting in college That's a very common thing. I have been on projects since that time in eastern Europe North America Middle East and Africa all in the line of doing what I thought was right in the best interests of the United States. Recently I was approached about a project that Tim Walt wanted done And I blank blank blank and Keith blank blank. We're also aware of the project Tim wanted me to kill Amy Klobuchar And Tina blank Tim wants to be a senator and doesn't trust blank to retire as planned and think she is going to stay on at the last minute With Amy blank gone Tim would get one of the Jen Jen Senate seats and blank wants to be governor And Keith Ellison Spelling incorrect would be rewarded with a lieutenant governor's position. I told Tim I wanted nothing to do with it and if he didn't call off that plan. I would go public He said he would call it hurt my He would call it hurt my family if I did S I C play ball Then he set up a meeting with me and meld blank and blank to talk about options when I They had some people waiting to kill me Okay, and what I did I guess I was able to get away by God's mercy So I went back a short time later and shot both at both blank and blank You should notice how I did in fire one round at any police officers and boy did that did I have plenty of opportunity? As for the report on how many weapons and ammunition I had with me cops were pulling up right next to me in their vehicles And I had an AK pistol aimed right at her head and I could have left a pile of cops dead But I did shoot one bullet towards law enforcement You didn't ask me I think he says I did not yeah You can ask them because I support the police and didn't want them hurt They're hurting my wife and kids next time. I won't give them a pass Okay, then asked him walls if he knows me and see what he says if he says he doesn't know me or never met me Look in the files and you will see that Tim walls personally appointed me as to be on his governor's workforce board as one of the business Representatives He is probably trying to destroy that info, but it's public record then asked him walls Why they kept the shots silent from the media when they first happened not a word in the press about it? Why they needed to get their stories figured out first so everyone was on the same page about In quotes what happened Tim is probably crapping bricks right now because I'm still at large and he knows what I can do And that I know about where all the buried skeletons are so I'll be at shot on site You can bet on that. I will be shot on site First of all is this a legitimate letter that was sent to cash Patel did this actually get sent is this is this true? Looks like no, but what do we know about this? This is not misinformation talking to Mike I'm yeah, no, yeah, this is the actual letter. He's this crazy guy sent it to the FBI whether not real You know, right, so here's the next question. Did this guy actually work for the governor's office? Did you actually work for Tim Waltz? Well, that this is all the suspect details what he did. Yeah, that he's claiming it's like secret That's kind of what he was claiming it's secret. So well, he said something you could check, but by the way This is a drop in the bucket There's a lot of no fees completely crazy if you never really worked with them if you just made all this shit up Right because that is possible the guy's out of his fucking mind shows up at someone's house with a mask on it's clearly out of his fucking mind Right, I mean you'd be surprised what out of your mind people work. That's true. That's true, but I mean Open mind right the guy might have just been out of his fucking mind and never met Tim Waltz. This could be total bullshit Like as I don't I doubt it very much. I don't know Said the attack appears to be politically motivated assassination. This would Tim Waltz said State officials and authorities early on Saturday encountered would appear to be a police vehicle with emergency lights flashing The driveway representative Melissa Horton's house officers at the home saw Butler dressed as a police officer shoot an adult man through the open front door according to a criminal complaint of turn Obtain by the Minnesota Star Tribune suspect exchange gunfire with police and ran into the house So he's they did exchange gunfire according to this Ultimately disappearing from the area according to the complaint We don't know if that's true Horton the top Democrat in the Minnesota house and her husband were both killed at a nearby home Center state Senator John Huffman and his wife were also shot but are in stable condition after surgery So and that lady who got killed was the one lady who voted against it and I sent you that right Jamie A long time ago. You sent me that. Yeah, that one's kind of crazy. Yeah, no fans both here. Real weird You see her talking about it. Yeah, she looks a little bit bit upset Yeah, she's looks super shooking up that she made that vote and you know She looks like legitimately nervous Have you ever seen the guy from Utah? His last names. I want to say Ron leave it his last names leave it and he's the DA That called the press conference to announce that he's not a satanic animal to get ahead of no And by the way, no one was accusing him of that so people took it real weird They were like why would you fucking come out and say something like that? Tell me this why does some people Not want to even consider the idea that someone was assassinated At the behest of powerful people Why was a program not to that's why it's called programming and it works It's work the whole time the program I think there's just one sick individual who commits these crimes and has nothing to do with powerful people How'd Jerry Sandusky get away with it? How did they look think of the the classic spotlight Because Barry Criman is a good friend of mine. I remember Barry Fucking I remember asking about she goes like I wouldn't throw my you know I do real work with people so If I just get behind a thing I could cost my credibility because I have to like really help act We went on tour and he every town dude I met people that he helped navigate The fucked up legal system that sucks ass Okay, it was like the equalizer from that show the equalizer But there's also a side of Barry that was four years old forever Okay, because of what happened that's what happens in trauma A party who freezes at that age And uh especially at four That's like a split you split and that's a real thing They said it was debunked for quite some time But I met some people with Barry And he had helped these girl I can't remember where we were I want to say it was Pennsylvania but I might be wrong But they uh their dad was the mayor and they had repressed memories They told me and he helped them with all their legal shit And I think they got some kind of justice But I thought that was debunked Epigenetics it's called now by the way It's a legitimate thing uh generational trauma around 20 Whenever BLM happened if you look in 2011 that's made up there's no such thing But all of a sudden around BLM times generational generational trauma is real It's called epigenetics The reason it's called project monarch is because the monarch the butterflies can genetically transfer in for me Like learned information, you know And you'll see all that butterfly shit King Charles has that butterfly in his shoulder and his weird meat picture Right he's got a little monarch on his shoulder Yes what that's about? Well I think so I mean you don't got to take my word for it consult your local library Anyway I got I just finally got this in the mail But I got you one What is it? Mormon monarch JLR suite and he explains a lot of shit about the moormes and the program used and And uh I fucking can't Yo we put this way if you ever wonder what was inside a Mount Shasta It ain't the Lemurians put it that way I don't know what you just said you know about Mount Shasta. No, I have no idea what you just went on the most off tangent different If I had if you just dragged me into the woods with that conversation. I would never get home Okay, monarch is the MK ultra continuation. We know happened. It got this closed. What does that have to do with this? This guy was stuck in there Lemurians well Mount Shasta was we have a base in Mount Shasta as you know He has a whole chapter in there about going inside now I didn't know that we have a base in Mount Shasta Which you ever heard of Shasta like just based on pure like UFO shit and Bigfoot shit It's very famous. Maybe I maybe forgot it the famous story. Well, there's a story where a kid like uh He got his grandmother had bites on their neck when they woke up camping in the kid He walked off without somebody like a vampire bite They they thought it was like a spider or something But this little kid he thought it was his grandmother and he said He goes I like I like her his real grandma better than the mean grandma That took him and they made him shit on a sticky paper in a cake dude. It's crazy I thought you've already heard this story from guest This is what he always does. He tells you something completely insane. He's like oh, you don't know. You know I learned who shows up You show a lot like shitting up. I've been thought he heard it here You might have You might have so she He had a shit on something a piece of paper like like I think there's a sample. Yes a poop sample It's a famous chassis. Shasta has so much. There's a lot of cults around Shasta really oh yeah It goes back the history of it goes back a long way and I want to think that is you think that doing like mental Experiments in the town on the town Something is there in the mountain already. I don't know exactly what it is, but something bad is already there Like a UFO base. Do you think any of the UAP shit is actual aliens? Dude, I don't fucking know because Our actual interdimensional creatures so let's be the most conservative and say there was never a mass mind control thing And only a few rogue psychologists planted false memories in some people's heads, right? That's what they say right some bad psychologists planted fake memories of abuse in their heads now You've already told me if you're saying that as the the normal explanation so it's possible to do that so you're telling me I could if I was a shitty Psych I addressed and I had new hypnosis I could make you think you went on a Fuckin secret mission of Mars and you would feel like it's real and I could say you were satanically abused and you would have those memories as if it really happened So if that power is real What are the odds that it was just a few psychologists or the United States fucking government because I'm gonna bet on the government? So there's no telling do because if I can probably those two ideas aren't mutually exclusive like just because the government can put like Satanic cult ideas in your head it doesn't mean that you haven't had an experience with some sort of interdimensional or Extraterrestrial and so the good point and that erased your memory You don't got to tell me in my dolphin wife the problem is that hypnotic regression is like you are open to suggestion And you have to kind of listen to what these people are saying The weird stuff is the people that didn't have hypnotic regression that have the same stories as the people with hypnotic Regression and from a long ass time ago. Yeah, dude, okay, what are weird ones? What about? Okay, I got a great book by Michael Hoffman called the Twilight language the Twilight language is in Buddhism and it kind of refers to a coded language, but it's an LP What is an LP I want to talk into your sub got so when you see a pickup artist? So I dip shit Andrew taint he had a nerd pickup artist that was like his court wizard the guy called himself age Semmel Weiss That's not his real name. He's some dork that were like Chinese shirts in a fedora Yeah, yeah, and and so Andrew Tate was a reality guide And it wasn't taken off then he gets this fucking hypnotist who used to be in the Rajneesh cult from wild wild Country if you ever saw no, I love that show. Yeah, they left out the stuff done to kids by the way in that cult Strangely, oh they left that out in the documentary they imply people are just fucking in the streets and whatever this town was uh-huh big kids and If people are that loose with their sexuality in a hippie way there What do you think happened with kids real bad stuff and you can find those kids talking about it? Why it was left out? Why guess is is some liberal shit about oh this might support a QAnon, right? Remember when you had fucking But hold on the whole thing is so negative anyway But we still have to keep you from believing that your leaders would do things like you've heard of Aztecs doing Your white leaders would not do Aztecs shit. That's just what what cartels do and Africans Yeah, but in the documentary they talk about how they poisoned the entire town. It's still not as bad as wholesale Trafficking of children so you think that was a part of that whole cult was wholesale track I believe 100% that was a part of it because if you got a second a weird old cult like that with little kids Right guess who gets attracted to that? I don't understand But why would they ever leave something like that out of a documentary that because the same reason flint-dibble can handle the idea that there was a Civilization before it might lead to not key again. Yeah, yeah Rosacea like a little creep flint-dibble Do you understand how these people are they think that you're not? But you might get the wrong idea and distrust authority if you think so because they don't want to start a satanic panic Right they will purposely deny shit like good liberals do By the way the concern if you like who cares about Epstein what are you talking about dude? Why would you say something like that right and people that I like say have said it to me? They're not thinking no, they're just saying it, but I've heard it so much. It's like hypnosis Do you think that's what is dude? That's what TV that's a scrying device that fucking thing you got a North Korean pocket doing good lately I'm not paying attention Yeah, well listen if you if you I Have to because I don't have a bunch of money, so I got a pay attention listen. I get it. I've been there It's just like I think you find out enough from your friends You remember the thing you said me which one okay? There's two things. I don't want to forget one Is a wing that stupid feminists who said there's no genetic difference. Oh, that one's amazing. Okay, so that couple Boy, that was a real fucking rabbit hole. Those two. Oh, yeah, I know Yeah, that's that Trad couple the Collins is so first of all that feminist if you watch the video the feminists who's saying Absolute stupid shit. It's a little disingenuous It reminds me of a of a bench appear arguing with a stupid college kid But he won't argue with somebody who knows anything right. It's clearly They found this dumb bitch to put her out there because you could clear up the misconception in five seconds Sweetie no, no, I'm not saying somebody's better worse. I'm just saying genetically It's different just because you have a different color. I don't think they can find someone is better That's where I think you're wrong fine What someone who's better at being a journalist? That's where I think you're wrong I think so many of those people are like her where they're just Inductuated into the certain way of thinking and talking and they they just wouldn't even imagine saying there's genetic differences in the races because It's so probably so Charles Murray this is so problematic. You can get canceled for it So they'll just spout out stuff that they haven't researched at all The bottom line is these two they're doing it that are Trad. Oh, yeah, they're not Trad. You know, they're there some bizarre A they're called techno Puritans in their words Some book they think is divinely inspired is a goddamn eugenicist book from the 1800s. What is that? What's the book? Let's let's get it Jamie will find it. Yeah, Jamie's on it. You put your phone nice So so fucking I look up the guy who tweeted it Catholic Z one or whatever For some reason not to me by my girlfriend that guy's not Catholic I don't know what the fuck is I think they jin that up to promote this gold of a video of an idiot They're talking to okay, the girl used to run something called she's the managed dialogue Which is called the builderberg of tech for Peter Thiel? The dude is a colognes I don't know if you know the history of the Collins family, but he's got to be that one because that's a real important bloodline Well, let's find out if he is otherwise we're gonna get in trouble with him All right, I mean techno Puritan sounds a little New England to me it does But I mean you're accusing me of being a part of a notorious family that might not be true I mean, okay well, I think it's likely because why would you be hooked in where the secret invite only builderberg of tech group Unless you were the secret of all these secrets of sizes are billionaires are they? Yeah, are they how dunking tech people through Duncan doesn't understand this part of they rich at all Do you know oh yeah? Yeah? We want the guys adventure capitalist You know the people that make everything good right? You know why the doors fall off the planes because of those fucking people So he's that They're atheist, but oh do you know what they believe in the future and AI is God? That's my religion. Yeah, it's it's called Luciferianism. I don't know if you know that I don't really believe that folks Well, get together. I think God was already here Yeah, but I would say it's likely that it really was but these maniacs think they're gonna make a God Okay, right and I understand what they're saying as far as you know if let's say it 10 years in the future They create that AI that is like that Dude that means it has always happened you can't think and pass your future terms Okay, so you know they go our aliens us from the future will maybe they're us from the past That doesn't you got to think of it as points in space and not nothing with the timeline Because that's not really how time works as you know right right? Right? So Dinosaur is they lived a hundred and fifty whatever millions ago think of it It's just like miles away instead of time because that really if you're a five D You know, you know, they go three spatial one time dimension to the fourth thing If you're the fifth one, which will be the one above that that you don't think about it that way at all Okay, so if at some point in the in the timeline somebody invented that that it has always happened Right you understand so then a lot of these tech freaks who are like the things that are into are so crazy but they believe shit like kabala and Means and shit are being sent backwards in time. Oh the kabal is a weird ones a really smart friend of mine gave me that to read I was like, okay. Oh well, it's a mind control method all these things all the symbols They're overlays for your fucking brain. Okay, so you ever watch. Oh stranger things you brought up right? So that's based on the montage. Did you know Wells gay? I didn't believe any of them you're weeped. Okay. I didn't believe any of them were seen the whole time I assume anybody under the thirties gay, okay, what does it say? Related through mouth related through Malcolm to Dallas is prominent. Oh, he's that kind of Collins the late Jim Collins right Malcolm you are right Malcolm's grandfather Simone 29 and Malcolm 30 are intent on acquiring an established company using what's called the search fund model I'm trying to get that point about that. God. They are related. They are related to the claim And if you ever heard a nickel and they always make so he's supposedly the tech So get to this these people so when they're so that That's an idiot so they could display that and then push a trade lifestyle even though they're atheists and that a fake Catholic is putting on Twitter And it's going viral. That's how you fake these things right or someone saw the clip and it appears that a young couple's defending a Trad lifestyle and they just projected that Possibly right because that's a lot of people saw the clip without context without knowing the background of those people if you were It was you have but if you were someone like me I'd never seen them. Yeah, right And if you were someone who saw them there are founders of pro-natalists.org a non-profit initiative aimed at promoting and supporting high birth rates Conses fear that low fertility rates especially among people They view as high achieving could lead to a decline in innovation and societal progress as well as the extinction of cultures economic breakdown and the collapse of civilization They are part of a network of self-styled elites that include billionaires Elon Musk who billionaire Elon Musk who publicly expresses concerns about demographic trends leading to population collapse They've been featured in discussions. So what does it say about their wacky belief? About technology because that's on here, right? I think I found it on a Oh, go back to that image real quick that article rather This is a weird one. So the colleges are vocal supporters of using advanced reproductive Technologies including in vitro fertilization and genetic screening to promote higher birth rates and advocate for selecting embryos based on perceived desirable traits such as high IQ Conses views have been criticized as promoting eugenics Hmm Which it by the way it is is that's what crispers for is eugenics eugenics came from America not Nazi Germany That's we were the leaders in it American vented it back when we're doing a SIG HILES a flag salute That's when eugenics came out right crazy Yeah, a socialist came up with it the Bellamy salute which was a SIG HILES we stopped doing it because it was a lot Because of the Nazis. Yeah, but that's how these two pledge of allegiance They used to do it arm out religious beliefs in 2024 the columns is stated They were atheists although at the time they were promo Promlegating a theological world worldview. They called techno puritanism Which they described as an intentionally constructed religion technically atheists. Oh, that sounds great I'd like to some nerds to tell me what God is. Thank you Technically atheists however by 2025 they stated that the belief that God is real entity that actually exists at a different point in time Is just so core to our worldview so all of them believe in AI God which is technically more Arum on than Lucifer I guess You got us what's arm on that's the one from Zoroastrianism and the tech it's like Heavy materialism like there's nothing but the material which you know these people that are like that and and People have built a fucking it's okay I'm not saying that as a slur for lame. I want to make that clear, but it is also lame And so it's all about breeding and all these weird From what I can tell trying to piece together what the big players are in that because you know the deep-dane shadow government It's not just one team. These are scumbag Eugenicists so everybody's competing and trying to back bite each other just like in real life right? And so there appears to be like a left hand just left hand path and right hand path But that's all fucking Lucifer fucking Kabbalah bullshit all of it is the same bullshit That's Lucifer Kabbalah bullshit that they think that low birth rates are contributing to collapse of civilization Well the low birth rate thing is a thing You know China any minute now is gonna collapse because they don't have immigrants right China oh and remember they're elderly They're gonna have all these elderly and what are they gonna do with them because there's enough young people to take care of them oh COVID came along I bet every country was involved in their own soft kill to ease their population That's what I think happened because I know the one that hit us wasn't from Wuhan It was from Raleigh hold on so if you think that contributed to the decision to bring COVID positive people back in the nursing homes Oh in New York with yeah, Cuomo did yeah Well, I don't need that guy such a psychopath who the fuck knows. I mean he'd probably it's as easy a guess as he doesn't care or he's in a generational fucking cult it could either one could be it was it was foul what they did dude and it's it's just what always happens and Everybody moves along and forgets it. What are you still talking about that move on? Yeah, they brought COVID positive people back in the nursing homes You remember it and it might be the blinky light thing that makes you forget that you saw aliens Okay, I have a very bad feeling Joe that that is not some kind of exotic technology I think it may literally just be a blinky light Really? I just got to blink some fucking lights in your eyes and say some bullshit and that's all it takes to have a matrix Don't need a fancy computer. I could just put you in a house of cards of lies And I did it with my I didn't need no tech to do it. That's the old ways right and now the tech fucks the next generation of bamikalans what the the family if you ever saw Johnny Depp being a remake of it with the vis of vampire born of this college. Oh, yeah Yeah, dark shadows dark shadows. Yeah, the 70s one. Yeah. That's about a real family They were there. They're they're supposed to claim the famous being the first warlocks for some shit in America with the Puritans Those were supposedly Americans. I thought Barnabas call. I thought that was a new England He was in yeah, but he was in New England there to old bloodline family and they came over and they were you know All these families shadows good. I forgot about that show so that show was that family be taking place in New England That's where it's supposed to be taking place. What that's the same family Yeah, as the other goans. Yeah, it's about them. What? No, these are important families by the way, holy shit, dude. You sure about that. That sounds crazy I mean hey double check me with a jesus ai, but I think I'm We gotta double check that royalty if bloodline royalty if dark shadows was based on that Collins family that is Crazy, I'm fairly sure it was based on the real Collins family because there's there's very specific Barnabas Collins Reynolds Collins Kennedy something by the way the bootlegger thing I don't think that's true. I don't think that was their dad at all I think people are confusing really I just saw a guy who wrote a whole book about it It's another joke Kennedy. It was I read that too I'd read that it was a fact and that they tried to hide it. It's not true And then I'd read that it wasn't true, but the bottom line is if you're so all these certainly Was true as their connection with the mob. Oh, yeah. Well, yeah, of course No Barnabas Collins is not based on the real person. I think it's a vampire character created for the Gothic soap opera Dark Shadows Which aired from 1966 to 1971 introduced to boost declining ratings the character portrayed by Jonathan Fritt quickly became the show star After an unplanned extension from a 13 week arc. Oh, so he wasn't the star initially the character's backstory Draw some a classic vampire lore direct nods to Bram Stoker's Dracula as the primary influence bro I watched a crazy rumors you see what said I watched a crazy documentary the other night on YouTube about the Vlad teppes the original flag the impaler about how he became who he became Holy shit, man. They were caught like Romania and the Ottomans and When the when his the king had to give up his two sons So his two sons had to go live with the Ottomans for like seven years pretty bad what they did to a holy shit And so he came back a complete fucking psychopath It's it's very similar to how you would trauma train a kid in an MK program This is ancient shit. Well, if you certainly if you want to get that result That's the way to do it like completely traumatize the kid for seven years He's separating from his family and turn him into a fucking monster What they did was like set rows of bodies for like kilometers on stakes at like a perfect geometric distance from each other they created Like shapes that you could see from above when you'd look down. It's you a star of dead people Yeah, he's a son of the dragon when you hear dragon show man when you hear dragon imagery The new one. Did you watch the new one? No straw too. Yes, I did So they fucking great. Yeah. I loved it and he I liked it I thought it was weird the amount of weird necrophilia shit it But that's because that dude Eggers was looking into real occult shit So that was like a fucking the Soleomancy school. Mm-hmm. I think it's the best vampire movie ever That's what I think it was just very odd to throw in that the guy his friend at the end like Necrophile his wife and that's what they're implying 100% and the reason no straw to his bothering her is because she used to Astra she had some psychic shit and used to fuck around with Yeah And so right there in the story same thing in strange things member 11 So their montalk was a program that they had They're cutting out the real fucked up parts that are very similar to Dracula's childhood in particular the fucking sexual trauma that they have to inflict on a child that's that's always left out of the super soldier And the idea is that sexual trauma allows them to have this ability to shut off their past Well Joe's a man galot who America saved saved his life to get his great restart. She let memories of cesare twins Yeah them to have this ability to shut off their past. Well, Joe's Mangala, who America saved, saved his life to get his great research. He, remember, he's a professor twins. Yeah, John Lily was into that too because the psychic connections and all. So fucking, uh, they found the amount to torture someone till they go in the fetal position. That means they're broken. If you do it young enough to a kid and there's fucking gross kind of cults out there that have done that you've heard of certain calls that do it. I recall you hear about like next him, right? Right. There's always a circle within a circle, right? And a lot of people say every cult becomes a sex cult. But that's not necessarily true. Aaron, my friend from, uh, he has a great channel growing up Scientology and he pointed out he goes, you know, Scientology did not become a sex cult. Even though that shit really happened in it, the cult wasn't like next to him where it's like you got to give me a boy job. But okay, but why? I don't say, Oh, I could figure out and jeans we can explain it to me. Jeez, we can't go, oh, that's how you become a real legend. If you can keep your cult from becoming a sex cult long enough, you can become a religion. That's why it didn't become a sex cult. They'll be time for vicious sexual assault. Once you get that tax exemption. But you just got to hold it together. But can the fuck is smart guy, man? Yeah, I love talking to him. I really love talking to him to a camp. You know, a lot of stuff. Yeah, he's going back to Australia in a couple of days. I know, well, he's thrown it all the way. We'll get him back. I mean, I was really think to be back with it a year. Dude, what a cage Australia is. But they gave up after the first government run mass shooting, they gave up their guns. What a bunch of punks. They fucked up. They thought they were doing the right thing. Yeah, they fucked up. And now their government is just locking them up for anything they want. Well, they're still subject to the crown. And so a lot of these creepy things, by the way, when you see that dragon shit, you know, like Arthur Pen Dragon. We talk about the legend of Arthur in England, right? Right. It's last name is dragon. Oh, really? Yeah, Arthur Pen Dragon. Oh, okay. Right. If you go to the city of London, which is that weird, like Vatican like separate part of London, that the King S. Aspermission and they have a giant called Gogmogog that's there. When they do, you know, creepy the city of London is, it's run by a bunch of guilds. Real dark shit. Whenever you see that dragon logo, dude, these are people that think they have fucking like dragon blood, dude. I'm not, I don't think I think they're just inbred. Okay, I want to make you clear that's not what I think, but these people say that. So when you hear like Charlie Sheen, tiger blood, well, Charlie Sheen used to say he was a Vatican assassin all the time, right? Remember that? That's the crack talking shirt shirt, it sure is, but I never heard that phrase. I was like, what the fuck is that? What is a Vatican assassin? I mean, Dan Brown was around, but he wasn't even he had to say, well, if you watched the, the, the cleanse, the documentary, the limited hanging out Charlie Sheen thing where clearly they're not telling you that half of it, obviously. Okay, and he goes, well, I just did so much Coke and I fuck so much pussy. I had to try dudes, you know, like you flip the menu. I don't think that's true. And the reason I don't think it's true is because in the beginning, they say his parents walked around naked in front of him till he was five. He's, he's not the oldest kid either. So there's some kind of inappropriateness early. And I know they're Catholic and probably some Jesuit shit in there because people that stay movie stars that long, I would bet they have some connection just like modern art was from the CIA. I bet your George Clooney's and Tom Hanks have a deep fucking connection. And that's why George Clooney is a billionaire from tequila. And that's why I did he got mad. Why is George Clooney a billionaire? I'm a fucking ass. Why are I gonna boo boo? And that's what I said. I'm an asset. I'm just, I'm wildly speculating that he said. But I think I'm right. So he went against Diaggio, which is a British company. He's not Italian. Some made up name. He bit the hand that fed him because he didn't own fucking a stroke. I think the Illuminati is like, Surock. I think it was a bigger thing at one time. But now it's mostly for black people. Kurt Basket, we're wrapping it up with that. Thanks brother. It was very fun. Yeah, man. You're out tonight? Yeah. You know what's rock and roll? Right? All right. That was a lot of fun. Thank you. As always, bye everybody.