Hey, what's up everybody this episode of the Joe Rogan experiences brought to you by lube-mocity.com This is the time of the year we're all looking for ways to build good habits ladies and gentlemen It's new years. It's it in some of the new years. It's bullshit. Time doesn't give a fuck about you How about that how about the time doesn't care about the universe doesn't care about solar systems living and dying Time is infinite and it only exists But for us need a clock and a calendar so get your shit together The lazy bitch stop using the fact that time isn't real is an excuse and go to lube-mocity.com Lumeosity is essentially it's like a website gym for your brain They have brain games that are designed by top scientists to train mental processes I say that because there's a Canadian guest in my podcast. They like to say processes processes the Americans will say processes Best parts they're fun challenging and they only take a few minutes every day one time You can track your progress online and convey Over time rather you can track your progress on time and compare yourself to other people Which is a dick thing to do, you know really just worry about yourself Stop I mean maybe be inspired by other people, but don't be like hey, Bob. What was your score on lube-mocity? Mine was better I play it you can play it on an iPad. It's pretty cool just sitting around you can design these games Based on the things that you're looking to acquire whether you're looking to acquire a better memory or you're looking to acquire You know there's if you go to the website itself There's a bunch of different options like memory you can put recalling the location of objects remembering names after the first Introduction learning new subjects quickly and accurately and the beautiful thing about it is it feels like a game It's just something fun that you can do that is actually good for your brain Go to lube-mocity.com slash Joe that's lube-mocity.com slash Joe and go check it out your freaks. It's an awesome way to do something productive It's actually fun in your spare time and it's healthy for your brain. I firmly believe in it I use them. I think that playing chess playing games doing things that Makes your brain think steps ahead. It uses your brain the same way we use our muscles the same way we use our Cardiovascular system we exercise and we get stronger because of it. I think the same works with your mind So read a book bitch. All right. We're also brought to you by Squarespace Squarespace is one of my favorite podcast sponsors because we know so many people that have was my two loud here No, it's just in my ears. Yeah, that's all of them Is that better that's great. Squarespace is an all-in-one platform to design your own website that's super easy Click drag drop. It's in super simple interface. They offer 24 seven support every design Automatic includes a unique mobile experience that matches the overall style of your website So your content will look great on every device every time that's like iPads Androids tablets Laptops windows the whole deal. It's super easy and you know, this is something that a long time ago was virtually impossible A long time ago one of the big things about websites is like you would get a website that would work really well in the internet Explorer, but then we try to use it on Firefox. It was shit There's a real issue for webcorders not anymore This is the easiest time in the history of the universe for making a website for a free trial and 10% off your first purchase Go to squarespace.com and enter the offer code Joe in the number one That's Joe in the number one because we are in the month of January Squarespace is also putting on a contest now for JRE listeners And it's a website design contest and here's what you need to do go to squarespace.com forward slash Joe Sign up and get 10% off your first purchase then build a website It's super easy to do and once you've built your badass website tweet it to Hashtag JRE Squarespace. That's one word hashtag JRE Squarespace before January 17th and I'm gonna pick four winners who have designed the most beautiful websites and Squarespace will send these winners a swag bag with items like a square space Apple keyboard t-shirt a Mole skin and more so visit squarespace.com right now and use the offer code Joe in the number one to build your website and then tweet your website Hashtag JRE Squarespace. We are also brought to you by on it ONNIT What is on it? If you've heard this website have you heard this podcast and you heard me talk about this website You're probably totally tired of hearing about it at this point in time It's a human optimization Website and what we try to do it on it is offer you the best things that we can find as far as strength and conditioning equipment like kettlebells as far as protein supplements like hemp force and Different foods that we sell that are like we have like buffalo bars and organic coconut oil Just things that I believe are good for your health and supplements that I believe benefit Cognitive function benefits your ability to perform athletic tasks gives you a bit more endurance There's a lot of science out there that's been done into the the science of athletic supplementation and You know, there's not a lot that really work. It's it's hard to find something that really works significantly one of them that works significantly is called quarter steps mushrooms the fascinating one that was first figured out by the Chinese Olympic team it's based on a mushroom that They noticed these these cattle eating these mushrooms in high altitudes and they became more active when they saw the meeting this and so they were trying to figure out like why are they more active when they when they're eating this mushroom? They figured out that it actually enhances your body's ability to process oxygen. It's all fascinating shit All the supplements that on a dot com all of them have a 90 day 30 pill 100% money back guarantee So if you're confused or if you're like, man, I don't know if this stuff really works like new mood Which is a five HDP supplement which actually is a natural way of boosting serotonin And what's interesting about it is that doctors who are putting people on antidepressants oftentimes tell them to not take five HDP because then you'll have too much that good shit in your brain Which seems to me maybe it's just strict to far reach to you know But what am I what am I a doctor? No, I'm not even close all right go to on a dot com Oh N N IT use the code name Rogan and save 10% a lot of new stuff if you haven't been there before or if you haven't been there in a wild digestive enzymes and The new primal kettlebells which are all chimpanzees and zombie kettlebells lots of fun stuff Oh and N IT use the code word Rogan. All right stuff on volume is here Let's not waste any more time and cue the music young Jamie The Joe Rogan experience I've been looking forward to doing this podcast again for a while and I knew exactly what was gonna happen unfortunately when you got here as soon as you sit down We start talking about so much cool stuff before the podcast even starts. We need a prequel. Yeah, man We're already into temperatures and There's a lot of different things, but no no need to go back overall that stuff again I'm very excited to talk to you because there's been a lot of things that first of all I really enjoyed our first podcast really fun conversation in Toronto But there's a lot of things that I Read online and I say hmm. I wonder how Stefan would deal with this I wonder what your take on this is because you've got it's a very strong opinions on where taxes should go and you know What money should be spent on that benefits the community and I agree with a lot of them I think they're very fascinating the France thing if you've seen this France thing where they're jacking up the tax a 75% Yeah, I mean talk about killing the goose at least the gold and egg, you know We and it's sad because everybody seriously thinks that it's gonna be somebody else whose tax Exactly and they keep creeping it down It's like let's go get those rich people and tax them and then it's like you get a mirror and it's like what me No, no, no the rich people but now it's getting to the point like they could tax all of the rich people in America And it would pay the government for like three days I mean it's all complete nonsense It's just a way of setting us against each other so we miss the whole reality of what's going on It's a piss poor management solution too It's a terrible idea to take the people that are earning the most and take a massively disproportionate amount of money from them And so you know they're talking about like pro athletes and clubs soccer clubs and Corporations and you know the very highest of the high but still 75% is fucking ridiculous No one deserves to give you 75% of what they've earned yet Maybe a little bit more you know I agree that as a person who's made a good amount of money in my life I agree that I should pay a lot of taxes. I don't mind paying a lot of taxes. I don't mind But I'm not gonna give you more than half. That's fucking ridiculous. You can't get more than half You're not doing it right you you're not spending the money right looking you you can get more than half when you give me a fucking Complete analysis of every penny where it went what it benefited. I want to see or we actually living in paradise Yeah, you know like if we're floating on clouds and we get like we shit rainbows and all that Then you can get all my tax money and when there's no poverty and the children are all living peacefully and the schools Or gorgeous and glowing temples of knowledge then maybe but at the moment, you know It's like oh, sorry. Do you need more money for this war in Iraq? I have a slight problem with that Yeah, I'm all out of money for you dude Same with the guy with the sign the homeless sign in the corner that like smile only flips it over like it's bent Do you know could you spare a dollar and then he flips it over like you've got this crafty sign use that That mind that made that crafty sign go get a fucking job. You crazy fuck You know, Jesus Christ if it's possible if you get a job and if it's not possible if you did you get a job We as a society should take those people off the street and put them in mental institutions to give them help well Okay, okay So if going drum drag or is it topic if you dare but I dare there is this interesting thing around poverty right? Because poverty a lot of times people really feel like oh, you know, they just they had some bad luck It's a real shame, you know, they're just things didn't go quite the right way But you know statistically that the majority of people like if you take the average of how much people work in a household below the poverty line You got two people in a household below the poverty line on average They work 16 hours a week between the two of them. Whoa now that is it to some degree poverty by choice And I don't mind hey wouldn't it be great to only work 16 hours a week especially if your options are jobs that are kind of crappy Which we all generally start with those jobs that are crappy but to me that's And that doesn't change whether the economy is good or bad so it's not like we'd like to work more at the can't find the work So that's just one of those uncomfortable truths a lot of poverty is voluntary and it's nice to be poor because it's a whole lot less work Hmm and people get all the benefits out of not working which are considerable, you know I mean I guess daytime TV's good for a lot of people and So but but then what happens is then they need money for something they get sick and suddenly poverty becomes this huge problem But a lot of poverty it's like monks, you know, monks are poor But you know if they don't need charity because they're kind of choosing that lifestyle and it's not true of all the poor But on average a lot of people who are poor just they don't particularly like to work and you know again I don't mind that but except the consequences of that Well, don't you think that it's really difficult to break out of a cycle? That's the real issue that I've always had with people shitting on people who are poor or people who live in poor neighborhoods We're not getting out it's very difficult to break a cycle and if you're born into a cycle of poverty and of neglect and of laziness and Lack of ambition it's very hard to break out of that cycle and then Also, you're dealing with a really down economy where it's difficult to get a job that pays good money They're all taken there's more people looking for jobs and there are jobs and it's a real issue for a lot of people that You know don't really have an education or don't have a particular set of skills or even if you do I did a call-in show while I was here in California and a guy called in and he said, you know I just graduated as a pharmacist like a legal pusher and For me it's like okay pharmacist in America If there's one thing that's recession proof because you know when people are down they get it They take even more pills and it took him 10 months to find a job and he ended up having to take a job on the night shift and that's a pharmacist lawyers Can't find work in America. So even professionals are having a huge amount of problems Absolutely, it's terrible, but it's one of these things I worry about the degree to which when we tell people stuff is really hard does it become a self-fulfilling prophecy? You know like if you keep telling kids growing up in poor neighborhoods and I was a kid who grew up in a poor neighborhood So I have some sympathy with this but It's you know if you keep telling people, you know, it's really really tough. It's really hard to get out I wonder if Paul you know, it's really tough. So you know whatever it is, right? I don't think there's an either or but I think there's definitely a bit of that But you know you kind of disproved it with your example of a pharmacist who's looking for 10 months for a job in a very lucrative industry Yeah, so that's sort of disproves it a little bit I think you and I are very fortunate in that we can make our money independently We can make a living by doing things on the internet providing content and for me doing comedy shows and UFC stuff It's I don't have to be in the regular job market. I'm very fortunate because I've ever been in the regular I guess yeah, I drove limos. I did construction do a lot of things while I was a struggling comedian right right Okay, I decided I wanted to be a stand up comic at 21 and I sort of abandoned everything else I was doing I did a lot of shitty jobs and for a couple of years Yeah, you know before that I taught martial arts. So I've always had a weird life I've always been I just knew somehow or another I Probably could have been very different if my life was very different But my life wasn't very happy You know with my parents being divorced and moving across the country and always being forced moved around a lot and always making new friends I didn't enjoy school. I didn't enjoy the experience of going I didn't I didn't have a desire to learn and I knew that whatever I was gonna do It would it's gonna have to be something completely outside of the system There was no options for me like the idea of going to like some people say well, you know I really wanted to be a stand up comic, but you know, I'm gonna do it after I passed the bar There was none of that there was none of that there was like this is a job that I actually could do just go try to do that because a job like be a lawyer Be you know fill in the blank insurance Salesmen whatever the fuck it's gonna be I can't do it. I can't do it Go crazy. Well screw plan B. You know plan B. Everyone says plan B But plan B is always gonna end up going by the wayside because everything you do in life You strengthen that muscle you weaken your other muscles So you know, I will I'm a big fan of if you're gonna do it, you know, do it hard do it Do it full on tilt boogie, you know 150% and then if you fail at least you won't say well I could have done more you know, but but just go full But then you can always pick up the pieces not something else later But plan B is usually a real disaster like okay You can go be an actor, but the important thing is also you got a safety net Yeah, safety net is a news safety net is a news. I completely agree with you and we're gonna get attacked for this By people who are unhappy with the choices in life and that's a fact You know, there's there's a bunch of people that will say yeah Well, I've family so you know it's all great idea for you to just go out there and go crazy out of people to support You need to listen stop saying that stop saying any of those things every single person who has ever done anything worth while or exceptional or difficult or Extraordinary anyone whether it's great artists or authors or mathematicians or whatever the fuck it is Everyone encounters difficulties. There is no easy road. It does not exist. It is impossible Everyone has issues if you have time to pursue a hobby if you have time to do anything in your life You can better yourself and here's one way you never better yourself When you come up with excuses for why other people are successful and you're not that shit is fucking dangerous When you give yourself an escape. Yeah, well, that's easy for you to say you know, you do this Trust me everybody has a hard road I wanted to jump out a window several times during my young life I wanted to jump in front of a fucking train just ended because it's too much pressure not really but you know I'm saying theoretically We all go through hard times. We all go through depression. We all do it go through doubt and then moments in your life where It's really fucking difficult and you're trying to figure out what the fuck your path is gonna be it's hard as shit But Stefan and I were talking about this before the podcast starts that that is what makes you a person and those difficult Moments are what build your character show me a great man who's the son of a great man You know, that's what we're saying these kids that are born billionaires you're fucked You're never going to be a self-made person you have a backup trust for your backup trust for your trust and Your fucked man. I met a guy like this his parents own this gigantic chain of high-end stores and they're unbelievably wealthy like billionaire beach in Malibu is this massive community of you know 1520 30 million dollar homes They bought the next door neighbors homes on both sides and overpaid for them because they didn't want anybody Staying next to them. They just bought the homes like 30 million dollars 25 million dollars they literally own like a hundred houses They own homes everywhere. I'm talking estates in Denver in the mountains and then you know Why y'all mean at some great ranch? They just have fucking in the guy is a mess you could just slap him in the face you could just take his pants off He would just panic. He has no confidence. He's literally not not a person He's like a cat. He's like a cat. They have to feed or a dog It's a he's a sad sad person resistance breed strength They muscles in character in in mind and our muscles hate to exercise that's why the velocity calm is an excellent sponsor Yeah, no, but it is you know that which does not kill us makes a stronger You know, I mean sort of radiation poisoning really not good Sort of metaphorically. Yes, they out of the pure binary chemistry, but that which is is hard for you is what and all the stuff We hate at the time is the stuff that that we love later. You know, you go like wow that really did give me an appreciation for this or whatever And the trust of farrions, you know like the kids whose parents are really rich It is a huge problem among rich parents. How do you raise your kids? Because when you're poor or even middle class you your kid says I want x and you say what do you say we kind of for it? Well, but you know if your kids look at around and seeing like gold fountains in the living room and you know chocolate Baths upstairs and so on then clearly you can afford it and what do you say to your kids? It's really really tough that we have to provide limits because of x y and z I mean a lot of people like to duck out in the We can't afford it excuse, but rich parents don't have that and it's really tough for them to set limits It's very hard. It's also very hard when a child grows up with no doubt if you have no doubt as to what your future is going to be You don't have ambition the a lot of ambition comes from fear and as a comic some of my best sets ever In stand up have come after I bombed Like I bombed. Oh, yeah, like if this people I've got no careers. I'm a better. Yeah Well also it's a terrible feeling you don't want to you don't want that feeling to to reoccur So you have these bad sets and then you just get really super motivated to work on everything that's wrong or recognize What went wrong that night and never let it happen again and one of the worst traits that a comedian could ever have is to be easily Satisfied with yourself That's one of the worst if you think you're better than you are or you're really satisfied where everything hey, it's perfect No need to work on it. It's it's that's poison. That's like a terrible terrible terrible mindset for a stand-up comedian for that very same reason Like it has to be a struggle But we always this way aren't we like we always dissatisfied for something we achieve satiety and then we're immediately dissatisfied again And I you know there's a lot of people who will promise you peace of mind and zen and this and then I actually think that's completely Illusion and I think it actually contributes to more dissatisfaction Dissatisfaction is the nature of the beast It's why we're doing this and not going Uga booga booga in some caves because we were dissatisfied But the caves so we built some hearts. We were dissatisfied with the huts We built some condos. We're always dissatisfied and therefore we will continue to want to improve things That's how things get better at the moment. We're satisfied with something We immediately set a new challenge and remain unsatisfied in the achievement of that and people who try to end that process I think just trying to end being alive Fundamentally mr. Mon you you're talking too much sense here sir. You're confusing We have people with a commercial now you're free. We wish we could just to reprogram people's minds back to consumerism You're 100% right there's look I think everyone looks forward to this utopian time where whatever Motivates them drives them freaks them out right now can be set aside the work is done And you can just sort of like watch the sunset over the pond and The problem is this you you topian vision of the future that we have is Probably a carrot that's on a stick that will just never reach And we keep working hard to improve our society and our life and ourselves and our families and our relationships Hoping that one day will achieve this ultimate piece that will never come No, and and this is how people get exploited If they can dangle that carrot right and they can say well you see the communist into communist you'd help you You won't need to work and in the communist utopia or the fascist utopia or you know the Peter Joseph's robot mommy cities You won't have to work and everything will be fine Or in the religious view you will get to go to heaven or you'll achieve transcendental bliss or you know enough yoga Your butt will be firm and your soul will be at peace They will get you to give up freedoms and money and so on in hopes of buying a peace of mind that is fundamentally Ant human in the long run the restlessness of our species is the diamond that we get crushed into for the Existence that we currently Provide for ourselves in yes, I agree 100% I think the whole idea about all this is engineering a utopia Like Peter Joseph who I think is a very smart guy and I like him I had him on the podcast. I enjoy communicating with him. I think he's very bright But what I think is hilarious is that he makes his money as a stockbroker I mean he's talking about this utopian world and he's drawing the very blood that keeps him alive from a Vampire system this crazy fucking vampire system. I know no, but he's that he's a vampire on the inside. He's working the inside System so He's an inside vampire you guys had some serious debates didn't you? Listen to that a couple of flybys like I did some reviews of the zeitgeist movies and And then we actually had a debate We have fairly cordial, you know definitely but it heads which is natural. This is kind of what you want sure and then Yeah, he did go a little bit. I thought ballistic and some of the post debate. Let's say analysis Where I think he veered off a little bit into ad hominims, but you know my basic point is I don't as long as people do two things, you know do two things and you know We're friends till the end right? respect self-ownership and you know property rights and do not initiate force and so look if this if these cities Built by Jacques fresco and his Mary band of elven robots if this is human paradise on earth I say go for it have fun just don't force people to participate and let people leave as they want That's the only thing that matters. Everything has to be voluntary. You cannot violate the non-aggression principle Everything outside of that is you know well what color drapes do you want? I don't care just don't steal them the ad hominims are very disappointing I think well especially when it's just you could easily have just disagreed and Been fine with that and debated your points and look you and I probably don't agree on everything There's probably quite a few things that come up that we have different points of view on and that's because we're different human beings And it's also because there's not a black and white with these ideas of engineering society There's not a black and white. It's it's a very Look if it was very easy and straightforward it would have been done already. Okay. It's not it's complicated There's a lot to being a person. There's a lot to being a person that contributes to society There's a lot to what what about society is feeding itself and just feeding more society and more What about corporations are just feeding corporations and what about them is benefiting humanity and if you go and sway it towards benefiting humanity it's always the best choice But the idea of engineering it in one foolproof way that makes everyone happy That's silly the people that want to remove capitalism as a whole like I've met people that have jobs They tell me that people with money or problem and I'll go book they can be But you know much money Bill Gates gives the charities do you know much? Like charity worth that guy does how much money he donates to causes that he feels are excellent Millions and millions and millions and millions of dollars is a great benefit from having that that guy being wealthy Some people who are rich do a good job with it some people But you work too everybody works like the person telling me that money's a problem Don't you have a job? What do you get paid to your job? They give you free coconuts? What do they do they give you a use of a shower and a place to sleep at night? Now they give you fucking money man. They give you money. You just you're a capitalist You're just not as good a capitalist as that guy is it doesn't mean that the system is completely fucked It doesn't mean that the idea of the system is completely fucked. It means it can be fucked. Yeah But it also can be it's the choice of the people that control it if all the world bankers got together today and did acid and they realized Oh my god guys. We are fucking up. We're doing we're creating all this drunk. We're gonna die anyway Listen if we just pulled our money together into these massive charities to reengineer Societies and put money into poor communities and stop Causing war and stop extracting natural resources out of these places for massive profit and and massive loss of human life If that just happened the entire world would change instantly and they literally have the power to do that They would just have to all come to some sort of an agreement But there's no yeah and look charity is important and I'm not a Republican But one thing that is statistically true is that Republicans give a lot more to charity than Democrats do Which is why Democrats believe that welfare programs are needed because they're fundamentally stingy bastards who don't give anything How everybody needs to be forced to do it other is poor is it that they're have less money? Is it per capita like if you look at the Democrats per capita versus Republicans per capita? Don't know about that, but I do know that the Democrat donations tend to be far larger to the Democrat party I mean Democrats get their money from you know celebrities from they have these you know five billion dollar plate dinners Whatever for Barack Obama and whereas the average donation to the Republican party is like 20 bucks But the the Democrats get their money from unions and I'd like to talk a little bit about unions and Makes much a lot so we'll get back sure That's a really interesting topic about the same topic, but so yeah Democrats get their money from from forced union dues and from celebrities and from the entertainment business and so on and They they're just generally not very generous with regards to local charity has a lot to do with their secularism Right because a lot of the charitable donations come out of religiosity But there's no guarantee that charity is the solution There's lots of economists who think that Bill Gates would be doing much better good for the world if he'd stayed on at Microsoft and built that Company to be even more successful and bigger with more employees and so on that that would be generating more Value to society than giving money. You know if you look at India and China just over the last 20 years It has been the biggest poverty reduction in the history of the known universe I mean it really can't be over emphasized literally hundreds of millions of people have come out of poverty in India It's 50,000 families a month of getting into the middle class out of out of poverty because they just got rid of socialist policies and let people actually trade and make money and and stop their businesses They cut the red tape and all the licensing requirements and so on and of course in in China They were less totalitarian communist assholes and actually became some reasonable free trade guys and Out of that process More people that come out of poverty in the 20 years that they've stopped Interfering with people's trading abilities then an entire century of Western aid to to third world countries So I don't know whether it's getting out of people's way In terms of letting them do what they want to do and build their businesses or whether it's giving them lots of money It's a balance between the two, but I don't know if charity is always the answer I think just getting out of people's way is a great way to let them like what is it in California? Do you need like 27 permits to open a lemonade stand or something like that? I mean if you stop doing that kind of stuff or you don't need 300 hours to become a hairbrader on a beach of training to get a license Just let people do their own thing and let the customer be the decider about what's valuable what's safe What's right what's wrong? Then I think you do a lot more for poverty in many ways There are some people who need charity But I think most times people just need people out of the way so that they can go and create their own opportunities I think that's true for the most part in a lot of ways, but I think that it's hard to undermine what Bill Gates is done for people that can't afford things You know what he's done as far as providing funds for education and a lot of the charitable work They've done. I don't know if that would all get it have get gotten done if he stayed on it Microsoft and made it bigger and better and no that wouldn't but other things would have like Microsoft would have grown would have added shareholder value to people who then would have donated some of that to charity He wouldn't create it more jobs. He also would have opened up more Overseas offices in Africa and so much would have hired people and so that would have been more sustaining and again It's not to say there's no place for charity at all, but the or jobs, he also would have opened up more overseas offices in Africa and so much with a hired people and so that would have been more sustaining. And again, it's not to say there's no place for charity at all, but the balance between charity and opportunity on how to deal with poverty, you know, you had charity all through the dark ages, all through the Middle Ages, people gave money to the church and the church had, you know, indigent houses for the poor, didn't solve the problem of poverty. That was solved by, you know, free markets and property rights and free trade and all that kind of stuff. That's all the problem of poverty. Through that wealth, you get charitable opportunities that weren't there before, but fundamentally, I think charity is a nice side dish to opportunity. It's important, but I think if we think that charity is going to create that wealth, all it does is transfer and usually it's to a one-time use. The nice thing with the entrepreneurial stuff, it creates self-sustaining and self-growing economic opportunities. You know, the old thing, give him an efficient, you know, he'll vote for you forever, teach him an efficient, he'll become a Republican. I don't exactly know that. Aren't they teaching people in that sense though, they're providing a possibility for education that maybe wouldn't have existed for a lot of poor people. So in that sense, they are teaching people. Well, but education is important, but education when you don't have a lot of economic opportunities. Like if you look at Africa, Africa is one of the few places where... I should say. In the 20th century, like over the last 50 years, it's declined in net standard of living. I mean, it's wretched. I mean, South Africa, now the rape capital of the world, which you won't see on a lot of brochures. Yeah. Oh, it's just unbelievable. They're the crime rights and so on. Like if you rent a car in South Africa, they actually have a fire that comes out the side to deter a car jacket so you can push a button and have little jets of flame to come out to push car jackets back. And the amount of charity that's been applied in Africa is absolutely huge, but generally it goes government to government, right? So you give a bunch of money to a bunch of corrupt South African dictators and then you sell them a whole bunch of arms and then you wonder why there's not a lot of freedom for the general population. I think if you can scale back that... I mean, Africans who do fine as well as everyone else, if they had the same economic opportunities. Give people a bunch of education and you still have a very corrupt and fashistic style of government. I'm not sure what they can really do with that education other than join the civil service, which seems to happen quite a bit. So I'm a big one for like scale back into appearance in the market. People will create their own opportunities. You know, the last say fair, let them alone, let them trade, let them build their own wealth and all that kind of stuff. That really is inhibited. Charity will help people stuck in the sort of hardening amber of fascist monstrous governments. And that's needed for the people who are stuck there, but I think the long term solution has to be to try and find a way to try it. Like, let me give you one other hopefully not too boring example, which is subsidies for agriculture. Ah, wretched for the third world, unbelievably disruptive for the third world because, you know, you give all these subsidies to farmers and the farmers then grow too much crap. Then what do they do? They dump it in the third world, which destroys the market for local farmers. And you give all this food to the government, the government then hands it out to people they like and don't hand it out to people they don't like thus reinforcing their power. And then there's no local farming left because you're so just one of these kinds of examples. If we stop screwing up their economies by selling arms, by dumping food on their markets and all that. And even the foreign aid happens with that too. I think they do fine, but it's a lot easier to throw money at a problem than to actually try and deal with these immensely corrupt governments. That's a really unknown, but creepy aspect of the United States agriculture system is this subsidies, which causes people to grow food that they're not even going to use. It causes people to profit from corn and to put a lot of effort and emphasis into things that they know that they're going to get subsidies from. It's a real strange sort of power circle that goes on. What it does to people's health is wretched. There's this tiny sugar industry in the United States, very concentrated economic force. They get millions and millions and millions of dollars in subsidies and they've been trying to cut this for years, but everybody you know, lobby and focus their efforts. Right? And so what happened is when the subsidies went, when the tariffs, the taxes on imports are sugar went way up in the 70s, what did people not do? And they said, wow, sugar in America is really expensive. What are we going to switch to? High fructose corn syrup. And yeah, again, I'm no nutritionist, but there seem to be quite a lot of people out there who think that high fructose corn syrup has a lot to do with the growing weight problem in the United States. Along with, of course, the fact that you've got dairy farmers and wheat farmers and so on lobbying, the government to create these horrible food pyramids where they say, well, low fat is really important. And then what do they do? Because if you take fat out of stuff and sugar out of stuff, it takes like cardboard. They take the fat out of the stuff that's in the grocery store and they put sugar or high fructose corn syrup in instead. And then people are like, wow, I guess this does taste good. Like I was at breakfast this morning, I picked up a yogurt. It says low fat. Right. And what's the second ingredient is high fructose corn syrup. It's like, that is not going to be, I'd give me the fat. I'll take, I'll eat a, I'll shove a whole stick of butter up my nose rather than put that stuff into my system. Some fat is actually important. Yeah, you need it for your brain. You need it for like lots of good stuff. And essential fatty acids. They're very important for your life. Where are you going to store your LSD? Exactly. And you don't have the fat then you're in a business meeting. How attentive is going to come out of people's eyeballs 20 years from now. You need to play, you need a suitcase for that stuff. I think that's a fat myth. I don't know. People are just, you'll first use to get out of work saying I saw an octopus. That's right. I'm having a flashback man. That's why I was so creative the last quarter. When you start talking about economics and you start talking about giving businesses more freedom, people get real nervous because people think of businesses as being these monsters that they get power. And then they just start trampling and stealing things. is like whoa. What are you growing over there? What are you growing? I've grown a robot monster that's going to eat the world. Oh, come on man, you got to jump through government hoops. When have you ever seen a futuristic scientific science fiction movie with a negative portrayal of a corporation? Come on. They're always so benevolent, so wonderful. So many awesome corporations. Maybe big corporations. Okay. Oh God, I'm going to bore your listeners with econ 101. Okay. Corporations are state created, horrible, semi-ficistic monsters. They do not exist in the free market. Corporation has nothing to do with a free market. You know, we may start a business together and all that in the free market. It's like, okay, you start at a business. You don't get this legal shield. You don't get to take profits out of the corporation when it makes money. And then if it loses money, you don't ever have to put anything back. You don't have this thing where if the corporation or if you do something illegal, the corporation can get sued or can get fined and so on. It's a shield that is created to protect the people in charges of corporations because they give a lot of money to politicians, Barack Obama's the only reason he's in power is he took huge amounts of money from the financial sector more so than anyone else. Of course, you don't really see this really talked about. But this is why the bailout and all of this happened, particularly under his watch, the tarpon, all of that stuff, which was started under Bush, but expanded under Obama. Corporations did not exist until quite recently. And in the past, if you were the head of a trading company and your trading company lost money, you could lose your house. You could, like you could, that people could come after your personal asset. So these guys were really careful about their investments. One thing that's got this legal shield, you know, hey, the corporation makes a billion bucks. I can take that money out of the corporation and now it's mine. And if I then do something wrong, the corporation loses the billion bucks, too bad. Chairholders and employees pay the price. I mean, it's a wretched, unfair system that has nothing to do with the free market. Of course, the government always say the corporations are the problem to deflect, you know, what's really going on, which is the corporate shield. And the reasons why they gave this was A, to get the money from the corporate owners and B, because then they get to tax corporations and then everyone somehow thinks that there's this thing called the corporation like this blimp floating around the universe that you can tax for free. Like they did this fine recently, $900 million on some financial entity for its wrong, wrong doing so whatever. And people like, yeah, you know, they find that corporation like somehow the corporation is paying. no corporation. What happens is the shareholders end up paying the employees don't get raises the customers end up with service fees. I mean, there's no corporation to tax. There's only people. So anyway, minor rant, but the corporations, they're just they're part of the state, state capitalism or what's sometimes called capitalism, which is just the government and corporations working together. Technically, that's fascism, but doesn't have anything to do with the free market. It's just the modern bloated monstrosity that's been created. And it's just people figuring out a way to extract money and manipulating the system to make it easier for them to extract money. Whether it's extracting money from taxes or whether it's extracting money in the form of political donations. However, they figure out a way to do it. And what gets crazy about it is that there's a bunch of human beings that are a part of this thing that really isn't looking out for human beings. I mean, it's some people profit. You get money from it. But if you look at the ultimate destruction of these things, like very often, they're not looking out for people. And look, I say this as an insider. I mean, I started a company with my brother in the 90s. We grew this company. We sold it. And then we went public. And the process of going public is like having cocaine injected into your dick being lashed into a barrel full of psychotic monkeys and thrown off a cliff. It's it's completely insane. You go mental. You focus on the stock price rather than building long term value. And you can make a fortune from tiny upticks and down ticks in the stock price rather than focusing on satisfying you. It really draws your attention away. You know, it's like you're chatting with your wife and some incredibly stacked woman in a bikini goes by and you don't have your sunglasses on to pretend that you're still staring at her. Even if you do, they'll lift your sunglasses up. It's right. And it's like mad dog stocks are like continually having these incredible looking women go by while you're trying to focus on the love of your life. And it's like, you know, your hormones are going one way and your, you know, your heart is going another. It's completely insane. It really warps your thinking. And this is why corporations have given up on R&D and focus entirely on marketing and stock pitches because the amount of money you can make is insane. And it's because so many people's money is being forced into the stock market. I mean, it's like hurting a bunch of sheep off a cliff and saying, well, those sheep seem to be kind of suicidal now. Don't they? It's like, no, it's because like you got a 401k plan. What happens if you don't put money in a 401k, government takes it. Right. What happens if you don't invest in various incidents, like if if if your money gets taken from a union, the union has to invest it in your pension plans and all of that union is a huge amount of say in what happens in the stock market. Who wants to be in the stock market? I don't want to be in the stock market. Maybe you do because you have your thrill junkie and all that. But I don't want to be I don't want to be in the stock market. I really, really, the stock market is for people who know what they're doing. I don't want to be in the stock market. Nobody I know wants to be in the stock market. But we all have to be in the stock market because it's like, it's like that old joke where in Scotland, right? Scotland, Scotland, Scottish people are supposed to to be cheap. That's the stereotype when I grew up. And so, you know, an Englishman and a Scotsman of walking down and, you know, a thief comes up and says, I'm going to rob you of everything you've got. And the Stuft-Hatsman turns to the English guy and says, I hear that 20 quid that I owe you. You know, because it's like you're going to lose the money. So you give it, you know, give it to the, so the government's going to take your money by force or you give it to a bunch of parasitical, three-eyed, roach-faced stock brokers, right? It's like, okay, give it to the stock brokers, you know, if the guy's going to steal my money, I'll put it on red 22. And that's how the stock market works. So there's way too much money in the stock market. There should be like 1% of the money that's in the stock market that's there now. So you got these massive tsunamis of cash rolling back and forth. You get me a good coffee here. I just want to mention that. Pretty strong caveman coffee. How to my friend Tate. So I'm going to, you know, do three more rans and then face-plun. You're going to hang in there because that's got MCT oil and butter. So it's going to, you're going to hang in there. It's going to have a lot more in you. So I'm going to have like really strange shit in the morning. Maybe that'll happen. Nothing nice and s-shaped. It's going to be like the subtitle. It's going to be the subtitle system. Japanese movie that's going to be in the, it's going to be like, if you stuck mud in a musket and then just pull that pin back and boom. There you go. Right. So, so yeah, I mean, there's just way too much money in the stock market. Corporations are taking moral and financial and legal responsibility away from it. So executive. So this is just natural. You know, you, you, you, you drug a ballerina, you get a weird show, but it's not the ballerina. It's just what happens, right? That's a very funny expression. You drug a ballerina, you get a weird show. That should be, there should be a photo of you like this. Like an internet meme. And it just says you drug a ballerina, you get a weird show. Stefan Mullen, you. That's so true. It's a great way of putting it. And I think what a lot of what you're bitching about and we're, we're both bitching about is it comes down to a couple of things. It comes down to human beings being born into a system that's already fucked up. It comes down to managing your own thinking as well, thinking out how to weigh you as an individual, allegedly, and it's another debate has free will that's a huge debate, the free will debate, which is very esoteric and strange. I don't know. I can't. I'm not qualified. I would like to have you and Sam Harris discuss the free will debate. I agree and disagree with both sides. So I don't know. I don't know what's correct or what's now when it comes to people. I would do that, but only if you would call it like a mixed martial arts fight, that would be the only big and only if one of the strengths with a choke out, they would be very distracting. Because some of my debate's I thought, you know, this debate would go way better if we had a choke out option. It's at the end of it. You can press a button and both if you get down to your shorts and just start doing it out. Yeah, that's great. Yeah, that's just the threat of that is what keeps people gentlemanly actually, you know, when people know that there will be no physical violence, they can get very squirrely. You know, people can get very mouthy. Again, I don't want to keep harping on rich kids, but have you ever been around like a really spoiled rich kid that likes to yell at people that are working? Yell, it's security or yell. I have a friend of insecurity. And this is a famous person. I won't name, but her name rhymes with Paris Hilton. And she was out and she got shitty with my friend who is essentially, he's a killer. He's a, I mean, he's not working security because he's a cutie pie. He's working security because he understands how to keep people secure. So he knows how to deal with threats. He knows how to deal with violence. Okay. And you get this person. This is sampling people if you understand person is just shitting on him that's remarkably similar to Paris Hilton might not have been Paris Hilton, whatever, whatever. But I mean, why would she get away with that? Why would anybody, why would anybody think they can get away with that? Because you know the threat of violence doesn't exist. Well, and you know, as well, Joe, that there's a huge tendency that people have to mistake accidents at birth for personal virtues. Yes. That, that old saying like, you think that you hit a triple what you were born on their base. Yeah. So people who are rich, they think, well, I'm, I'm better. They're born rich. You didn't earn that. Like this guy in my high school, his father, I think was running the Toronto stock exchange or whatever. And you know, I was living this little tiny apartment with my mom and my brother. And you know, it's like the matriarchal manner as it was all like that the, the fallout from like the 60s and 70s feminist revolution divorced right with through the roof. And it was all the single mom, they'll like the, the, the girlfriend farm for the thug industry. And we went over to this guy's place to rehearse some play we were working on it. It was just, it went on forever. And you know, these are the kids, 16, you know, they get their, they get their sports car and that they show up in school. And everyone is like booing and eyeing and these guys are printing and I get it. They're 16. What do they know? Right? What do I know when I was 16? But that's just an accident. You know, it just happened to be born there, you know, like it wasn't like you, you laser targeted from the stock army and decided to go to that house rather than some other place, you know, like you're not a guided missile of, of wise pre prenatal aiming. And so I, we all have that, you know, industry people who are born pretty or people who are born rich or, you know, people guys sometimes want to or you know, like I was told when I was a kid, if effort matchability, you'd be an A plus, you know, like I just wasn't trying hard enough. It wasn't the school's fault. It wasn't my family's fault. It wasn't a chaotic or crazy situation where I was growing up. And we weren't poor. We didn't, I didn't have to have three jobs. I just needed to work a little harder like the other kids did who had good homes and all that. It's natural. And, and we have a very tough time really getting how much our environment has to do with who we become. Absolutely. Because that gives you a lot of humility. Like, okay, I was born with a fairly good brain and, you know, fairly good language center. I try to use that for as much good as I can. But with all the humility of knowing that, you know, I mean, if I'd been hit the wrong way with a ball when I was a kid, I'd be a whole different person. If I'd been born, as you said, you know, different race, different country, different culture. I mean, you know, not a lot of female playwrights in Iran, you know, because it's just bad luck. Sorry, you know, you're really true. The short straw. We have a very tough time. And I think that basic humanity that we have is diminishing. And it's catastrophic. And it's diminishing largely because of single moms. Because wow, the statistic is that by far the best predictor, I'm waving this pen at you, trying to talk about empathy. Let me just do my thing. The best predictor for the growth of empathy and a human being is the close presence of a father. This is something that's kind of, I know, because we all think that moms are about the, the nurturing and the emotional development, so on. But statistically, you know, outside unstructured play plus the presence of a dad is the biggest thing in developing empathy. You take fathers out of the equation in society. This is right. So see, Opethi is doubled over the last 15 years. This is basically why we have a welfare state. It's the destruction of the family. It does not a welfare state. It's a single mother state. It's it's all making up for not having a provider. Well, it's a problem with phrasing it like that, though, as you say, that the issue is single mothers. But the issue is really that the father isn't around. Whether or not it was the mother's fault, the father's fault, whoever's fault it was that that relationship didn't work out, whether it's mutual or one person, you know, has the majority of the blame. It's that the family's broken up. It's not that the single mom. It's just that family's broken. Maybe it's like, so I think we're about the same age. Is that right? 46. Yeah, 47. So we got a younger person in the room. Yeah, James, 12. You want Jamie? I didn't know some Italian kids had that kind of growth. I don't know face with everyone's. Yeah, the ones that have to shave the back of their knuckles. Like after they turn 10, that's my right role. Here's your finger shaver. Now that you're 10. Yeah. Okay. So in your general, how do you 31? I just turn yes. Okay. So it's happy birthday. Did you really? Happy birthday. Who asks you out? It's a women asked men out. It's a mutual men asked. This is a completely broad ended question. It depends entirely on the game of said individuals. I know, but generally. I mean, in general, generally guys. Yeah, of course. That's the growth on asked men out. They don't have to. Okay. Okay. So so so so then we can't say that single moms is equally shared because the single mom like men propose women dispose, right? I mean, men say I want to date you or have sex with you or something. Something Al Sharpton would say. It does rhyme. Yeah, but I'm afraid I don't have that. And then propose women dispose. Yeah. And what do you mean by that? Well, so men say I want to date you on a sex with you. I want to to go out with you. And the women say yes or no. Well, men are generally more aggressive and women are generally more desirable. So that makes us have to go after them. I mean, I mean, I'm a heterosexual man. How could we possibly figure that out, right? And of course women are more desirable to us, but you know, to lesbians. No, wait, that would be a no being sense. But to gain them. Even to them. They just, they just whatever reason. I can't figure out what women see in us at all. Yeah. I just, I fundamentally like intellectually maybe I think that the men have a lot of value in relationships. But you know, we are 40. We're smelly. We sit at odd angles. We don't cross our legs. We, you know, we're really using napkins. And I cannot understand why we need like 10 times more pillows than people on the bed. I like during the day when it's I knew it. These are things that confusing to me. But but fundamentally women say yes or no to two relationships. So they do get to choose who the man is a lot more than the man gets to choose who the woman is. Oh, I don't know about that. I don't agree with that. I think that ultimately it boils down to once you finally meet each other. Do you like each other? And if the woman likes the man as much as the man likes a woman, it works out. And if they don't, then it becomes this weird balance of power, this weird shifting sort of a thing. But I think there's a lot of men that don't want in a relationship and they end it or, you know, they pursue and they end it. I think it's probably, I don't want to be a 50 50. I don't want to give you a statistic. But I would say there's a good number of men who end relationships and a good number of women who end relationships to put all the power in the women's side. I think it's well, not at all. Of course. See, we disagree on something. No, no, but we found one. But we have facts to to mediate. So statistically, it's it depends on how you measure it. But that 70 to 80% of marriages are ended by women. Is that true? Or is it the men or so fucking douchey that the women have no choice that the men have given up a long time ago, and they just don't want to fucking bother going to the court. So just shot the fuck up, I'm going to go out and they shut the door. And then the woman calls the lawyer and well, the woman ended that relationship. Did she or wasn't mutual? Just one person decided to make the call to the lawyer, but did the guy already give up to the point where he was just treating like shit hoping she would leave. That's like the old Sam Kenson joke about marriage. He goes, you know, he goes, he goes, you know, I like to break up women. So what I do is I just stay up all night, do cook for four or five days. I come home drunk and smelling like pussy. And until you get to point where she leaves you, right? She leaves you because you're falling apart and he goes, and here's the best part. She feels like shit. Because she left you when you needed her most. It's perfect. I was at my lowest ad money. I'm paying you just you could have been there for me. We could have been a successful team together. Yeah, there's we bitches on both sides. I agree with that. I agree with that. But I don't think that we give, I don't think we give women enough responsibility in this area. I think that men generally want to protect women. I think that men generally, oh, that's crazy. And I don't agree with that at all. You don't think men want to protect women. They want to protect the ones that they love. But the reason why so many women get sexually assaulted is because so many men want to protect them. Men want to fuck, you know, and they want to, when they get a girl that they like to fuck, they want to hold on to her, make sure nobody else hurts her. You know, I mean, that's that they ape shit, you know, that's the worst aspects of people. But the idea that men want to generally protect women sure is less than they want to generally protect themselves, though, you know, and I think less than less than really would be ideal. If you look at the balance of power between men and women, the real issue is the physical strength. The real issue is that men can physically do things to women like where does rape come from? Where does violence against women comes from? Come some people that are that are capable of committing violence against women in rape. You know, like a woman like Ronda Rousey, you have seen champion, doesn't have to worry about some hundred pound duty smoke cigarettes. You know what I'm saying? She literally doesn't have to, she'd be in the room with them. And you know, he'd be like, bitch, you want to rape you. Oh, really? Boom. Drop them on his head and he'd be unconscious. I mean, she'd break his arm off. That's that's a physical situation that women have to deal with that men don't. And I think for sure, we could do a way better job of of addressing that. And I think, you know, like this, one of the stupidville rape case, you know, this case in Ohio, you know, this case, remind us, football players got together, high school football players got some underage girl, drunk, raped her. And then the guys went to jail and they just got out. Um, why is that, why is it so horrible? Well, here's what's so horrible about it. It was a girl. It was men that did it to a girl. If it was a bunch of women who raped a guy, they got them drunk and sucked as dick for an hour and a half. Everyone would be laughing about it. Okay. It's a sexual act that happens to a woman who can't control herself. And then you find out that it's a football player group, a group of giant athletes, a group of super strong men who obviously could have physically dominated her as well. It becomes a horrific act. If you simply reverse the sexes, it becomes a comedy. If it's some nerd who gets too drunk in a sorority and they all fuck him for three or four hours and take pictures of his penis, it's a comedy. But because it's a woman, it's a tragedy. And the reason why it's a tragedy is because men are physically stronger. It's really that simple. So the idea that I think that that men want to physically protect women, man, there's a lot of evidence that they don't. I think it's a giant broad generalization. I think the nicest men certainly do. I think I would certainly, if I was seeing a woman that was being physically assaulted or something, I would absolutely risk my health to help her. I wouldn't be able to live myself if I didn't, especially if I cared about her. Some people tell you. I'm training too. Right. I mean, you know how to do this stuff. Yeah. Well, that's also part of it. I know that I have some preparation in that area, which is a very terrifying thing for people who don't. I've seen people involved in physical applications who don't know how to defend themselves. And it becomes like you're facing a werewolf. It becomes like the most horrific thing in the world because you're going to get slaughtered and you know you're going to get slaughtered and people they hyperventilate. They don't know how to deal with the stress. That's I think you're doing yourself a disservice as a human being. If you don't know how to defend yourself a little bit in your man. Yeah. Okay. So a lot of points. Yeah. Maybe perhaps do you know who gets raped more men or women in America? Well, men do, but here's a problem. That's statistic. They're getting raped by men. So even though men get raped more, they're getting raped by men. So men are still a fucking problem. Men are just raping. They're raping men and they're raping women. Yeah, they rape men more. But that's just because we keep them pinned up with men. If we had no prisons and everyone ran free and we just fucking slaughtered people that we are absolutely sure don't contribute to society with their murderers or rape as we just slaughtered them, we would have the rape stuff would pretty much die off. It's keeping men together locked in a box and making them fuck each other. Yeah. Yeah. But it's men doing it. The real problem with that, you know, that's the the MRA argument against feminism is a man actually get raped more than women. But by men, yeah, it's still a shitty argument. Well, it's not I think it's not an argument against feminism. I think what it is is not something that people generally know. And like for instance, like pretty common knowledge. Most people know I was surprised again that certainly no gauge of everyone. Also, as you probably know, like 96, 97, 98% of workplace deaths or male and all that kind of stuff. Right. Sure. So I think or the fact that 50% of domestic violence recipients are men, right? A men being battered. And they're actually you can't get that no men's battered shelters. You actually can't get you can't get security. You can't get this America son. We don't defend pussies. Some chicks are kicking your ass. I say that and not just one of my favorite people ever was murdered by his wife Phil Hartman. Oh yeah. Fellow Toronto, Native brilliant brilliant comedian. And I knew both of them very well. I knew him and I knew her. And it was, you know, horrific scene and very, very tragic. And if you know someone like that, you know that is possible for a woman to do it to a man just like it's possible for a man to do with a woman. This weapon's lazy in gentlemen. There's knives and there's guns and every sleep sometime. Yeah. And by the way, you know, that's there's good and bad in that. The good in that is that you can defend yourself against a man. If someone's, you know, if you're a woman and you're physically weak, but you have a gun, you can say, get the fuck out of my house and the guy has to run away because you have a gun. There's good in that. But there's also, you know, people, you know, people do horrible things. They get angry at each other and happens with both sexes with men and with women. There's there's no need to generalize. It's all just shitty people. It's all just shitty people and shitty circumstances and a gigantic past of momentum of terrible decision making that's led you to this really unstable start current state that you find yourself in. And then you add drugs. You add antidepressants. You know, I mean, I believe you and I discussed this the last time we talked, but the amount of fucking school shooters that are on antidepressants like causation does not really rule. You know, people want to pretend there's not relation between those two. The FDA dissa the FDA has black warning the strongest warning labels on this stuff. Yeah, causes suicidal ideation causes homicidal rage causes, I mean, on some people. Yeah, yeah, some people. That's what we have to realize is like it's not a black and white thing. It's some people die from fucking peanuts. Okay. Some people can't pet a dog or they go into hyper ventilating shock. I mean, some people literally around dogs, they're, they're throat will constrict and they can't breathe massively allergic to dander. Cat same thing. People are, people are different. A lot of people are allergic to weird shit. And but a lot of people also could benefit from being healthier. This is one of the things we discussed before the podcast started the how many people that take an antidepressant could have fixed their problem just with a little exercise and diet change with a little just getting around better people having a better relationship being a friendlier person trying to exercise the stress out of your life, both mentally and physically. And then let's see what kind of emotional and psychological state you're in because the idea that this we need a holistic approach to the human organism. And that holistic approach should really have a big impact in what kind of medication we subscribe to people. I think it should have a massive impact. And if you find someone and the person is eating fucking doughnuts all day and you know they sleep four hours and nine and I constantly drink at red bowls and they're depressed. Huh. Okay. We got to fix this first. Well, they're a hot person under achieving in some dead-end job and they don't have people around them saying, listen man, you've got more to offer the world. Let's just find a way to get you out of the hamster wheel and get you on some flat track. The dead end jobs, dead end lives, dead end relationships. It's almost just as bad as some physical ailment. You mean, they literally do suck the fucking life out of you. We've all experienced it to some degree if we're lucky because it makes us appreciate the good times when you do experience something along those lines. But I think that man, you've got to really deal with that first before anything else. And there's too many people in this world that want a pill. They just want to fix things. And I've said this before, but I have to say it again just in the interest of clarity. This is coming from a person who I know sever. world that want a pill. They just want to fix things. And I've said this before, but I have to say it again, just in the interest of clarity, this is coming from a person who I know several people who have benefited tremendously from antidepressants. It's not a black and white thing. It's not either or. There's a lot of variables when it comes to antidepressants, when it comes to medication, when it comes to mental health. There's a lot of variables. We've done some amazing things to help a lot of people that have really had real issues. But we got to figure out who the fuck actually has issues and who doesn't. And what the statistic that you brought up before the podcast was over 41 out of four women on antidepressants. Yeah, in America, I think is, yeah, 35 or 40 and over one out of four women on antidepressants. And those are just the people who gone and got diagnosed, right? Lots of other. Yeah, I mean, there is, there's a lot of good things that are happening, I think in the world with regards to human relationships. I think that we are getting smarter. I think we are getting more positive. I think that we are getting dare I use the hackneyed Victorian term more virtuous, better in our relationships. There's an awareness of beating and emotional abuse. And I think that the standards are kind of raising. And Dr. Phil is like the number one day time show and he talks a lot about how to be reasonably decent human beings in relationships, which is sad that he has to keep saying that. Stop screaming at each other, stop hitting each other, stop doing drugs, stuffy. You know, yeah, you've got to go to Dr. Phil to figure out your fucking life. You're way behind the ball. There's a lot of the shit you need to cover. Right. But so I think a lot of that stuff has been going really well. But I think there's a lot of stuff that is not going so well. So well, I mean, a lot of, you know, just basic things you were talking the other day about breastfeeding. I remember you were looking up on the, you're looking up on the web. No, I just take the first website and that's that's how it works. That's true. That's the way it works. That's how you do anything that disagrees with those. I mean, it's just overkill to go to the second one. It's a much worse. It wouldn't be first was right. That's the key thing. But so yeah, I mean, like 30% of women still are only breastfeeding for the minimum amount of time six months. I was, this guy's Stephen Pinker, I think, would be if you can get him on. He's a really smart guy. Great to talk to. But he's, I think he's neurobiologist, neuroscientist. He's, and he basically was, there's a lot of studies out there that say that there's sort of personality traits go like 50% genetic and maybe they can get zero to 10% is the parents. And the rest of it is kind of cultural and so on. Right. And you know, I'm not going to argue with the science. I'm not a scientist, but I will say that I think that parents don't have really that much involvement in kids lives from a guidance standpoint that much anymore. I was right. The statistic the other day that said the average dad has like 20 minutes of conversation with his children every week. Whoa. Average. Right. And so, and that's just, that's of the people who are present. That doesn't count. The dad's were absent and someone because, you know, the typical, you know, two family working. I mean, once they're a day like, I mean, I've seen it, I've seen it up close. And this is one of the reasons I kept one to have kids because I saw what happened. You know, you get up at six o'clock in the morning. You got to get your kids up. Breakfast, get them out to the school bus. You go to your work all day. You're sweating bullets to get pick them up at the daft school daycare or wherever they are. Get them home, feed them, do homework, bathe them, you know, get them to bed. And then you start the whole thing again. It's all just her management. It's all just keep them going through the, the, the maze and all that. And I think that like I've been a stay at home dad. My daughter is, is five now. And there's a lot of little guidance things that happened during the week about how to modify, you know, whether or not to help them understand sharing or empathy or understanding how to do win, win negotiations rather than just focus on what they want, which is natural for the little kids. But it's all these tiny little corrections that are scattered throughout the week. You don't know when they're going to be, but you have to kind of be around for them. And I think that we don't really have much opportunity for modern parents to really stay involved. Like we kind of designed as a species to be around our parents. You know, they were there with the fields, the dads would take them. You went hunting recently. dads would take them out hunting and stuff like that. And that's when you have your conversations and you teach the kids the values and all that kind of stuff. It's really been supplanted by, you know, government by daycare, government schools and all of that. That's who we're kind of bonding with. That's who we're kind of letting raise our kids. And I can understand why there's very little influence of parents over children's behavior. I don't think that's natural. I think that's just the way society has been structured or rather the society we've kind of inherited. And I really would like to see, I say this on my show all the time to people who call in. It's like, wow, we're going to have kids, but I got to work. It's like, you don't. You know, I mean, you went into debt to go to school. I mean, this is important. Just at least for the first couple of years, you know, my daughter, her brain is like 90% done now. That five. Yeah. I mean, it's mine is too. Unfortunately, it's going to be crazy. Now you really stuck on that training. Right. We were at a hotel this weekend. And we went skiing in the three-year-old, zipped up her luggage, but she forgot something. And so my wife says, honey, you're not going to fit that. you have to put your boots in there. And she goes, Oh, shit. And it's something about seeing a three-year-old go, Oh, shit. And you realize, ooh, okay, that is a human condition. First of all, that's obviously me. Okay. I need to either stop saying that or embrace the idea of a three-year-old saying it. It's one of those. Because I don't think there's anything wrong with saying, oh, shit, when you leave saying, but if you do it in certain circumstances and school and work, it's going to be a problem. So I have to figure out what my daughter loves Bible stories. Really? I'm an atheist. Do you say once upon a time before you tell them? She knows their stories. Okay. Yeah. We call him the big invisible guy. Do you go old school, old testament? Or do you go? We do the whole thing. Oh, yeah. I've told to the story of, you know, the guy who's going to kill his son because the big invisible guy. I say big, even an ice cream, like, bake him in a pie with whipped cream because, you know, it's that's how you say, I don't have knife to the throat. I mean, she was four. But she loves the big invisible guy stories. She loves the Noah one. She loves the Adam and Eve one with the snake and the apple. I mean, these stories that they've stood to test a time. They've really some of the best stories around who was going to kill his son. It was Cain and Abel now. No, Cain and Abel were the son of Adam and Eve. They were brothers. Yeah. And they killed each other, right? I said, Isaac and Abraham, I think, I know. Isaac can, I know. Do we have a web? Yeah. Abraham has killed his son, right? Yeah. So, I think God was asking him to kill his son for him. Yeah. You know, it's a love test. Yeah. Just because, you know, that's how you know. Yeah. If someone really loves you, like, you know, this is why, you know, you give this, you give this to your wife, you know, like I would, I would murder our offspring for you. And that's the whole market that really helps your wife understand how much you love her. Or an ex-boyfriend. Yeah. I'm already an ex-boyfriend. I would find that way. The ex-boyfriend would beat you up on murder. And so, I love you. But, and I'm trying to tell the stories in a neutral way. Right? Like, it's like, again, I have my, my opinions on all these stories and all that. But she really likes the stories. And she's a huge fan of Lucifer. Whoa. I mean, Lucifer is the guy. He is like her superhero. You know, like, he is her mighty more than power ranger. She thinks he is just the coolest because he's always standing up to big, invisible guy, right? And, right. Because for her prayer is, you know, everyone's standing around and saying, Oh, you have the best. Oh, you have the best. Oh, you're the greatest. Oh, I love you so much. Oh, you're the best. You know, and so, you know, Lucifer gets kind of tired of that and leads the rebellion and all that. Because, you know, I said, you know, just keep saying it. And she's, I'm getting tired of it. It's like, well, no, no, no, keep saying it. Because it's an eternity of saying that to the guy. Right? And she's like, Oh, man, I'm really tired. I want to sit down. It's like, now, you know, how Lucifer family can sit in that kind of thing. Anyway, so she's got this great, she's this great song. Yeah, which goes basically. Lucifer was right. Lucifer was right. You know, what? The songs. And I'm just waiting because, you know, in Canada, there's some homeschooling, which is kind of what aren't schooling what we're doing. But a lot of them are Christians. Right? So we're going to at some point be around a bunch of Christian kids. He's going to break into this song. And I'm looking forward to that moment of trying to explain that. Maybe she's referring to a Beatles song. I don't know. I completely bail on her at that points. I don't know why she gets this. Well, the real issue is you're going to have to mingle with those Christian parents. The real issue when you have children besides raising the children, which is of course the primary one teaching them and everything is dealing with these other parents and seeing it's really weird when I see people with their kids, you know, see how little they interact with their kids, see how like non appreciative they are of their kids, how they're always distracted or always. The ring of cell phones around the playground, you know, like throw your cell phone, go into stupid McDonald's tubes and go play with your kids. I know woman who's a psychologist and she picks up her kid and she's on her phone while she's picking the kid up. The kid trying to talk to her about school and she's like, uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh. And she's texting. It's, you know, I mean, you just, the kid was gone for five hours. And when you you pick them up, you texting. Yeah. It's so, it's so attractive to us though. So easy to do. It's so easy to ignore. We get so used to, you know, the kid being around and we get so used to our own free time that kind of- Oh, my daughter's really good at that. Sorry, she's great. Because, you know, like I'm trying to teach her eye contact, right? Because, you know, when she's a kid, you know, I don't know if they can't focus when they look at you, but they tell stories like they're just watching the biggest disco light show on the planet and you're just like some leaf or something. Right. And so I tried to remind her, you know, eye contact when we're talking that kind of stuff, so the other day of course. And I, you know, I try, oh, Joe, I try, you know, and I, you know, but every now and then, like I get donations. My whole show is just donations, right? No ads or anything. And so, you know, when a donation comes in, it's like, who, you know, like I'm like the rat with the palette, you know, like, who, what did it get? And I got this little kitchen noise that comes in because I'm four. Anyway, so, you know, the kitchen noise come in, my daughter was telling me something really important for her and all that. And, and yeah, she's great. She's like, four and she's like, daddy, eye contact. You know, you're absolutely right. I'm so sorry. How rude that was of me. I apologize. That's hilarious. Yeah, it's fascinating to watch their little brains develop. Isn't it in the wants to weigh the, they interact with each other or how they see the world and realize like that this is how a person is shaped. And this is the number one problem that we have as a race is that we don't respect this process and that we also don't respect this process in strangers, especially people that we know are fucked. People in bad neighborhoods, people in bad circumstances, people in abusive families. We know they're fucked and we don't, we don't do anything to stop it. It's one thing that I keep harping on is that if we have a resource, whether it's oil or gold being we protect that resource and, and, you know, we set up laws and we attach a value to it. But our number one resource for sure is human beings. We have created all that you see, whether it's laptops or buildings or cars, that's all from a human being. The best way to ensure that that continues to go on is to have less losers in the world. The best way to have less losers is help out kids, educate kids, get on the ball with them very early and do something as a society protect them primary before we go into wars, before we go into all this stupid shit that we do to spying on people's fucking emails and looking into their cell phone record before you do any of that. How about you protect kids first? That should be a primary importance and it should be like one of those things where you kid, you know, wants to go out and play. Like, if you've done your homework, you haven't done your homework, you can't play. It's that fucking simple. You can't have your wars unless you fix the kids, okay? And they're, they're so smart. And I, you know, I was, they're human. I've had a whole bunch of experts on my show, which, who talk about the native intelligence of kids, like kids can start doing mathematical reasoning at seven or eight months of age, they can start to using empathy at 14 months. My daughter at the age of four, we started playing a game called subjective versus objective. You know, like, is this something subjective? Like, I like ice cream or is this something objective like ice cream is made from milk? And, you know, we'd point at stuff as a subject or objective, you know, I like jazz subjective or objective. And she's like bang rattling them off the other day. She was saying to me, dad, you know, we've talked a lot. She's always asked me about the show. In fact, I should have been taking notes because she's asked me all about you. What's going to be the topic? And I said, you know what? I have no idea. I know it's going to be interesting. It's a chat with Joe. No idea what we're going to talk about. And that was the best conversation. Yeah. Yeah. She's asked all about, you know, where you're from and what you do. And she's fascinated by mixed martial arts and all that kind of stuff. And, and so she's going to ask me all to it. And they do some shows on economics. And so we talked a little bit about that, you know, for your money and all that. And I diagram stuff out for her. And she gets it really gone through the whole history of the second world war. The other day she says, you know what, daddy? I think I've decided what I want to do. I think when I get bigger, I think I just like to work. I want to be the government. I'd love to be the government because I just I want to type whatever I wanted to my bank account. And I was just like, wow, you just nailed the Federal Reserve like right there in a night. Whatever I want into my bank account. That is a bank of four year old logic, but perfect. Yeah. That is what it is. They can print their own money. Yeah. It's beautiful. What a great system. Yeah. No one. I come out of the sort of libertarian world, right? So I mean, I'm an anarchist, but I come out of the libertarian world. And libertarians very much as we talked about law nonaggression principle and so on. And I've been fighting this this battle in the libertarian world. And in other worlds as well around, you know, things as to me is basic as spanking, right? I, yeah, I wasn't sure. We touched on this. We did. We're both on the green. We just throw a few stats for the audience who hasn't seen it before. More than 90% of parents of toddlers say they've spanked their child toddlers. 61% of moms three to five year olds have spanked their child in the past week. Boys spanked a lot more than girls. Boys are also diagnosed with ADHD, which is one of the symptoms of spanking a lot more than girls. Spanking can continue into the adolescent years, 30 to 40% of people in junior high kids in junior high are still being spanked. Moms do spank children a lot more than fathers do even controlling four times spent with kids and all that kind of stuff. Economic status doesn't have a huge amount to do with spanking, but culture does. So African Americans do a lot more corporate punishment, religious conservatives, fundamentalists do a lot more corporal punishment and so on. And this to me is such a fundamental thing. I'm very much for philosophy that you can do. Philosophy that you can act on values that you can do. I don't like the Federal Reserve. I think central banking is a monstrous cancer in the eyeball of society, but I can't really do much about it other than rant and rave about it. But we can't what we can do is, you know, do some basics like stop hitting kids. You know, that to me is a very fundamental thing. And in the libertarian community, that's a challenge. A lot of religious conservatives in the libertarian community, as you know, like on the on the right or wrong Republicans that tend to be more religious people on the left, a secularist, less religious people, but more socialists and so on. And it is really tough, you know, to just get that basic thing across. We tell kids not to hit each other. And we hit kids and we've all, I don't know if you are there, you see bad parenting sometimes when you're out. And you actually, and I'll usually say something to the parents because I don't want my, my, I think it's the right thing to do. I don't want my daughter to see me be all about the ethics and then not talk to people doing something wrong. But you can see parents hit kids saying don't hit your sister. And that the fact that they can do that without their heads exploding from this wormhole contradiction of pretzel logic is just astounding. But it is something we still have a long way to go in. I think we can't slowly get in there, but we have a long way to go and just let's not hit kids. I think how much of the world would change if we didn't do that would I think we would be virtually unrecognizable as a culture. I couldn't agree more. You know, I read this article recently on my message board. I don't have an affront of me. Sorry, I apologize to whoever posted it. But it's about a man who got stuck in the financial system of divorce and it was from his perspective. He committed suicide, let himself on fire. I started reading his perspective and they came to his house and he had his initial issue because he slapped his daughter in the mouth so hard that her mouth was bleeding. And he did it because she was licking his hand. She kept licking his hand so he slapped her in the mouth to her mouth. Everything I stopped reading right there. I'm like, I don't want to know this guy. I'm sad that he was so fucked up that he committed suicide. But if I saw a guy slap his daughter in the face because she was licking his hand, I would have to really suppress my urge to strangle him. Yeah. I mean, that's violence. That's violence to someone who cannot defend themselves. And can't leave. Not only that, it's fundamentally the most fucked up kind of violence because you're doing it to a developing human being who you allegedly love. You're teaching them the violence as a part of life by the people that they respect the most and that it can be done to you at any time when you don't agree with whatever fucking guidelines and rules they've set up like licking your hand. My daughter was licking my hand. I'd be laughing my ass off. I would think it's so funny. The idea that I'd smack her in the mouth is just fucking insane. But people, they fall into this pattern and they don't realize that violence is violence just because you're not going to hurt the kid that bad. You're just going to spank them and you think it's no big deal. Fuck yeah, it's a big deal. Because that kid, it's a horrific situation. You're doing something that can't control your holding their arm, removing their body and then this big hand comes and slaps their ass and they feel pain and they feel confused because you've acted out against them. You've not only acted out against them, you've done it aggressively yelling and slapping and like it's a terrible terrible precedent to set a terrible idea to plant in a child's mind and it's unnecessary. It's just not necessary for you to tell me that you can't sit down and reason with your child and do it with love. And yeah, they're going to freak out and fucking flail sometimes and get mad and yell and that's because they're a fucking child. You piece of shit. You don't smack them. You don't smack anybody. You're hitting your friends. You're hitting your friends. You're like hitting your, I don't, don't hit anybody man. Well, and in particular, the moral concentration of like black-hearted nastiness, you know, you hit your wife. She got to date you. She got to, you know, you had an engagement. She, you know, she chose you and you chose her. But if you hit your wife, she at least had a test drive you, you know, and then she can leave it anytime. She's an adult. She's got shelters. She's got whatever. People will help her. But kids, they didn't choose you as parents. You know, and they can't leave and they have no options. And I say this to my daughter, you know, I say, I say, I know you're not here by choice. You know, you didn't choose me as a a dad. I choose to have kids. And you didn't choose me as a dad. The way I have to parent is, I want to parent like if my daughter did have a choice, if any dad in the world that she would choose me. Like, and so I imagine like she had- She's pretty cookies all day long. Absolutely. And I know it. And, and, and what about feedback, you know, and I go to my local pizza joint, half the time after Phil, I don't, they give me this comment card to fill out, you know, how did you like the pizza, you know, was good for you, was it bad for you? Yeah, they want to know. They want to have a good pizza. And how many times do parents do that with their kids? Say, how am I doing, you know, how's your experience of my parenting? You know, what's more important if a concise pizza or your relationship with your offspring, you know, ask them how you're doing? How could today have been better? What did I do that you liked? What did I do that you didn't like and all that? Get that kind of feedback. I don't know. It's just weird that we don't even think of doing that. Why I think your perspective is very unique in the fact that you are a state-owned dad, and you do have the resources to be able to do that. It's, it's really hard for a lot of people. And it's what you were talking about before that number is pretty crazy. The 20 minutes a week, I didn't know that it was that low, but honestly, not shocked. I don't have a regular life, but I've dabbled in regular life. You know, I've had like jobs that take me away for a long period of time during the day. And I could only imagine what kind of energy you have to devote to a kid. If the mother, both the mother and the father both leave the house all day long, work an eight hour day, and then come home. How much is left? There's not even much time the the kid's going to be awake. How much energy do you have left? How much focus are you putting on that kid during the day? And, and we have this again a couple more stats. We have this idea that the moms have to be there and the dads can be there. But a study conducted by Dr. Kyle Pruitt found that infants between seven and 30 months respond more favorably to being picked up by their fathers. He also found a father's parenting style is beneficial for a child's physical, cognitive, and emotional and behavioral development. A mother's tend to reassure toddlers when they become frustrated while fathers encourage them to manage their frustration. My daughter's like this. So I she's learning to do all these things. And most of her friends are older because you know, we're not the youngest parents on the block. And so a lot of her friends can do stuff better than she can. She gets frustrated. Me helping her talk it through that frustration and reminding her that I didn't know how to do this stuff. And you know, she's trying to do rackets boards. And I remember it took me years to become good at racket sports. So, so that's important for for kids as well. I mean, it's really important to remember, you know, the mom and the kid that used to be the same freaking person. You know, like she grew her, they were like the it's like my arm, you know, it's not like a separate thing where is dad so have a little bit more objectivity around that. A longer term study that this guy did to prove that a father's active involvement with his kids from birth to adolescence promotes greater emotional balance, stronger curiosity, a stronger sense of self assurance. Additional studies during the first five years of a child's life, the father's role is more influential than the mothers in how the child learns to and manages her body navigate social social circumstances and play. And the last one is this is 1996 study that I was referring to before by McGill University. The single most important childhood factor in developing empathy is paternal involvement in childcare. The study further concluded that children who spend time alone bonding with their children more than twice per week brought up the most compassionate adults. So how do they measure that? How does that quantifiable? It seems like a all those statistics seem very odd. It's like how do you know what caused a person to have more empathy? How do you know what caused a person to be able to move better? I mean, how do you where? Well, what they improved that again, it's sort of a many too many relationships. So they they ask the fathers, you know, how often were you involved and maybe they even measured them if it's sort of a life study. And then they measure the compassion and then they measure a whole bunch of other things. And if the other things don't change the compassion measure, but then the parental involvement is what moves the needle, then they assume that that's close to causal. But isn't the issue also that parental involvement, like say if a father is involved a lot in the kid's life, he's also probably likely involved in the relationship with the wife and maybe the wife would be more happy. The father and the wife would be more happy. And because of that, they would both be better parents. So it could, you know, it might not just be that the impact of having a man around does all these things and creates an empathy. It might be the impact of having a successful family as well. Right. Right. Now that certainly is true. And again, I didn't run the studies. I assume that they've tried like whenever you question this, always try to tease it out this way or that way. And they they try to find that answer. But I do think that compassion, again, you know, I mean, you're married. You've got you've got kids floating around and all that. And I'm floating, but they were floating at one point. And then they came out through the magic chamber. But I think, you know, I mean, my wife's skills as a parent are fantastic. And, but but there are some differences between us, you know, and I don't know whether it's biological or whether it's just the way we're raised or whatever. But, you know, I encourage more risk taking. I encourage, you know, if you fall off the horse, get back up on again, kind of stuff. And I think that's just kind of a natural kind of difference. And I'm also more encouraging of, you know, my daughter is like crazy, friends. I keep thinking she's going to go up to someone sometimes an unfriendly world like a cheese up to a greater, you know, it just kind of gets dreaded because, you know, we go places and she just goes up to kids and says, hi, would you like to be friends? And that's cool. That's fantastic. That would be, you know, the whole world. Everybody was on ecstasy. That's how we would interact with each other. And that was one of the things that we got a little bit off topic. But one of the things that I wanted to complete this thought on when you were talking about antidepressants. And we're talking about the good and the bad of them. I think right now one of the issues that we have with this idea of manipulating human neuro chemistry is that it's not really done. There's, it's not a complete art form yet. It's not something like dying your hair. Like if your hair is gray and you want to have black hair, you simply go to the market and you buy some hair color and you put it in your hair and now your hair is black. It really is that fucking easy. I mean, they've got to down to a science. You see guys that are fucking 80 years old and have jet black hair and looks ridiculous. The Reagan. Yeah. But I think we, we do have the potential just like we have mastered virtually every other aspect of our world that we live in. Whether it's high-speed communication or the ability to, you know, combustion engines with your my own batteries one day, they're going to figure out how to engineer consciousness. And you have this, you have this opportunity to take a pill or get a shot or whatever. And you have ultimate clarity and you fucking think much better and you're a better person. I keep swinging my hands for the air and knocking shit on my keyboard. I am literally retarded when it comes to that. I'm looking for something to hand you again. I'm not. We're all right. I got some paper towels here. It didn't really get on anything. Just got a little bit on my screen. But I think that one day they're going to have the ability to do what we would like them to be able to do to figure out how to engineer human consciousness ideally to make in a pill form or in, you know, I mean, in a shot or in some sort of genetic manipulation. I think that is that possible? And is that bad? Is that going to take away from being a human being if we're... I think that would be a great tragedy. Why is that? If it made it awesome. In pill form life would be fucking literally everything we've been searching for. No struggle. Just we would just talk into that. That's like everyone being born with a billion dollars. Is this talking about no resistance? We have that. We know that to a large degree. I think that we know that to a large degree. With our current state of consciousness, what I'm saying is we engineered it past this eight monkey paradigm that we live in right now and boom with one shot, they give you this Buddha thing. Yeah. It's called the Buddha shot. Would you take it? I don't know. If everybody else was taking it. You're a natural father. I think I would consider it. I would want to know what the... Would you want your kids to take it? I would want to know what the results were. Look, if the entire world took it and then we would engineer consciousness past this stage where we are now in completely restructured society to have no evil, no problems. We think that we have to have a young to have a young and in our current state we do. But is that the ultimate end all? Are we not continually evolving? Is this life that we live now not much easier and safer than it was living in the time of getting us kind of? Well, it certainly is. Isn't it arguable that a thousand years from now it would adapt and change and become something different than it is now? We have the technology. We can actually build it. Wait, this is not a huge difference. And none of your audience know six million dollar man references do they then play? I bet a few of them do. You're right. Barely alive. That's right. And then we can rebuild him. Yeah, we have the technology. I met him recently. Very nice guy. Did you really? Wow. I think I think he's a pretty fun guy. But anyway, he's pretty cool to meet him. I imagine. Yeah. How is this handshake? It's very firm. He's a man. I imagine it would be Steve Austin. Yeah, Lee Major is a great guy. I think I'm a may fan. I think we do have that. I think we have that that technical. Okay, so let me ask you what we have in now. I think we have engineer consciousness? Yeah, I mean, neuroplasticity and focusing on what I would argue is it's the old Aristotelian idea that we look for something come you domain or happiness. And happiness is according to Aristotle, happiness is the one thing we seek for its own sake. Right? Like we don't, we get on a bus to go somewhere. Right? We take a cab to get home and once we're home, we've arrived there and we don't stay on the bus to stay on the cab. And most things we do in life are there to to pursue happiness. Right? Like I came here because it's sunny. No, I came here for you. I came here for you and the sun and you and the sun both together. It makes it very easy. I really enjoyed our last conversation and I think it was great to to get the messages out that I think are really important for people. And so I came down here because it will make me happy so far. You and the coffee have made me very happy. I'm not saying necessarily in that order, but they're both in the mix. Caveman coffee works. It really is good stuff. I tell you that. I knew that you were going to butter me. Yeah, that's how I do it. I butter people up. But literally. And so yeah, Aristotle said, so how do you achieve happiness? Well, happiness, he said, is the pursuit of excellence, particularly in virtue. And now virtue for Aristotle was a little funky because he was pro-slavery. So yeah, it's, but you know, they didn't have labor saving devices other than other human beings. So so I think that we do have the capacity to be quite happy and to achieve a state of not contentment because I think contentment is for like cows and stuff that they excrete. But I think to achieve happiness, we pursue virtue, which is you know, we act to do good. We fight the bad guys. We try and reform the people on the fence. We try and encourage those in pursuit of virtue. And I mean, let me ask you this question. How is your conscience? Right. You know, this thing that you accumulate this sort of unconscious thing that accumulates the good and bad that you've done in your life. My conscience is pretty easy. I think I've done some things wrong. I think I've done a lot of things right. My conscience is pretty easy. How is your conscience? Do you think in the sort of the sum total, you know, that thing you go in front of St. Peter at the end of your life and he tabbies up, you've sort of the good and bad? How is your conscience as far as that goes? Well, unfortunately, I engage in a not so frequent, but quite strong psychedelic activities and doing so like roller coasters with your eyes closed. Yes. Okay. Got it. Well, the most common one for me is sensory deprivation tank. Right. Right. Do you do that all the time? So you face yourself in that environment without distractions, right? Yes. You certainly do. And that's one of the more challenging aspects of it. One of the things that people are most afraid of because of that. And I certainly have done things wrong. I certainly have made mistakes. And I certainly think that those mistakes have given me more empathy, more understanding, more objectivity and the analysis of those mistakes have made me a better person. And the subsequent reaction to my analysis of those mistakes has made me a better person. You change your value. Yeah. So, you know, when you say your conscience is your conscience clean, no, no, it's fucking littered with bodies. But the result of that. Angel know that so you know when you say your conscience is your conscience clean no no fucking littered with bodies But the result of that life has made me a far better bodies not zombies right now. Yes, I am right now Yes, my conscience is clear the way I treat people now. Yeah, honor percent. Yeah, I'm very I try to be very nice I talked about before I think you do a lot of good in the world You bring a lot of I think good thinkers to people's attention hopefully myself included I think that through your comedies we talked about before I think you give people a very empathetic relationship To their own physicality and and bring sort of some of the secret stuff in people's lives into the open and have them have good humor about it So my think you do a lot of good. I think that's what you say that you're quite happy Well, yeah, I'm very happy But I and I think that that good though is a very reciprocal It's it's a very even relationship between audience and me I think I easily get as much out of this podcast as the people who who listen to it do and I think that's one of the reasons why it's so harmonious And one of the reasons why it's so easy to do and also one of the reasons why the relationship that I have with the audience when I meet them It's like I think they know that I'm as happy about all this as they are and the people that it's benefit their lives And they've been exposed to all these different people like yourself and other interesting people that I've had on the show I have also been exposed to those people Yeah, I've been exposed to you been exposed to whether it's Sam Hatteras or You know, and it goes to me the theoretical physicists or all these different fascinating people that I've had on the podcast Graham Hancock I had nauseum joy. Dias all these people have made my life a more fascinating life for sure So it's been a completely mutual beneficial situation So when you say like you've done a lot of good well, it's done a lot of good for me So I really think it's a very old man when we yeah, it's a completely even exchange what I've found is a path that I find to be both fascinating and enjoyable and I've gone down that path been very fortunate to find it and then pursue it and That's unusual, you know for your profession, right? I mean What is my comedians who do or public figures and so on who bring intellectuals to a mainstream audience? I mean well, that's because I've kind of resisted the idea of being pigeonholed into one sort of occupation Right, right? What I do is just I'm a person and there's a bunch of things that I enjoy Right, you know one of the things that I enjoy is hunting this thing that I've really become fascinated with lately That's for a lot of people's repulsive. I've had you know incredible Like don't insult some I mean, but if they think they come from well not only that there's the the Do-know do the least harm principle It's really kind of fucked but the reality of farming is that unless you're organically farming in your own garden You're actually killing more animals per pound of you know of grain and for pound of rice Then you do per pound of beef. It's really kind of fuck There's there's some study on it like how many animals get ground up in those machines that they use to turn up crops And I was that right how much you displacement they do to the into the natural habitat of certain animals when you plant crops and there's a You know this it's very it's it's ideal if you can grow your own stuff if you can grow your own stuff And you want to be like a vegan you want to have like the smallest footprint possible That's the way to do it grow your own stuff and you know and make sure that you don't you know harm anything in the Cultivation of your fruits and vegetables, but if you don't Boy, you're still participating whether you believe it or not you're participating you're participating in slaughter Well, yeah, I mean I I have some sympathy and again I you know if you can do less harm I think that's great you know after high school I wanted somebody for school I ended up going up to work in in Northern Ontario like past the tree line where you had to fly in to do claim staking and gold panning and all that kind of stuff and You know when you really in mother nature and this was like you know minus 50 degree weather in a tent for months I mean when you really in mother nature you realize she's kind of a bitch. She doesn't even fuck about you Yeah, like she'll just you know fucking tree will fall on your head and that's it for you. I mean you know it's really You know one time we got snowed in like we couldn't get the play then with supplies And you realize look you look in that a box of food and you're like You know when we're out of this it's getting all kinds of like stuck on a mountain looking at people I actually was thinking you know you see those These are loony tunes cartoons. So again for your younger audience members. Please ask your parents You know like some of guys really hungry and he looks across at some other guy And he turns into like the steaming chicken wing or something like that today No, make that car. No, you couldn't but I was looking that was one guy who was kind of plumping in the in the camp You know he actually just started to look well marbled to me like I think him is fat anymore I thought of him as nutritious what things get ugly people do tend to start leaning toward survival Yeah, and a lot of times like we we like nature because we are a comfortable distance from it You know like we've got our air conditioning. We got our antibiotics. We got you know the people in the middle ages You know they were really close to nature and we died like flies Mm-hmm, you know like childbirth was hot fatal to like half the women and how about the whole of every fucking Story has a big bad wolf in it and the reason being is it wolves were fucking killing people on a regular basis Yeah, tell people figured out firearms wolves were killing people like crazy Yeah, it was a really common thing. Yeah for people to get killed by wolves You know one one stupid ass flea comes across in a rat from the Middle East and suddenly a third of Europe is dying from the black death I mean Nature is great to visit, but it's not a fucking ansel Adams poster I mean gee is a sociopathic bitch who will wipe you out as soon as look at you There's a story from 1450 that I've told on the podcast once before but for the This in this line of thinking there's a series of murders in Paris in 1450 by wolves where we'll get started murders I guess it's just predatory they killed 40 people wolves killed 40 fucking people in Paris in 1450 and We are no different to them than a caribou or anything else that they can eat It's just when we have protected ourselves completely with cities and cars and guns and all these things Then it doesn't become an issue and then we'd look at them and like oh beautiful nature But that beautiful nature gives zero fucks about you and will absolutely eat your baby in front of you. Oh, yeah They have no problem with it whether it's a fox in London They actually have had issues recently where foxes have broken into children's bedrooms and attack the children while they're asleep Or rats babies in Harlem. Yeah, I mean rats will just eat the babies face up Oh, they're just monstrous. It's it's it's so heartless and the it's all about survival and we've eradicated that But I love it. I love it. I love it. I love it. I love being at the top of the food chain I'm sorry that that we had to kill a whole bunch of stuff to get here But at the beginning it was us or them You know like I'm glad that some comet came and took the heads off the dinosaurs because otherwise We just be little rodents that they're eating like I'm sorry that a whole bunch of we're on top of a big pile of bodies But I'd rather be on top than in them. I have no problem with killing dinosaurs I have no problem with the meteor that killed or the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs. I'm happy that it happened It's like the big mammalian air strike from outer space, you know, yeah, it's makes some room in the food chain We got to grow people we got a podcast to do in four billion years I said this bit about this people that I talked to once that we're working to save the Komodo dragon They were going to the Komodo Islands and doing this work make sure the Komodo dragon populations are good and healthy I'm like What why would you want those heartless fucking monsters get a few of them stick them in a zoo shoot the rest of them in the head Are you you're fucking evil? These are even reptiles. Oh, they're so evil tell me tell me why I got a horrible monster I don't know much about the biggest lizards on the planet and they eat water buffalo people anything on the night Oh fuck yeah, they do they even buy by them. They're huge. They're enormous. You never seen a Komodo dragon Pote over Komodo dragons mouth they used to think that they carry botulism. They're saliva That used to be what we thought but now they realize that what happens is the environment that Komodo dragons live in It's so hot and tropical and that a lot of times they're biting into water buffalo and all these different things that are exposed to moisture And it's just the septic nature of their environment because water buffalo is piss and shit in the water that they live in And then when this Komodo dragon bites them he opens up their flesh and the blood gets exposed to all the toxins And then actually it's the teeth waiting for whatever the next bite so it's not There just like discuss discuss the look at it. Look at that image the evil saliva one of them though Bit Sharon stones husband on the foot this dump fuck he got into a cage with a Komodo dragon and he had white socks on and the thing I thought his foot was a rabbit so it clamped down on his foot and wouldn't let go and he almost lost his foot They're it's really they're really let's go back to that pot where he got into A Komodo dragon oh, it's so cute. I would do it if I was in a tank Again a cage with it. I had a samurai sword Fuck out of here those things are horrifying But these people that I met were like really dedicating all of their time and effort and I'm like that is fascinating But those fucking lizards don't give a shit about you buddy and now I can understand it if there's some big ecosystem thing Yes, you know like but they got where the the predators in Australia I think it wasn't then they basically the rabbits just ate the entire continent So I can like if there's some balance and nature thing, you know, I think that's fine, but I am very very glad To to not be around wild animals, you know like when I was working up north we had to be armed Because I mean their bears who might not have had a meal in like a month. Yes, and they don't care I like they'll just they'll just come and rip your face off and eat it and That's you know wolves and all that we really had to be careful out there and this You know so all the people who are like nature is basically cuddly is like that's great That's because you go hiking in Yellowstone on on clearly marked pods when people have cleared all the predators away And you know not even Yellowstone you'll 70 maybe because they're black bears But Alex Honnell do you know he is he's the climber? He's one of the world's best we see on like he's on 60 minutes Yes, yeah, yeah, I saw that one. Yeah, and he was on the podcast I got Yellowstone confused with Yosemite and we're talking about bear death I'm like man bears a fucking died in Yosemite, right? And he was like no no bears are dying. I was I got I didn't know that there's two different I in my head Yellowstone and Yosemite became the same thing Because two people over the last couple of years were killed in Yellowstone by grizzlies And just fucking hikers Yeah, just people wandering around and you run into a bear in the wrong situation and that is a giant 1800 pound monster or 1200 pound or 800 pound. What are the fuck it is? They're bears they're enormous It's a think of a giant dog an 800 pound dog that wants to eat yeah, like it's gonna eat you You can't get away. You can't get away. You can pull from the trees. They can climb up You cannot get away from those guys and I open run up trees. Yeah, he runs straight up a tree And black bears especially can run up a tree like a cat. Yeah, yeah, oh and and I remember being in a tent Again in the middle of nowhere. I was with this Tiny Japanese woman who was like incredibly strong. She was literally like made of muscle. It was his snounding anyway But and we were in this tent and I heard this Oh, wow, you know snuffling around and you know We did all that we hung that the the food and the trees and all that you don't never want any food around Obviously when you're sleeping and this kind of stuff and I mean you literally think this is like this is my last 20 seconds in this planet You know this this is it. You know this thing because you know even if you're armed There's only so much you can do well You have to get off a shot very quickly and you have to hope that it scares the bear away Yeah, because if you just shoot them unless you have a really high-powered rifle like a pistol Shotgun 38 yeah a shotgun's not good enough now I'm gonna kill it. Well, but what it will do is it will annoy him to the point where he killed you quicker Oh, so there won't be a lot of suffering. Oh You know you won't you know it'll rip your own head off and you won't get to see your own better. I'll put in the gun your mouth Probably yeah, that might be the mood but the problem is then you know They can't identify you but dental records because you're you know your teeth is sprayed out all over the forest But so stuff like that gives you a pretty healthy appreciation for Sun the bears killed dogs near the camp and stuff like I mean it's it's seriously dangerous stuff out there and I'm very happy to live in a civilized area where I can go visit nature and nature is absolutely beautiful When it is not trying to kill you. It's like the you know the ocean is beautiful I love scuba diving and snorling that's flying over the coral with the as long as nothing's taking your leg off It's a beautiful beautiful experience But that taking the leg off thing is a pretty important part of the equation and do people forget it who spend a lot of time in cities Yeah, people do forget it that taking your leg off is a real thing Something if to think about when you go swimming anywhere in the world where there sharks You know you might think that it's not going to happen to you because it hasn't happened to that guy or that guy or this person on the surfboard over there Look this person's snorkeling. I'm fine. No, you're not you're rolling the dice You're getting it's like if you go into the woods the idea of like that that somehow None of these millions of sharks are going to avoid you like likely yes Because there's so much real estate But it's like if we we knew that werewolves were real But there was only one of them and it was out in the woods How often would you go in the woods when it was a full moon you would never fucking go in the woods Because you'd go fuck what if I picked the wrong night in the wrong place And I get out there in the wolf man's right there and it eats me Well, the fucking sharks are sharks all day 24 as a day seven days a week 365 days a year The wolf man is only the wolf man once a month and you know, but we you know that we not that terrified of nature because all the kids toys are like cute predators You know like you know All the way if you go down to the woods tonight you're in for a big surprise You know because the teddy bears are having a picnic but the real end of that story is No, isn't it funny that teddy bear is like a con that's that that is so common It's a completely common Only common now. I don't think they had bear toys when bears could kill you You know, I think it's right Now that there's no bears around they can be cute and cuddly and you can have the lion king and all of that because nobody's around Lions, but you know in Africa people still get regularly eaten by lions I bet you they're not a lot of lion toys lying around that are cute and cuddly I bet you're right And if you think about some of the animals that we have What's the the term? Throw Promorphism is that it when you take a person you project human character Listen to a non human thing about like like Tony the tiger there. Great Talking about your children. He's a fucking asshole right to eat. You know why you making him cute They're tigers because we don't have any tigers around there in zoos and you take pictures It's a fun fact about India. There's a place called the cunderbans where tigers have killed 300,000 people over the last 200 years 300,000 people have been killed by tigers in the cunderbans. It's so incredible I had a bit about it on one of my past comedy specials because it was just it's such a ridiculous statistic One tiger killed three men in a boat of five Swim out to the boat killed a man dragged him back to the water to the beach Jump back in the water to another guy hop and did it three times before either got bored or they got away from it Are full. Yeah, I mean they they swim incredibly fast and they're really aggressive They've got these teeth get that can tell where you're of jugular. Yes. They're sensitive. Yeah, I mean the beat Not stuff. Yeah, they adjust. Well, that's where they're designed for you know I mean they are literally designed to clean up anything slow They're there as population control. That's what they're there for Making sure the herd stays strong You know getting rid of the slowest and the sickest and the oldest and keep the herd strong We don't like to think of it that way But again, this is the end in the gang if you gave the tigers a pill and made everything groovy and there's no one need to hunt What would we have well we have nature but you know that the real question is if if we are going to engineer that But what are we gonna do with the end of the world? Yeah, I'm gonna do with the bears and the tigers and the crocodiles Well, I mean of course the natural human predators. Yeah, you know this is weird idea And I think it comes out of religion that I mean there's a couple of things that are problematic Which come out of religion and some of them are obviously kind of obvious But some of them I think are more subtle like the issue of the soul to me is always really interesting like this this in the religious idea And not all religions but a lot of religions You know you have this eternal part if you call the soul which is incorruptible Which can all and so you know when they say you know that he's a bad guy But if you really can if you reach through if you connect with him There's you know, there's good in somewhere and all that kind of stuff I think that's a really dangerous idea and it's scientifically seems to be entirely false You know like people who are sociopaths don't get better. They don't reform. They they will become cunning And they've tried everything they've tried injecting sociopaths with LSD and they try both like well The lids are the cure and they're not Like one in 25 people This is the yeah, I certainly come across them too and these are the human predators and I mean it's fairly easy to Create them if you really traumatize a whole lot of kids then you can like they a lot of them came out of a Chascuse Romania because he banned abortion and a lot of women who would otherwise have had abortions put these kids into these orphanages Where they were fed and taken care of but nobody ever touched them and then I think it was in France There was when this came out a whole bunch of French families adopted these Romanian orphanages kids and they were strangling their cats and they were throwing their other kids out of windows and stuff And they were just and they were comfortable Completely unfixable from the jump. I mean like how old were they when they adopted them? Usually it's within if you do this if it's after two or three years. It's usually irreversible because you know the brain development the development of empathy is like in three years. Yeah, psychobass empathy is It 10 to 12 different brain centers all have to fire in harmony and you also have to develop these things called mirror neurons Which are I think completely fascinating the biological basis of empathy. I don't completely geeky fascinating to me But a sense empathy I think is the most important resource in the world if you have that all other resources Will be taken care of but mirror neurons are if you see someone take a nut shot You go, oh, you know like you kind of get it in your body Those are mirror neurons and you can you can make them or deny them in monkeys very easily Right, I mean if you just give them all the food and drink that they need But you just give them like a Simulated mom like that doesn't actually interact with them and you isolate them and you don't even have to traumatize them You don't have to hit them you don't have to scare them if you do that they get even worse But then they grow up with with no particular empathy because they don't get that sort of back and forth I mean babies are born with it one freaky thing that babies can do is right out of the womb like right when they're born If you stick your tongue out at a baby It will stick its tongue out back at you which is a completely freaky thing to do when you think about it They've never seen a time. They don't know that you have the same but they so if you develop mirror neurons Then you won't get sociopathy because you'll have empathy right and people who spank Fundamentally are acting against empathy and they're teaching the children to act against empathy because you're doing exactly What your child desperately does not want you to do and so you're really screwing with with empathy and so on and so the development of the Non-development of mirror neurons appears to be something that cannot be corrected later in life It's just it's like if you don't get exposed to language between like two and five you just never really learn it Wow, that's so crazy and this is why when I talk about fixing the world or having Apparatized on earth which relative to what we have now. I think we can have it's a multi-generational process because if the kids are screwed up That early it appears to be irreversible and all you can do is manage the symptoms, you know through prison or whatever it is but these human predators It's not in the religious mindset where there's a soul that there's someone good you can get into that that you can connect with is Biologically completely it seems to be again. I'm no expert. It seems to be completely incorrect It's like saying if you got lung cancer throughout your lungs that there's a healthy ghost lung that you just have to connect with the breathe Well, no your lungs are corrupted. They're screwed up. They're they're not there's no healthy backup lungs that there's no healthy backup personality or brain Called the soul but this idea that you can reach through to the most corrupted and destroyed people and somehow reawaken their humanity Which is necessary for religion? You know, you have to have a soul I think it's really a dangerous thing because it it lets us if you have compassion for sociopaths They use it to manipulate and control you And so it's almost like if you're a sociopath you'd love to invent the idea of a soul so that people will try and and help you and then you can manipulate and control them Where's it directly? Nice at their predators then you just steer clear of them. They lose a lot of their power so Well, it's sometimes it's very difficult to find them. It's very difficult to identify them That's one of the problems they can with flash right? Yeah, and there's there's one of the ways that you can is By when people behave around you that seems like really fake and weird It's like they have like a fake weird friendship with you or fake weird interaction with you One of the reasons why they have this fake weird thing is because they don't understand regular friendships Loves and relationships So it all comes off as odd to them because they're doing make believe all the time They're imitating what they've seen around them. They know what's important to other people But they don't feel it is important to themselves. It's the best way to describe it right? Like I mean like a torturer knows what hurts you And likes it, you know, and they've done actually a bunch of studies where they show people and This this I find it's so incomprehensible I try and sort of get it because having empathy for non-empathetic people is it's a tough thing I think it's a necessary process to go through for self protection and I think for the betterment of the world So there these studies where they sort of hook up these these electrodes to people's brains that can measure what's going on in their brains And they show intentional cruelty films Like they show like no cruelty and then accidental cruelty like guy steps on a rake or whatever right and then they show intentional cruelty like guy pretending like stapling and other guys hand or something like that and When people see some people see the intentional cruelty the same happy centers related to orgasm related to just feelings of intense bliss show up because this is sadism taking pleasure in The suffering of others. I mean that is that's anti empathy. That's like well. I you know I know that you're attached to your children So I'm gonna use your attachment to your children to control and bully you or whatever it is You know like you kidnap some guys kids or whatever and this this aspect of of human predation is really important We are not a species We are a whole ecosystem of predator and prey and our lack of ability to differentiate between predator and prey in the human species I think is one of the major roots of hierarchical Brutalities and and wars and all of this kind of stuff and I think we really need to throw away the idea of the the eternal good within us and Recognize that the most dangerous species to human beings or other human beings by far I mean just governments alone in the 20th century Murdered not even including war governments murdered 250 plus million people they can't even get it down to within 10 million people It's a quarter of a billion people murdered just by one human institution populated by sociopaths These are incredibly dangerous people we're talking about bears and stuff and that's very important But the most important and most dangerous predators are human beings and we don't really have a good way of identifying them Other than they're on the ballot. Oh, sorry little anarchist propaganda there, but could you imagine if you had like a bunch of bears That were like really cool and you love to be around them and they're like really fun They do things for you and they help you and they help you move and they provide you a joy Then there's other bears that will just fucking eat you if they find you or it's like that battle saga Galactic a thing like the silence they look like people but they're aliens and this is something that is we really got it as a species Up are like radar for this kind of stuff because imagine if we could see these guys like if they had an I'm just go What if I'm up on their psycho and then it'd be like okay? Well here's someone I'm not gonna lend money to or be friends with or have kids with or you know We could this gene or whatever even if it's genetic we could we could eliminate that within a generation or two But as long as and of course if they're physically attractive or wealthy or powerful as well I mean that just it's like ambrosia for a lot of people, right? It's anyway, so this is sort of a pet thing of mine It's just really help people to understand that there's really bad people out there and even if we say they don't have free will So what you know bears we don't say the bears are morally responsible for eating people But we don't hang out with them, right? So I don't buy that the free will thing of course you're free will this is like how much free will do you have how much Making does your consciousness have yeah, if you believe you don't have free will guess what but then there's a bunch of people Well, there's factors go that go into every decision that you make and those factors are genetic and Environmental and this and that and that and if you factor it all together. It's not about free will It's not about your free decision me. Maybe or maybe not. I mean it's it's a very it's a very slippery argument in both ways on both sides actually yeah, I mean For me because people are always able to find free will and I've given some thought to it And I got a series on YouTube about this free domain It's youtube.com forward slash free domain ready if people want to check it out But to me free will is our capacity to compare Something proposed with an ideal standard that to me is is is really the essence of free will so So composed to an ideal standard meaning that's what you gauge your reactions and actions on Yeah, so that's them so science a proposition about the physical universe We compare it to an ideal standard called scientific verification or something like that more we compare a proposed action to a moral standard Or a moral ideal or something that's the one thing we can do that Nothing else in the universe that we know of seems to be able to do to compare a a a proposed action Like I mean dogs propose an action they all get together and they you know They all birds all fly in one direction or another They but they don't compare it to an ideal and this this comparing things to an ideal I think is the fundamental aspect of Free will that we have and we can either just go through all life and never compare anything that we do to some ideal Standard or we can say about the important things not you know Do I have another sip of coffee but the important stuff will we compare that to some ideal standard now? People do this all the time right? I mean is this moral is this right is this God's will is this with the law? Is it against the law we compare proposed actions to ideal standards in even in school? Do you get a hundred on the test? That's the ideal standard in 50 that's right not good So we're constantly comparing things to an ideal standard And I think that is really the essence of choice that we have and even if it's not an ideal standard We're being inspired by what we deem to be successful behavior whether it's emotionally successful socially successful Whatever career athletics whatever it is we regain some sort of inspiration from that that also enhances our ability to perform the same actions. Yeah, and is that free will? Who is it something else is it a combination of all those things? I think more likely that the argument that there is no free will I think is a little silly because there is but that's not the only thing I think that's what it is I think there's a lot going on when it becomes When when you try to figure out what it is that makes a person to act the way they act We could put you in a situation and something could occur with your daughter for say and you would be Like well Let me explain to you what happened and let me explain to you how I've made these same mistakes myself And this is what I learned from it or you could put a different person in front of a similar four-year-old kid and that person's going What did I tell you get your fucking hands off of that come here sit down I've told you once. I've told you a thousand times Come on You know, what is it that causes one to be you and one to be another person in the same scenario with a completely different result Well, it's no it's comparing to ideal standards right so in the story It's very short about earlier where I was saying my daughter said, you know daddy I contact You know, should we have a standard which is if someone's saying something to you you should really pay attention to them That's the standard right now I've told her about that You know like if she's playing on the iPad and we're trying to have a conversation I say can you turn that off while we chat because you know I don't want you to be distracted She can make so there's a standard that we have And then when we deviate from that standard we try to realign with that standard And I think those are the basically the fundamental choices that we have what what are your standards? So some guys like some guys with parenting Genuinely believes like every time I put out the facts about spanking I just interviewed Dr. Elizabeth Gershof is spanking expert who's given all the facts People always they say well, you know, but kids these days are spanked less and they're running wild And they're having lipstick parties and they you know hooking up and they have no more So they genuinely believe well if I don't hit my kids It's gonna be really bad and I think that our futures are fundamentally written by our deepest values by by that Which we consider the good What your values or your virtues are will be your future like a train track now we can't Change The effects of our ethics, but we can decide which are valid or invalid ethics So I make the case that you know, don't hit your kids non-aggression principle reasoning better parenting better child development All the science behind it. You're a kid's IQ will be better That behavior will be better. Their social skills will be better. There'll be more peaceful and blah blah blah blah I make that case I change people's minds about that like tens of thousands of parents probably hundred to thousands by now Stop spanking as a result of the work that I do and there's tons of people have to do in the same work We give people better ideals Then it's like the the wind changes with a boat. It just they'll turn that way The capacity to evaluate new information and have it change our ideals I think it's the fundamental essence of that a free will And when we can either choose to ignore that information in which case we're just gonna keep doing the same thing as history like a Hamster wheel a revolving door of history all we can evaluate new information and change our behavior according to some new ideal That I think is the only choice we have the people who argue against free will only ever argue with people Which is really interesting when you think about it because they say people are fundamentally Indistinguishable from other complex systems like the weather But you never see somebody arguing with the weather You only ever see people debating or arguing with people like at a guy called into my show recently He was telling me that he said staff you're just like a computer and I said okay, well, why don't you hear? You only ever see people debating or arguing with people like at a guy called into my show recently Who was telling me that he said staff you just like a computer and I said okay Well, why don't you hear here's my computer? You can continue the debate with the computer and he didn't understand what I was talking about He said I'm not gonna talk to your computer I said so you only want to talk to me not the computer and he said well computer doesn't I said I got voice recognition I'll turn it on go ahead Right and I said so you don't want to debate with the computer only with me So you're saying there's something different about me versus the computer and have you ever Yelled at the rain to stop raining or to change the winds direction if it's wind if blowing the wrong way He said no, of course not and I said so you cannot say that people are just like everything else in the universe if you will only ever debate People you have to be accepted There's something fundamentally different with people if you will never debate anything else that you compare people to and that's the challenge of the deterministic argument We are just physics everything has an antecedent cause, but you only ever debate with human beings That's a strange argument I don't understand where you're going with that of course because that human beings the only ones that debate back the whole idea of a debate is You talk and they talk and you differ in opinions But they say that that you you debate back like two television sets pointed at each other And it's all prescriptive there's nothing the new that can come in everything has a prior course based on physics That's what people who believe that there is no free will say that's what you're saying. Yeah But I don't debate with the TV. I know that the TV is going to you know I mean there are idiots who yell at movies, you know, but they don't It's gonna debate in and of itself isn't that that hold debate just in exchange of information and it's Exchange in a controlled system. This is not a human race, but you but it was someone to change their mind right? Well, I think ultimately all human beings are trying to accelerate growth Whether it's financial growth in electoral growth technological innovation I think we're constantly trying to grow and expand things we also fundamentally know that we are imperfect So we will either argue our position or try to learn One of those two things either try to reinforce ourselves on our own decisions as opposed to your decisions Jesus is the Lord and you are in correct sir with your Satan Satan Satan song that you teach to your daughter You know, what is that about? Well, that is about to to organisms inside of a system that agree upon a Dictionary of vocabulary and definitions for things and they're arguing about whose path is a better path But ultimately all of them are trying to be better all of them are trying to improve and there's no real set Guidelines for how to live correctly There's no no one can really prove to you that it's better to be an atheist than it is to be a Christian or it's better to be a person Who likes to exercise and is to be a guy who sits in the couch You sort of have to figure it all out for yourself and along the way you want to justify your own actions and your own decisions by arguing and by by trying to debate so in a sense like saying that humans only argue with humans That doesn't really negate the idea that there is no free will in fact It might actually support it by showing the whole thing is just a system And it is just a mathematical algorithm and inside that algorithm is a thing called ego And ego is the thing that wants you to be correct and wants you to learn and wants you to improve and wants you also to assert dominance and perhaps sexual preference over those around you by showing how clever you can turn a phrase and how Easily you can defuse someone and make them look foolish in front of the rest of the group You know these all these things are perhaps just more evidence that there is no free will I mean arm I'm obviously playing devil's advocate here, but I think inside that controlled system I think it is possible that that could be that could be an argument Let's go because you said something that It's really really important that that I would like to challenge Okay, maybe it's successful or not, but you said nobody can say whether it's better to believe in a deity or not believe in a Daily and so on right what I mean by that is that you can't tell someone is happy being a Christian that it's better to be an atheist They're not gonna believe you look I certainly can't say that you'll be happier being an atheist Right because let's say that they go into atheists and it's gonna cause problems in their family relationships It's gonna cause problems in their community It's gonna cause problems in their church and then they get hit by a bus. They die unhappy I have friend alone there were Mormons starting to rub to my friends who are Mormons for the longest time and then in their 40s They abandon it rough they are they are so that writes about that actually in in his most recent book about meeting up Of the bunch of Mormons and and how they become atheists and just a lot of it from his work Yeah, not of it from his a great guy who's very logical and very smart and a lot of his questions and his his discussions on these things have caused introspective thought and people that perhaps would have just gone along with the program if it wasn't for a guy like Penn Yeah, I think it's very interesting, but I would make the case so Nietzsche the 19th century sure sort of philosopher sort of guy who wrote great aphorisms, but he said that that Socrates basic argument was reason equals virtue equals happiness Right, so if you want to be happy you have to be virtuous. How do you how you purchase? You have to have consistent consistent principles Consistent principles and there's some support in psychology for this in that if you have opposing ideas within your own mind or If you have feelings that say one thing, but your intellect says another Then you are going to be unhappy or another way of putting it is to say that all psychological dysfunction results from Unacknowledged suffering And so for instance like so some people, you know, they beat not by their parents But they're told by their church on a thy mother and thy father So they've got this idea this ideal on a thy mother and they father But they have an emotional response of outrage at having been abused or neglected or or whatever These are contradictions. You've got an ideal that tells you one thing in your heart and your your monkey Splendelling you something else that if you grasp against an animal it's going to react in a negative or hostile way and so when you have contradictions in your mind That is going to produce dysfunction in your life unhappiness in your life and so one of the purposes of philosophy is To say okay, we've got some basic principles Let's keep rolling them forward and try and live as consistently as possible Like if we used opposite words for things half the time it would be impossible to communicate We have to have consistency in our language to a large degree not perfectly of course we have to have consistency in our language to be good at communicating to have any possibility of communicating effectively and The degree to which we can have consistency in our thinking in other words We don't have contradictions. We don't have a value here Like don't hit your wife and then a value here which says hit your children that that's going to produce contradictions and some bring in problems and so the more consistent your thinking is the greater chance you have to be happy and in the same way like if you have a consistent methodology for examining the universe like science you're going to get a lot further than Reading chicken entrails or praying to some non-existent day that you're actually going to have a way of organizing your knowledge about the world To create computers and rocket ships and cars and all that kind of stuff and so the idea is that the more consistent You're thinking the greater chance you have for happiness now that doesn't always mean that you'll achieve it because it's great statement Though the way you're saying it greater chance you'll have for happiness. Yeah, I can nobody Nobody can guarantee anyone happiness right and in fact if you've grown up in an irrational culture and Culture sort of by definition is irrational because if it's not culture its science or or math or logic or something like that then when you achieve the goal of reason and you start working out your beliefs from first principles and being good at philosophy puts you in a lot of conflict with with people around you and of course a lot of power structures fundamentally I think live or feed off an Unacknowledged contradictions right so for me to to use force to take someone else's property is theft for the government to do it Is called taxation and considered a virtue so there's all these contradictions and definitions that we have We hit wives. It's called abuse. We hit children. It's called discipline We just redefine things all the time based upon emotional preferences and prior trauma and The what philosophy does is it says what we got to resolve this stuff We can't just have these little beliefs floating around unattached to each other We need a consistent way of organizing our minds and our values and our decisions and all of that stuff And we can't just make up different values based on the circumstances with the idea being that the more consistent you are the happier You'll be I definitely think that the less contradiction you have in your mind the happier you'll be and it's really hard for a lot of people to Eliminate contradiction because they've made so many rationalizations about their actions They've made so many rationalizations at the past in order to shield themselves from the sting of The that corrective the need to correct behavior need to correct some of the things that you've done that's staying is very difficult for a lot of people to deal with so they They justify or they'll argue louder You know to try to that's you know, I've got a whole series on YouTube called the bomb in the brain which is I don't mean that it's FDR URL dot com forward slash BIB There's huge amounts of science that that really establish how people argue how people argue is You get an emotional trigger like right deep down in your the base of your brain right like where we don't know anything about Civilization right down in the base of our brain you get a fight of flight response and what happens then is You come up with a justification for it afterwards. It's called X post facto justification right after the fact you have an emotional response And then people come up with some frankly bullshit some polysyllabic bullshit to justify their emotional reaction Yeah, and they've actually done studies amazing stuff where They they give people a moral position and they say do you believe in this and then people Say yes, and they will give you great arguments as to why and then they say close the book I want to ask you something else and then the book has some special glue thing and when they open it up It's the opposite moral position and they ask people to reread that statement and defend it Wow Right, so it says I oppose abortion and people say well here's all the reasons I oppose abortion they close the book They talk to them about something else for 50 minutes. They say oh we didn't get the recording right Can you open it and then it says now I oppose abortion and the majority of people like two thirds of people? Will give you great arguments for both and not notice the contract that seems to be the key to Experiencing this fight or flight feeling in the middle of an argument is being completely attached or having your ego attached to ideas or a position If you're not and you treat it as an intellectual puzzle that you can both solve together Yeah, then that stuff doesn't exist. I've had some really fascinating disagreements with very close friends Where we've managed to keep it completely civil but yet explored some really interesting topics But then I've also been involved in conversations with people where they get really insulting like almost immediately if they disagree with you Yeah, like I had an argument with a dude about recent findings in in About the Yeti, you know, they've found that there is this thing that they thought was a Yeti May very well be an ancient bear or at least the DNA from an ancient bear. We have a theme. You know that right? It's like a bear show the bear show Just like bears, you know, we're gonna walk out of this room and just be mold I did some some freak escape from the zoo thing and this is gonna be hugely ironic podcast What was fascinating to me in the middle of this heated argument? Was not that this guy disagreed with my my thoughts that This whole thing was probably a big misunderstanding and there's probably some strange looking bear looks there But it was how aggressive like someone would get about a fucking Yeti Like you're raising your voice You're getting shitty and real snappy and like this is not the way you should get ever with your friends And you're getting this over a fucking Yeti. Yeah, if it's over the ethics of violence or something That's at least an important topic, but whether there's Bigfoot or not well, that'll be that was over It was over fucking DNA evidence. I mean this is all pretty straightforward stuff like you know They've found that there's some What they thought was extinct polar bear some hybrid type of polar bear this they thought is extinct for 40,000 plus years And they've got DNA that came from something that was killed a long time ago Probably I think it was in the 1900 or something and they say oh well this this thing matches Up with this this DNA what we might be dealing with when these people are seeing Yeti's is actually just polar bears, right? You know, it's really simple right? It's just an idea and it's just I didn't do the fucking research He didn't do the fuck of research so like getting upset about it so weird, but but that's what it is It's it triggers that fight or flight thing and then once they realize they're in some sort of a debate and perhaps They don't engage in enough competition Perhaps they don't engage in enough athletic endeavors where they strain their body and get rid of some of that I can use to face you use to failure and you used to losing yeah, that's another thing It's some people do not like to lose at anything like they won't even they won't bowl Because if they lose they get sick, you know, they won't play checkers. They won't do anything But that's I mean isn't that always just childhood stuff Joe I mean isn't that just people you know, they don't like to admit that they're wrong because whenever they would admit that they're wrong There would be mocked or humiliated that happens in school all the time like I had a guy in a friend of mine in junior high school we were in Science class and he used the word orgasm instead of organism I Don't even remember the sentence which is a shame because I bet you it was a really great sentence because any time you put the wood orgasm into a sentence inadvertently It's funny. Yeah. I think it's premature elaboration. Yes. It's the phrase but anytime you do that. It's funny but Literally for the whole year. He was the come guy like he was he was the orgasm guy and it's like how comfortable do you feel making stupid mistakes like that if That is the environment that you're in then you're just not gonna like families will so often stare your type people like you drop three Plates and then for the next 50 years you're the clumsy one, you know, and then you become paranoid about all this kind of stuff Yes, and it becomes something that's in the forefront of your mind. Don't drop the plates I can't drop And then it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy because then people don't remember the million times you carry to play successfully But 20 years later you drop a plate and like oh well He's the clumsy one and people hate being I hate being stereotyped like that if you carry that idea in your head It does create weight and it gets momentum behind it. Yeah, it's with everything like if you're playing a basketball Don't miss a shot. Don't miss a shot. What are you thinking about? You think about missing the shot? You know you think about making it you think about missing it more and you think about making it You see you're feeling the failure already before you've attempted it because it's become a predominant pattern in your way of thinking yeah Yeah, and I'm I mean I'd love to know you know like the twins experiments as someone I would love to know Which parts of me are me and which part of me of your environment or which part of me of genetics like put me somewhere Distinguishable I know I mean but not be fascinating because it would be but it's not I mean you are a series of events that have taken place over 46 years of life and 24 hours in a day and 365 days in a year and just So much is so many calculations and here's an interesting question to you because you Predominantly Apply your trade on the internet how much of an impact has the internet had on who you are as a person Just the the free flowing of information over the last 20 years since we're the same age. Yeah thinking of 994 ish Yeah, where where it really popped out how much of an impact has it had on you? Oh, it's It's big No, it is it is if I'm gonna look at I mean other than learning how to read it's it's the biggest Influence and impact I mean I'm only able to do what I do because of the internet Because the gatekeepers are gone like we can talk to people without gatekeepers that is Like the last time this happened in such a fundamental way was like in the 16th century when Martin Luther Translated the Bible from Latin to the vernacular and then people got to get their hands on the Bible verse before It was all done in in Latin and nobody knew what the hell was going on other what the priest told them they got a hold of the Bible and Basically the texts could speak directly to the people and didn't have to go through it gatekeepers anymore The unfortunate result of that was a couple hundred years of religious warfare which and then again culminated in the separation of church and state Because they just were killing each other and Lutherism and Lutheranism and when gay leaders and Calvinism and and a baptism and all that kind of stuff and a Baptism where you have to have an adult baptism do you know how they did dealt with this in Germany? Oh, you're an anabaptist will drown you yeah because you just into adult baptism I mean it was just brutal one of the reasons that the Nazis had such power was the Germany missed the whole enlightenment because they were just so embroiled in religious warfare I mean this travelers who went through Germany in the 17th and 18th century and said you could barely see a tree without the fruit of a hanging person on it I mean it was that insanely violent a society based upon religious darkness and so they they Notism is like this weird medievalism that made it through the Renaissance in the Enlightenment in Germany and and then had the power of the 20th 20th century technology with all the brutality of Medieval parenting and and brutality so anyway that's where a lot of the strict discipline as well for the the military Discipline the goose stepping all that came from oh and hit the screaming. Yeah, and Alice Millis written great stuff about this like Hitler was was beaten so badly he actually went into a coma once he was beaten so badly was I mean he was just so And and the kids they would hang their babies on hooks in Swathed in bandages that often would have licensed them then the lights would crawl all over the baby's skin and legs and so when he referred to the Jews as Lice It connected with something so primal in the German psyche and I tell you this though to Germans learned an incredible lesson from that My mom is German and when I grew up My cousins would come to visit from Germany and of course we were idiot warmonger British boys because you know we won the war right which meant We lost to socialism, but we won the war and so we were all playing war games My my German friends Cousins would come over and they'd say what we we're not allowed to play with guns We're not allowed to do any of that stuff because they did finally get you know I hope we get this book for some other stupid cataclysm on the planet They finally got that they needed to change their parenting if they didn't want this crazy stuff to continue There's a book I'm reading is an audiobook by Lloyd Dimas called the origins of war in child abuse It's actually available for free at freedom and radio.com where he says basically if you want to know where war comes from You have to focus on child abuse that is where all of this stuff gets laid in and this is you can They've done a huge number of studies Robin grills written a book called parenting for a peaceful world where he traces You know you can tell how quickly Democracy comes to a country by how the prevalence banking is I mean there's incredible things like all all politics to me is an effective of early family experiences of early childhood experiences and to try and understand how Hierarchies can exist without looking at early childhood experiences It's impossible It's like trying to to run the solar system model without putting the sun in the middle it just gets ridiculously complicated and and and so on so Yeah, so I think that's one of the reasons why I continue to focus on this you started with the question about the internet and it Being able to talk directly to people without gatekeepers is an incredible experience and and and is the greatest leap for what I think in human communication and and the possibility of virtue I think is is Unbelievably enhanced by this I agree with you and I also agree with you that I I am unrecognizable to myself of the past Because of the internet and I think my my my understanding I mean you've got one of the biggest shows around I mean that would that have happened without No, I mean no It's impossible who would have never happened. I would never been able to do this I would have been fired a long time ago There's no way I would have been able to do any of the things that I've done online With with some sort of a company backing it and saying this is a good idea No one would have said it's a good idea No no no publicist would have said it's a good idea to say the things I've said no no agent would have advised me to move in that direction Wouldn't have happened it happened naturally it happened on its own But I think that the biggest impact for me is not that I've been able to express myself But that other people have been able to send me information and express themselves to me The the impact of being able to share information online store even wrong things like there's a meme that there's a video that went around that Has gotten massive traction over the past few days. It was a man who was on the news and didn't know the camera was on Didn't know that his microphone was on he was talking about a missing girl and he was saying you know that Hey, if he finds her I would fuck her I'd fuck her right in her pussy hole Like but he was fake and then you see the newscaster go We're sorry for that unfortunate thing But that newscaster was from a previous thing where a woman didn't know that her microphone was on and dropped an f-bomb Just said fuck. Oh fuck and so I'm sorry. Ladies and gentlemen We're having some editorial. We were very sorry that you know editing issues very sorry. You had to hear that well this video has gone You know viral and millions and millions of hidden I don't can't tell you how many people sent it to me on Twitter But within a couple days it resolves itself and people realize always just bullshit. Okay. Here we go So wait, how is it fake? Was it fake? It's just an actor So I pretended and spliced it in he put his footage of him saying this horrible thing But it wasn't really a missing girl was all fake and there's you know the fake Fox broadcast label and all that but it gets exposed It does get exposed and that's what that's what's unique about the times and it's also That something can just spread. It just has to be impactful and interesting with good or bad. I mean, this is an incredible thing Which is happening in America as well where you can actually see bodies of imperialism Right like you you can go online and you can see the bodies of the Iraqis or the bodies of the Afghanistan whatever That's unprecedented. I mean you've never get that through the media. I mean None with that was made illegal to have Bush administration in the United States But even show show coffin couldn't show the coffins let alone the victims of the imperialism and The media I mean there's no law that says you you can't show Iraqi victims of the war Yeah, yeah over a million but nonetheless you will not get this through the mainstream media You'll see the pictures of the guys who died which is also a great tragedy the American soldiers who died But you can't see this and you you can't find out the basic fact that there has been so much radiation damage done to the Iraqi Particularly in Fallujah that up to a third of children are being born with birth defects that people who've gone to study Iraqi Cities where these depleted uranium shells have been used say that they've never seen a more genetically compromised Genetically ruined population the whole world over and the fact that this information is available at the click of a button to me Means that people no longer have the excuse of having been propagandized. You know some poor bastard who who was in Stalinist Russia, you know in the 1950s, you know, okay be a communist or go to the Gulag, you know That that's your choice So he's a communist, but you don't say you're a communist by choice then It's just like the way you it's like you're in the hit the youth you're not see but you're not a bad kid because you're a Nazi That's just what you have to do To survive in the culture, but now that information is so available Nobody can claim anymore at least in the West that they didn't know Because it's so immediately available to everyone at all times that if you don't know now it is an act of choice It is not the result of propaganda. I have a lot more sympathy Like a woman called in my show the other day Then she said, you know, what my dad beat me and my mom didn't do anything about it and a mom grew up under China under Mao and the culture revolution where people were dropping like flies every time they batted their eyelids wrong There's a great story in Salchin eats into the Gulag, Abigail, Alago where some minor Party functionary is given a speech and everyone gets up and is applauding And they're also terrified of being the first person to stop applauding that they just keep applauding and keep applauding until Their hands look like hamburgers and they can't even like it's so incredibly But nobody wants to stop because the first person who stops is our comrade you seem to be less enthusiastic and they're just terrified This is the world that some people live in we don't have that world here in the west and we have access to every kind of Information opposing viewpoints you can go on to Al Jazeera you can find out what American imperialism or British Impairilism looks like or even Canadian imperialism in Afghanistan looks like from the other side So there's a great ripping away of the excuse of propaganda and ignorance and a great settling of moral responsibility on people Yeah, it's it's a very unique time as far as exposing evil and distributing information of very very unique time I don't think there's ever been anything like it and I think you and I are both two perfect examples And also that we can find each other and be able to do this I mean this is what what about how would have this happened? How would have our friendship happen? How would have we have had these three hour conversations? Even if we if we didn't have podcasts and we got to meet each other We'd have to agree to sit down and talk for three hours and then it's like who would benefit from that you and I would certainly benefit from it We would enjoy it, but no one else would get it. It's not it's not like something that would just get out to millions and millions of people like almost Intaneously forever and grow yeah constantly what I last show went to number one on iTunes. Yeah, like I was expecting that to happen because my rap sucks So it's really great that we're doing this because my music career remains stolen the Donald rooms. Yeah, but I think that is is an incredible opportunity It's like you know, we got this this I do a lot of talk about Bitcoin and stuff like that Well, we have the opportunity to have a currency system not controlled by governments You know where there's ways of I mean these things are just unbelievable opportunities for for human communication That doesn't have to go through the prescribed channels and the prescribed gatekeepers and ways of exchanging value I mean you can have a an IPO I don't know in Bitcoin you can have an IPO and you can start a company without having to spend four million dollars on on On the all of the accountants and lawyers that are needed from IPO in the West I mean the things like that just Incredible because we have got to get faster at getting better as a species because our technology is going through the roof human knowledge is doubling every 18 months weapons that are inconceivable to to even a generation or two ago are readily available So be printed and 3d printers. Yeah, and surveillance technologies. I mean God every time we come up with something good The assholes take it and use it against this doesn't that drive you crazy? It's like every time you pull out a gun to fight the mugger the mugger does like this and he has the gun is like damn it Can we have technology that isn't put to the service of assholes? We have to get faster at getting better as a species because our technology is increasing to the point where if we don't get better quickly I don't think we're gonna have much luck staying free. Well, I think we are getting better And I think it is we are trying to catch up to this technological capability that we find ourselves in right now But I think we are I really do I mean it's not just hollow optimism I really do believe that we are getting better I think that we're commenting on the fact that it's not perfect and I think everybody is and I think this Glen green wall that all these different Edward Snowden and those people exposing all of the hypocrisy and government and all the All of that is working towards what ultimately will be a very unique time in history when they look back at this time The birth of the internet will be by far one of the biggest events in the history of the human race And we'll look at all these different growing phases and all these different challenging events that happen and we won't We won't see it as much because we're a part of it right now But I think things are just changing people are more responsible for their actions people more educated Information flows far more freely than ever before it's happening. It's all happening right now But I don't know about you. I mean I know that a lot of what you do is about getting information out to People and I think that's great. I do also think that there's a lot of ethics behind what it is that you do because it's not like You get a whole bunch of KKK members on here Precilitizing about white nationalism. I think you try to get people with good and useful Viewpoints even if it's just mentally stimulating that provotes virtue as well for me I really feel a sense of urgency and I try not to let it you know make every day like a race against evil or something like that But I you know that the the the the the technology of control and surveillance and all of that is is Growing so quickly. I really do feel like the same medium that is can be capable of so much control and surveillance is also what we're using to communicate I feel quite a strong urgency that it's it's a race of us versus them and And this is why like I have like 3,000 shows. I mean it's it's lunatic right? I really do feel because remember freedom in radio where quantity is quality But I really feel so short You have a lot to say I mean you could do 3,000 shows because you have 3,000 shows where the things to say you're not Not one with this. Yeah, if this is the last show without We're good we would you feel that or do you feel that there is I don't feel it's inevitable that the good people win I think that's a lot to do with Really working at getting the message out. I think there's a battle I think there always is and I think that that'll exist because you need a yin to have a yang You need a push and a pull you need an evil and a good you need an ideal to Subscribe to or aspire to and you also need a really negative thing to avoid I've learned personally from the failures of other people and I think that's an important lesson They've learned from people who've gotten hooked on drugs I've learned from people who have ruined their life because of alcoholism or gambling or whatever the fuck it's been I These are all there You've learned from people who've gotten hooked on drugs. I've learned from people who have ruined their life because of alcoholism or gambling or whatever the fuck it's been. I, these are all there also is life lessons and it's a very, very, very, very fascinating trip that we're on. Yeah. I do have a sense of urgency, but for the most part it's really a sense of stimulation, of excitement and of just really excited about. I like to fight. Yes. I think that if I'd been born later, it wouldn't have been as much fun. I like being in the fight where it is now because it seems so overwhelming. Yeah. I mean, what if we got two microphones and one bad haircut and one great polish? Well, we're in the craziest time that a human being is ever existed in and trying to figure as far as like technology and information, trying to figure our way through this, you're going to get these things like the NSA surveillance issue. You're going to get that. When you find out that they're building this gigantic facility in Utah to store all the information and slowly but surely it gets out, they've already started doing it. And then, you know, all of this is how the people remotely. I thought that they have a hundred percent control of it. They could turn your camera on, they could turn your phone on, you don't even see it. You don't even know it's on, any could be heard. It's like, yeah. Well, Amber Lyon told us that when she went to other countries, they wouldn't let anybody talk to them if they had an iPhone. You had to have an Android or some other phone where they could remove the battery or they wouldn't talk to you. Wow. They were like, what do you think we're stupid? Get that fuck on crazy spy device out of here. Like, there's no such thing as an iPhone to them. That's a spy device. You got to have a phone where you can remove the battery and sit down where we know that you're not transmitting this conversation to some nefarious source across the world. Which is what they can do. That is also a part of this weird thing that we're doing. But ultimately, my thoughts are that if I look at the accountability, here's a perfect example. Look at General Petraeus. General Petraeus got caught and removed as the head spy from the CIA being investigated by the FBI. I mean, the FBI found out that he was having this affair and all this jazz with the reporter, the woman who wrote the book about him. But how did that happen? It was cyber. It happened through the very thing that we're all scared of. Where everyone is scared of someone being able to go into your email and find out, oh, look, stuff in mind. You apparently he's got these communist meetings. Yeah. And he wanted to find out what it's all about. We have some information that maybe you've been thinking about overthrowing the government. And then boom, you're in jail. Like, look, I was just talking to theoretical ideas. He's just, I'm an anarchist, but not really. I'm not not raising guns or anything. This is what happened to the head spook. Oh, yeah. No, when someone calls in my show and they say that the name's Jack, I don't say hi to them. I say hi, Jack. Nope. Nope. I say hi, listener. No, because I'm hijack is. Oh, I see that they're going to be. It's good. You're going to get red flag. Yeah. No, and I still do it. But I'm like, I'm conscious of the fact that when I say something is the bomb, you know, this could be pink. You know, it could be flagged in Microsoft and Skype or, you know, in deep with these guys. And it's, you know, it is the hair. I mean, we do have to struggle through this stuff. And I don't feel particularly concerned. I think I fit like with three or four million downloads a month. I think I've hit enough trajectory that, you know, I just can't be targeted in that kind of way very easily anymore. But yeah, definitely at the beginning there was a little bit of, oh, I'm still pretty small. And it's also you have the ability to be honest and express yourself. You can't be like, you can't be silence. Like in the McCarthy era, how did you get your, if you know, they came after you and said you were a communist and you got kicked out of, you know, whatever job you were doing, what are you going to do? You're going to start a blog. We're going to get on, on fucking Twitter and explain yourself in 140 characters. No, you couldn't do a damn thing. Right. Now, you know, if you have a situation where perhaps maybe something comes out where you did say something that you regretted or you did do something in the past that maybe wasn't the best, you could describe it in depth in a show, own it. And it wouldn't be, it would be a complete non issue. And in fact, you'd probably grow from this non issue. And the listeners would grow from the experience of hearing you honestly talk about whatever it is, whether it's, you know, going to some fucking communist meeting. I mean, it's obviously that's not an issue now. So I'm giving McCarthyism terms. But whatever it could be that would be something that they could hold over you. And it's almost, it doesn't matter anymore. You know, it almost doesn't matter. And I believe that where this is heading is a time, whether it's a decade, two, three, what have you, where there are no secrets. And it's probably beginning to be some sort of a technological change in the way we exchange information. Maybe it's some Google glass thing that goes to the next level and becomes an implant, or whatever the fuck it is. I really don't think there's going to be any secrets. I think we're going to laugh one day at the times we used to be able to lie to people. We're going to laugh at the times we used to be able to tell people that you're going to go to some place, but really you went to some other place. There's not going to be that anymore. That your whereabouts will just be information and it's easy to look as a Google search. Well, I think that there's some real benefits to that. You know that there's a whole bunch of lawyers who are now trying to peanut the NSA for data that will exonerate their clients, hopefully, where they had cell phone records or something that will help me exonerate their clients and so on. I mean, I personally would be more than willing to give up where I'm going and what I'm doing and so on to an organization that was actually there to sort of help and protect me. I mean, I was just reading on the judge report the other day. I think it was the FBI or the CIA have just scrubbed from their mission plan anything to do with criminal, like pursuing criminals. Now it's just been entirely basically protecting the powers that be that's so crazy. Really? It's natural though. I mean, scrambling for control. Well, look, the police have no duty to protect. That's been shown many, many times. You have no constitutional right to a jury before the trial of your peers because what is it? 95% of people never get a jury trial in the United States because all they do is they get threatened with insane sentences and they just plea down. I mean, because there's just you've no hope. I mean, they've even said that threatening someone with a life sentence for a minor transgression in getting the plea for something less while threatening them with a life sentence for a minor transgression of the law is not cruel and unusual punishment. It is you can't bribe someone with 50 bucks in the legal system, but you can bribe them with reducing something from 20 years to two years and somehow 18 years is not a bribe. So there is no constitutional right to a trial. There's almost nobody particularly in drug stuff. I mean, people just plea down and go to jail. And a lot of these people are convicted on the hearsay of other people who themselves are giving up whoever they knew in order to get out a crazy jail time and so on. So it is a monster system right now. I mean, this comes back to the whole war in drug stuff, which is just, I mean, so amazingly evil that it's, it's staggers the imagination. I mean, I can't believe and it's so fantastic that that America is finally looking over to the example of Portugal, Portugal 10 years ago decriminalized their drugs. And now they have a 50% reduction in drug use and they actually get addicts help. addicts should get help. It's a medical problem. They need, you know, let's say it's not medical that they got in there. But so what? They're in there. Right. I mean, even drunk drivers need the jaws of life to get out of a car and they get these people, the medical help they need. They don't throw people in jail for personal consumption of mind altering substances like TV isn't one of those. And they actually get people help. But now there's something to get a couple of things here and there where you can go and buy this stuff legally and so on. I mean, thank God. I mean, I thought we were going to be so past what it used to be like before the war on drugs that people like at least with prohibition. It was only what 13 or 14 years in the 30s with prohibition. And even that brought organized crime over to America. I thought we'd have this war on drugs for so long that people would be, would have forgotten what it was like beforehand and it would have just gone on forever. But it does look like there is going to be some relaxation of this stuff, some tentative steps are being taken towards it. And my God, what an incredible thing that's happening because I mean, the majority of people in prison are there for completely nonviolent offenses. Do you know what they did in Colorado with the legal marijuana you're allowed to buy it and sell it retail? The vet was the first guy who bought, right? Yes. That was the first guy who bought. And one day they went, they made over a million dollars. The first day, 12 stores made over a million dollars in Colorado. And by the way, that money is going to be taxed and it's going to be going back to the people and that's going to benefit people. That stimulates the economy. It's actually good and it makes people nicer. It's going to calm a lot of people down. Well, people in a more sensitive mood. So much. I mean, let's say you could just legalize all this stuff tomorrow. What an incredible thing it would be. First of all, that'd be less incentive. One of the reasons people get hooked is because people offer them free drugs because it's so profitable once they are hooked. It's also forbidden. So it seems that it's enticing. One of the things about Holland that's been so fascinating is that their hard drug use is radically down because cannabis is so prevalent and accepted. That. So I actually going to go speak in Amsterdam. I'm speaking with this huge crowd in Amsterdam about crypto currencies in April. I think it's called the next parenthesis. Bitcoin and stuff like that. Why is that crypto? Oh, because it's encrypted. It's anonymous. It's not open clear text. But it was like secret. What kind of secret, right? Yeah. You can't be identified if you take some basic steps in your economic transactions and what a blessing that is for a lot of people, even people who are doing the right stuff. Like a third of the world's economy. A third of the whole world's economy is black or gray market. It's huge. It's so crazy. When people find out that that was a major motivation for the Vietnam War, it's another thing that you can find out on the internet today is how much money was being made by selling heroin. People don't even want to believe that. They're like, oh, come on. You really think that heroin had a lot to do with the Vietnam War for the people who are selling it, certainly fucking did it. And those people made trillions of dollars. Right. Where did that all go? Did that all just disappear? Did it turn to mist? Was it like the super soaker in the 41 below zero air? What the fuck happened? What happened all that money? No, like the copies in Afghanistan. Exactly. The people think that the copies in Afghanistan are completely irrelevant to the voice on. Anyway, it's a whole lot. But yeah, it's a fascinating subject because people automatically want to dismiss it because of the war on drugs and because it's not thought of as a commodity. It's instead thought of as something that's illegal and you just gross and like, oh, drugs, drugs, drugs, drugs are money. And money is what everybody wants. These fucking people that are over there that are trying to extract resources, whether it's in the form of natural gas or whether it's in the form of oil, that same type of thinking. If you think that that same type of thinking doesn't agree or it doesn't work in terms of like trying to make similar amounts of money from illegal drugs, you're crazy. And it's so naive. And drugs are a fantastic way to harass the population. Because the whole idea behind common law is that the law is passive. Like the law doesn't go out looking for problems. Like if you, if you come key my car, then I call up the cops and then like because you've done me wrong, you know, the law leaps into action. The law is never supposed to exist without a complaint, right? And if you know, if you buy drugs from some guy and you like the drugs and he likes your money, there's no complaint. But the law then becomes proactive and it goes out there looking for problems and nobody's complaining. And that's when the law becomes tyrannical. When the law is passive and just waits for a complaint and has clear rules, okay, that's a fairly good thing. When the law goes from reactive to proactive and starts going out there to look, oh, prostitution, oh, gambling, oh, drugs, you know, this is all voluntary consensual stuff. You know, it may not be healthy in excess, but neither a cheesecake. Who gives a shit, right? How about the fact that people are being arrested now for having secret compartments in their car? Yeah, I've read about that. Yeah, not even having drugs, having zero drugs, but having a secret compartment in their car. You're, you, they can strip your car down, search it, even if they find nothing, they're not in trouble. Well, then they get these stupid drugs and if they're dogs, they're completely retarded. I mean, well, who did you find something? They're dogs that go in like this because of the tone of voice of the cop and they suddenly think that this is somehow some justification. No, they're actually very good at training dogs to find drugs. But they can also be encouraged by the policeman who wants to harass someone. They can be if they're trained poorly, but if they react in a very strong way of being in time, they're their sense of smell is impossible for us to even fathom. I don't know how dogs sort up with people. Like a mean-to-me-to-me-to-me-to-me. Yeah, like how they got to love us something fierce. Well, we think of smells, we think of smells a bad thing and they don't. They sniff other dogs shit. Oh, yes, that's true. Maybe that's why they love us as we smell like shit. I do like that. But dogs can actually smell cancer. They can take vials. Yeah, they've trained dogs. They've taken vials of tissue and have cancerous tissue in certain vials and had a whole row of many, many, many choices. And the dog went down the road and went right to it. They went over again. So they can actually smell cancer on people. They can smell sick people. Wow. Yeah, we can't even, I mean, they can smell fear. They can smell adrenaline rushes. They can smell when you're thinking about doing something. There's a lot of reasons to have those senses, the senses of smell. I mean, animals have them in a very, very strong way. If animals smell you in the woods, they fucking run. I mean, they smell you. They know your intentions almost. I mean, there's information that comes out of your scent that we just, our noses are stupid and those are always pot roast. Oh, I smell gas. You know, our noses are broken. They're so clumsy. A great analogy for how incompetent our noses are in comparison to a dog is skunks. Because we can smell skunk scent in one part per billion. We can smell skunk scent, a little bit of spray, way the fuck down the block. And we were like, what is that? That's how a dog is. For everything. Dog can smell everything like that. They can smell all kinds of things. A tiny amounts of it in the air. And they find people in the woods, man. Like I run through the woods and a dog knows where the guy went based on his body touching the ground in certain places. Wow. And it's your fucking shoe and your shoe. How much scent is your shoe giving off, but the dog can smell that and find you. What you, I thought about this sometimes. I was like, I was just, I went to exercise before the show and I said my wife was laying out some stuff because she, you know, has a better clothing sense. I'd be here in like a mess t-shirt. Like this. Yeah. Something like that. Cade man coffee. And I was thinking, would you, if you could like just, I don't know, like 10 seconds in someone else's consciousness. Do you think that would be like the most, or 10 seconds in a dog's brain? I think it would just be like if I could do that and come back and not be insane. Yeah. Like I think, you know, we were talking about, I would totally do that. Like if I could sit there in my wife's brain for 10 seconds or a half a day or whatever, I think that would be so amazing. You know, to just with her experiences, different than mine. Another species. Mm. I could love it to be in a shock's brain to be in it. I just, if I could do that and come back and not be completely mental, but still retain the memory of it, I don't know. It's kind of an idle thought, but I think it would be really, really fascinating. You know what they should do? They should, if they do ever come up with that technology, they should force it on the people at SeaWorld and get killer whales in mind and stick it in a person and have them by your license leg off. Oh, just have them. If I didn't like hearing so much, you bastards. Just what kind of torture they're existing in a daily basis. Yeah, make them, make them do it and see if they come back and still want to run SeaWorld. I don't know, or zoos or anything like that. Of course, zoos we have to have because it's the only place you'll let Komodo dragons exist. That's it. Or some rich guys yard, some rich guys got a big, big, big fan. With a big Komodo size, like barbecue there for special guests, right? Well, that's my thoughts on animals. You know, I've always said, I do love nature much as you do. I do respect nature. I'm fine. Absolutely beautiful and fascinating, amazing. And I talk about wolves and bears and all this different shit, like if I hate them all, but I'm absolutely thrilled that they exist. I find it amazing. But one of the things that people who are more interested in animals than they are people, I mean, there's a lot of animal lovers that say just unbelievably ridiculous things sometimes. Like we can't find cures for childhood cancers because of bunnies. Like they can test up on bunnies. Yeah. You know, these are the people whose kids have never been sick. You know, like I don't care how many bunnies it takes make much. I mean, sorry, you know, I have a little bit more allegiance to the, you know, genetic closeness. I think that is a bit too much. I think a bit too much that way. I mean, human life is still pretty significant relative to animals. Well, yeah, I can't about hunting people. I'm on team people. I've always been on team biped. Yeah, it doesn't mean I hate the other teams. But if the shit goes down, I'm with the people. Rabbits start fucking running through the streets, killing babies. I'm shooting rabbits. You know, absolutely. I'm not going to say, well, you know, they were here first, you know, I think you should totally sell tickets to your dreams. Because you know, you're going to dream about that tonight. Like you end that dream about giving roses to the guy. Now you can have a dream about rabbits running through the streets, killing people. It's possible. Yeah. It's very possible. Damn it. Bunnies. Well, I've had many, many animal dreams. I have a vast amount of respect for animals. And I've also been around and I've seen a couple of mountain lions. I've been around a lot of coyotes. Cuyotes are the creepiest fuckers ever. You know, I was in my yard the other day. And I think it was a coyote. Might have been a mountain lion, but something was chasing a deer. And I just randomly happened to be there when it happened. And this deer was fucking big, you know, like, you know, maybe a hundred plus pounds. Whatever it was, because I could hear it running. And I'm outside two o'clock in the morning. I'm just chilling outside. And I just happened to be really close to this happening. So this animal just fucking runs through the bad eyes. Like, white eyes. I didn't see it. I saw silhouette because it was really dark out. But it was fucking running and it was heavy. And behind it was something chasing it, something trying to eat it. And I pretty sure was a coyote. And when I just feel that and hear that and know that, like, I find it thrilling, I find it fascinating, but I also find it quite terrifying. Oh, yeah. That's the food chain. There's something about as big as me. And it's running away from something about as big as me. Oh, yeah. And I mean, if grass could make horror movies, they'd all be called the deer. You know, the fucking cows. I didn't come. He didn't even kill him. He just bit the top of his head off. Oh, the bleeding and screaming and some ripped out by the roots. Yeah. Yeah. Monsters. Yeah. You're right. You're right. 100%. I think we're out of time. I think we didn't do it. We did it in the whole course. Yeah. We just watched it really. Yeah. We didn't talk about a lot of things that I wanted to talk about. Quick. It always feels quick. Man. Yeah. I could tell him. You know, I said, tell my girlfriends. You know, it's longer than it feels. Yeah. These conversations are fascinating. You know, they do feel quick. They go by. But three hours seems to be the right amount. You don't have any, like, chantrum, because people are watching. They watch it live. Yeah. Yeah. This is live on you stream right now. Right now. You stream dot TV forward slash Joe Rogan. It's live right now. So there's a bunch of people watching live. More people will catch it on YouTube. But the most will see it either as an MP3. And they're going to say like relative to the last show, this has delicious buttery audio. Yeah. There's more deliciousness to it for sure. We had some caveman coffee with butter. This time we were stuck in our style. Right. And just TV, too, put in a pitch for the Stevie. Yeah. Because that is like cocaine for my sugar to my sweet tooth. Yeah. That's just fantastic. And it's not, it's not dangerous. I mean, you need a tiny amount of it to sweeten things as well. And it doesn't spike your sugar. It doesn't fuck with your insulin levels. It's actually not bad for you. Listen, man, we got to do this more often. I really enjoy this very much. I'll be back here in March. Maybe we're doing another one. Fuck. Yeah. Down ladies and gentlemen. Thank you, sir. Really appreciate it. Thank you so much. You can catch stuff online at freedomrainradio.com. And it's FDRurl.com forward slash iTunes for my feed. And you might as well give my, I'm sure most of my listeners know your feed as well. But freedomrain radio is your iTunes feed. Yeah. It's FDRurl.com forward slash freedomrain radio will get people to the iTunes feed. It's a redirect. And you have a vast amount of content out there. Incredible amount. Incredible amount. All that sort of stuff. So I hope people will check it out. And I think that's a really good video as well. And that's one of the things that I really admire about what you do. Like whenever something happens in the news, it's controversial. You have a very poignant point about it. You'll do this long 20 minute really in depth discussion of these things. Just you know editing standing right in front of a camera. And that takes a lot of balls. And it's also very impressive. It's great stuff. And you have great points. I really enjoy talking to you. So Stefan Mullen, you ladies and gentlemen. And you could find him on Twitter. Your Twitter is the same. Stefan Mullen. But it's also Stefan Mullen, you right? Yeah. That's what I, yeah, you follow me, buddy. I'm looking at you right now. All right. So there's a few of the media ones. I'm looking at on the screen. That seems true. Is there a freedom in radio one as well? I think there is. Mike is going to kill me if I get. Oh, you have a guy that he does it. I do all my Twitter shit. So if the guy, the guy got mad at you, put up dick pictures and shit. No, if I get the feed wrong, he's going to be like, I can't believe you do this in seven years. And you can't give people your Twitter feed. What the hell is wrong with you? You can't spell something. I'm like, I'm sorry. I'm just pretty. Yeah. M-O-L-Y-N-E-U-X. That's a crafting aim, ladies and gentlemen. And if it's an F, not a PH, S-E-F, S-N-Frank, A-N-F. Yeah. Freedomaneradio.com is where people should go. They get free books and podcasts and no commercials and all that kind of stuff. All right. Comedy wise, I will be at the stand up live in Phoenix this weekend with the lovely and talented Tom Segura. Very excited about that. And Chicago. I go see Joe Rogan. Like, you gave me tickets to the last live show. It's like gut-bustingly funny. Like, you have to go. It's just, it's incredible. It's like an ab workout. You come out with Tia's in your eyes and ripples in your stomach. I'm glad you had a good time, man. Thanks to our sponsors as well. Thank you to Loomosity, Loomosity, which is one of our favorite sponsors. It is literally a gym online for your fucking brain. Go there, check it out, get in there. It says, do not talk about any direct benefits you've experienced since playing Loomosity. Hm, don't talk about direct benefits. I won't talk about direct benefits, but I'll tell you I enjoy it. I like it. It's also very easy to do and fun. So go to Loomosity.com and enjoy the shit out of that, ladies and gentlemen. What else can I tell you about Loomosity? That's all I'm supposed to tell you, I think. Squarespace.com. That's our other one. is our favorite website when it comes to doing things like creating a website of your own online. I do not think there is a better choice. Squarespace.com, they can create a real, you can create a really slick, professional looking website for yourself. You can do it all online. Go to squarespace.com, enter in the code, Joe, in the number one, that's Joe, and the number one for the month of January and you will save 10% off your first purchase. And we're also doing a contest at Squarespace. So if you use the hashtag JRE Squarespace and tweet them one of your websites, you can win some cool shit. Thanks also to onit.com. That's O-N-N-I-T. Makers of Alpha Brain and Shroom Tech Sport and all that goodness. So there, use the code word, Rogan and save yourself 10% off any and all supplements. Tomorrow we'll be back with author Scott Sigler, very cool guy and very interesting guy and was fun talking to him the last time. And then on Wednesday, Dr. Mark Gordon is going to talk to us about traumatic brain injuries and hormones and all kinds of cool shit. So we will see you soon. Big love and big kiss and go fuck yourself. All right. Bye.