So you're running for governor of Florida. Why are you doing that? I'm doing it because I love my state. My fourth generation Floridian and I gotta tell you Tucker, it's really hard to be an American in America these days. It's really hard for Floridians who quite literally put the state on the map. They're not being forced out of the state because they can't afford to live here anymore. All while illegal immigrants still get the free stuff from the Biden years. All while H1B's still coming to our state and take jobs that belong to Americans here in Florida. And then I think the last straw was this idea of Washington DC negotiating a trade deal with China and then 600,000 foreign students are going to come to our universities. Maybe a third of them to Florida colleges where their taxpayer funded universities are going to have to give up their seats from Florida kids from Charlotte County or Lee County to kids from Shanghai and Beijing. It didn't make any sense. And so I'm running because I'm the only that's literally true. Literally. That's part of the current framework. This bilateral framework between the US and China right now is the DC is now as a concession to the Chinese and this terrafore that we're going to have to accept 600,000 Chinese foreign students at our schools. And you think you're getting 200,000 in Florida. We could get 200,000 here in Florida and they would go to state. That's a university of Florida state. You see FUSF now I think it's easy to get lost in all those numbers, but just take one kid from a small fishing village in Florida and say, hold on, your ability to go to a horticulture program at the University of Florida has now been put on pause. Your entire life has been shelved because we need to have a grand negotiating strategy with China and tariffs and the ARM's race. It's destroying lives here in Florida. It's just the latest analogy of we're losing sight of what the America first was. So that's for sure. So that means, I mean, I guess this is obvious, but I haven't talked to through a really thought of through. So that would mean that there's no preference given to the American born whose family's been paying taxes to support the school. And I should say in Florida, the best schools in Florida are public universities. It's the largest and the best. Right. So university of Florida, number one, I think I want to get in trouble. But I mean, I'm just like, yes, hardest to get into. So it's not like they're all going to go to some boutique liberal arts college and pay a hundred grand a year to write Middlebury or something. They're going to be taking spots at the public universities that are there to serve the children of taxpayers of Florida. That's exactly right. Who will not receive preference over them? Correct. In fact, we'll be inferior to them in a sense because when you have this DC mandate coming down, this says, hey, because of our grand strategy with China, because the US China, the Sino-US relationship is on the line, wink, wink, nod, nod, in order to maintain data on with Beijing and Xi Jinping, we need this kid to get in. And it's not going to ever be a direct order, but it's going to be implied in the zeitgeist that those pesky Americans, the ones that paid to build this university, yes, they deserve. And forget this idea of fairness and who deserves what? Just objectively speaking, Florida kids who grew up here know the state best. When they graduate, they'll stay in this stage. They'll build businesses here. They'll hunt here. They'll raise families here. And when you deny them that ability to do all of that, then what's the point? That is a very distressing thing. And that's happening. It's happening. What has been the posture of state government? Like what's the governor's office say about that? There's been nothing so far. I think governor's stance has been a great governor, especially during COVID after COVID standing at the end. Yes, I agree with that. The indoctrination in our schools, which maybe is the only silver lining from COVID is all the parents actually knew what was going on in the classroom. The white guilt lessons, you know, so the white kids, we don't want the teachers telling the white kids to apologize. And we don't want the teachers also telling the black kids that there's something somehow wrong with that and they're systemically oppressed and they can never make it. You know, my posture on all of this is I think it's conservative. We have to stop playing defense, stop wagging the finger at things we don't like and start actually having concrete falsifiable solutions to the service issue of China. Here's my solution very simple. On day one, my first executive order as governor next January is to raise tuition on all foreign students to $1 million a year. So talker when they can't pay their out and our kids are back in their destinies, their lives restored at our great colleges. In the legislature can you can do that by executive order. Sure executive order. Oh, that's clever. Yeah, because foreign students pay full freight typically, right? And unless you're in a legal alien and which it's subsidized, but rich foreigners send their kids to school in America and displace Americans. Correct. Why should say they pay full freight relative in that moment to what the tuition is relative to the end state student? Right. Think about the end state student 18 years old, probably work to job in Florida, live their whole life, their parents live their whole life there possibly. So all of those taxes that they paid over their 18 years, their parents 45 years collectively built that university, funded dormitories, janitors, professors, of course, the chief DEI officer, right? All of that was funded. And so it is full freight in an instantaneous sense. But if you take a holistic view, the kid who just got here from Shenzhen who doesn't know what a Florida orange choose to write, none of that can't possibly both in an economic sense. But I think not to sound gay, but in a spiritual sense, yes, you know, like in a spiritual sense does not represent our state and our heritage. It's the opposite of gay actually. No, I agree with you absolutely and completely. And that's by the way how civilization forms its culture is for education, right? And you can't educate the world. That's not your job. And in fact, it's counterproductive to having a distinct culture. So that's what inspired you to get in. I think that was the last straw to tell you the truth because I met with a lot of college students in my life before this, which is to say four and a half weeks ago. I've been running an investment firm called Azoria that actually launched at all places at Mar-a-Lago last December 2024. Kevin Roberts was there, President Trump, Kathy Wood. The firm was based on this idea that instead of channeling money into companies that hate America, why don't we channel money into companies that unapologetically stand for American values like meritocracy, like color blindness. Yeah. So in 2025, I'm proud to say we channeled up to $40 million of investor capital in companies that were doing the crazy thing of not hiring on race and gender and hiring on skill and merit. And my company, Azoria, it's actually, it's ETF got delisted by our board of trustees. supposed to be independent, but it got delisted because we submitted an amendment to them saying we wanted to now exclude companies that abuse the H1B program. We said, look, this abuse is systematic. It is systemic. It's hurting American workers. And we gave them a five page research paper that said it's actually hurting the bottom line of these companies because they're bringing in cheap foreign slave labor that doesn't actually add to the synergy of the company. It leads to higher attrition. It breaks down productivity, etc. And their response was, you're a racist. And they delisted our fund. And who have this? The board of trustees of the title financial group in October, just nine days after saying, hey, here's our formal amendment to broaden the scope of our investment fund to not just exclude companies that are doing the DEI stuff, but actually exclude companies that are doing something that's far more insidious, which is you're a white guy. No, you don't get a job. We want an Indian guy to do it for half the price. And ethnic cartels form within companies that hire within the ethnicity. That's the opposite of what this country promises. Right. And they gaslight us and say, all the white men hiring officers are only hiring white men. Absolutely not. That's a lie. It's not a single HR manner. It's just a white male country that led in the rest of the world. So clearly, we know that's not true. Clearly. Yeah. And it's all based on the slanderous lie of systemic racism. The only systemic racism in America is against white Christian men. I'm aware. That's interesting. And it's interesting to hear you say that as a gubernatorial candidate because even six months ago hearing that from aspiring politician would have been totally shocking. And it does seem like maybe because of you and people like you saying it more just like who could disagree with that. Yeah. I think for me, I was in a small town called Frostproof in southern Polk County. Your viewers may know Grady Judd is the most famous sheriff here in Florida. I know Grady Judd. Yeah. And so I was down in Frostproof. And this was a community that was teeming with life just 15, 20 years ago. The peak of our citrus industry was the 2005 harvest 230 million boxes of citrus. This last season only 14 million. And this was predominantly a white man's industry. And when I went there and I saw what used to be a small movie theater now a dollar general would used to be a family owned grocery store. Now some weird perverted liquor store. When I see entire towns across my state, whether it's Frostproof, a hokey, belglade, can now point more hate. Yeah. And the primary victims of what is effectively this America last globalism that is prioritized other nations and other corporations interest over our own people. It really does hit hard that we have been sold a bag of goods and the biggest victims and all of it are actually predominantly white men to be completely honest. I mean, the victim would not to be a victim, but the victim is very far reaching. But if you want to flip the caste system over, you'd be hard pressed to find someone more oppressed in my state right now than a rural white Christian man who relied on cattle, on citrus, on manufacturing. My own dad was a tree trimmer for 20 years. The devastating Haitian earthquake happened in January of 2010. And then it was this brilliant idea from a guy named Barack Hussein Obama to let 100 Haitians who were here illegally just stay here and get work authorization. Now of course they can't become SAT tutors. So what happens? They do manual labor like tree trimming. You know, my dad has lost his business of 20 years through no fault of his own. But because the open border legitimized that labor and now I'm living on food stamps with my parents who are on the brink of bankruptcy. Thank God we didn't have to go that far. But that is a real concern. And I felt that in my own community quite literally in my own family. The New Year is a chance to get your priorities in order and sleep ought to be at the top of that list. If you take care of yourself by getting a good rest, you're fully yourself. You can serve people. That's why we recommend Beam. Everyone who works on the show uses this American company to help them rest at night. And unlike the junk pushed by big pharma, Beam's Dream powder is clean and no fillers. No weird synthetic stuff you can't pronounce. Just real healthy ingredients help you fall asleep fast and stay asleep through the night. So you wake up, you feel sharp, you focus ready to face and dominate your day. Beam's Dream powder has already improved over 28 million nights of sleep by their calculation. A bunch have been on our staff. So trust us, give this stuff a shot. Beam is giving the show's listeners a fresh discount start the year. Visit shopbeam.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker to get up to 40% off Beam's Dream powder. Only available at this price until it sells out shopbeam.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker. You'll be thankful you did. I can see why that radicalized you. It radicalizes me just hearing it. What happened in citrus and Florida? Like the groves have been torn up. It's gone. It's dead. Greening. I can't get a straight answer on that exactly. USDA is part of it. Trade deals are part of it. Do you have any idea what happened? So it's not to sound vapid, but it is a multifaceted issue. The proximate cause was greening that really hit 0.6. 0.7 just knocked citrus out. I think greening this quite coincidentally from China of all places, and not Wuhan this time. Right. This infestation that led to the premature falling of fruit, citrus fruit, whether it's Donaldson or Orange, Tangela, whatever, off these trees. And you can't sell that fruit. If it falls off early. And so that's obviously the proximate cause. And I think it's again, it's like most conservatives. I'm not going to sit here. I mean, just blame China for everything. I think the ultimate systemic cause is Democrats and dare I say Republicans and Tallahassee just stopped caring. I mean, look, this destroyed an entire industry. 220 million down to 14 million boxes in higher communities decimated, not just citrus, but all the little mom and pop businesses, the diner, the family owned grocery store, the little movie feeder, Dao Zhan. The interest was Florida was on the license plate. It's still it. Well, there's nothing, something else in the license plate now is it that you know it's a foreign flag. I've also said it's Florida governor. There's going to be no foreign flags thrown on our government buildings or in our state license. Don't ask you that. That had another country's flag went up on your license plate, but I'll ask you in a second. Sure. But citrus was at the very center of Florida's economy and its culture for it was 100 years, 100%. And I grew up in Broward County, which is obviously a very urban place now, but where I grew up in Davian in West Broward near the Everglades, we had citrus growths out there when I was a kid. And so you could quite literally go out like a flamingo gardens and you could smell, you could smell that orange scent on a crisp. It was a wonderful day. And it is perhaps the sickest analogy that yes in a proximate sense, China caused this, but much like COVID Tucker, it wasn't China. It was the government apathy and difference and an intentional sabotage of our country against its own people. So true. I'm not going to sit here and blame Xi Jinping. He's doing what he thinks is best for his country. And that means screwing us over. I guess that's it. I can't sit here and say, look, the Chinese are guilty of the fentanyl crisis. These precursors come from interior of China, get shipped to Mexico, get pressed and defend null pills and send across the southern border. But really it is our leaders that have the ultimate responsibility. They're the last line of defense. So I think as Republicans, we need to grow up and stop blaming all of our problems and embracing this left wing victim's hodelature. And so look, China, this China that here's my solution is Florida governor. Any scientist in the world who wants to develop a strand of citrus that is impervious to greening, we're going to pay you $1 billion cash. If you can prove and we'll grow it and we'll do it for 18 months. If you take the best scientist in the world and they may be in Iran of all places, it doesn't matter. If there's a scientist or a group of scientists in the world who want to step up and actually solve a problem that has torn a thunder in higher communities. Unemployed men and women, hollowed out entire towns across my state. We're going to pay you $1 billion because what that industry represented, that would merely be an investment in bringing back the number one thing that put my state on the map. No, that is absolutely right. And they tore up the groves that took year, takes years for an orange tree to go from seedling to fruit bearing and they tore them up. They tore them out of the ground. They burned them. That's really a metaphor for so much. So I want to ask with the Foreign Flag thing, I always admired to Santa certainly during COVID. I thought he was just a remarkable leader, interviewed him many times. I know him and his wife. And it was the foreign policy stuff that made me wonder, like, what is this and how controlled is he by Ken Griffin and the rest of his donors? And then he had this moment where he signed a hate speech law. Out of the country, he flew to a foreign country, Israel, to sign a hate speech law for Florida. And I thought, well, this is obviously unconstitutional. It's immoral, but it's also part of an elaborate humiliation ritual where you have to go not just like enslaved your own people with a hate speech law, which that is a slavery. But you have to go kiss someone else's wall to show your obedience and I was like, I'm out. Like how did that happen? Well, it started like most things. Terrible things start here in Florida with Randy fine. Randy fine, quite literally. The genocide guy. Yeah, the genocide guy. The star boy, God's a kids guy. I can't even believe he's real. So how do what do you have to do? So she introduced this law, which effectively criminalized anti-Semitism in Florida. You know, look, Tucker, I think you and I and your viewers recognize that any form of religious hatred should be condemned unequivocally. Well, of course. Yeah, I have condemned it. I've condemned attacking people for being Muslim with their kids' revel too. Right. I was called as a hottie for that. I'm against all of it and I'm certainly opposed to the anti-Christian hate from, which is perhaps most virulent. That's for sure. So no, I'm of course, I'm totally on a Christian. I'm opposed to that, but you can't criminalize attitudes. Every person's free to have his own attitudes ugly as they may be period. Correct. And the issue is if you look at if you look at the statutory definition of anti-Semitism here in Florida, which is 1010.5 in our state statute, it actually says that criticizing the Jewish state that would be Israel holding them to a double standard, denying them their place on the world's stage. That's literally in state statute, 1010. It's against the law to criticize Israel. Think about that. So if you're a college student at FSU and you're having an earnest good faith debate with someone who sympathizes with these really cause you with the Palestinian cause whatever the case says. And one of you says Netanyahu is a war criminal or Israel is committing genocide. You could literally be punished and expelled from your taxpayer funded university by that. And that is messed up. It is unconstitutional. Totally. It's on a Maricah Sea. It's totally an American. And of course, the Republicans and Democrats in Tallahassee got along with it because they're donors wanted them to get along with it. And so Randy fine is the one who introduced that. I'm just dead. And it was his idea to have it signed in Israel. Why would DeSantis who is smart if nothing, not a warm person obviously, but he's definitely not stupid? Why would he go along with something like that? That's a great question. What, you know, I hold the governor to the incredible work that he did during COVID. I mean, to education, all of that. I think that what's quite telling just recent events is maybe you heard a foreign leader was here in Florida last week. One Benjamin Netanyahu is a visit to the United States. The criminal is a total criminal. He's a depraved little man to be completely honest. And he was here and all of this Ashlee Moody Bernie Moreno all came down to meet with him. The governor didn't. Governor DeSantis didn't, but the lieutenant governor, Jay Collins, did. And so I think it's easy for us to go back and say, you know, why did the governor do this? That are the other several years ago. But at this moment in time when the governor had the opportunity to meet with Netanyahu, seems like he deliberately chose not to, which was an absolutely wise decision. But Jay Collins did meet with him, which is actually rather interesting because 40 hours before that meeting happened is really media said that I am a quote threat that I am a bigger threat to Israel than Donald Trump's who is. I am you. Yeah. How old are you? I'm 31. Well, congratulations for being an existential threat to a nation state because you're running for governor. They really said that. I said that. And because I pushed out a policy that was actually quite popular with almost everybody. And it is the fact that Florida lends Israel $385 million as we sit here today. And so what I said is that a day one is governor executive order number two would be to fully divest all foreign bonds of any country. And there's only one country that we invest in abroad. And that's Israel. $185 million. You know what really got them is I said, I would then take the $385 million and create a statewide down payment assistance program for young married couples because we have to protect home ownership. So young folks across our state can buy a place to live, get married and have kids. Okay. We've got my vote. That's all I needed to hear. Sorry. Amen. Amen. What's the smart way to protect your house? Is it wait till a burglar smashes a window and wanders around the living room terrifying your kids or is it be preventing bad people from breaking into your house in the first place? Well, obviously it's be the most security companies don't seem to know this. They react to invaders after they've gotten into your house. No. Simply safe does the opposite the obvious. It stops criminals before they get inside is proactive, not reactive. Simply safe cameras, spot threats alert live agents talk directly to intruders. Hey, you're on camera. Get out now. They either bolts or the cops show up fast. They're no long term contracts don't hit in fees. You can cancel it whenever you want. Named best home security by US News and World Report five years in a row plus 60 days of money back guarantee. Simply safe is simple. Takes minutes to set up no tech wizard-addicted. The app lets you monitor everything from anywhere. Cameras are crystal clear. The rapid response provides total peace of mind, especially when you're on the road. This month only take 50% off any new system. This is one of the best prices you will ever see for simply safe. Don't miss it. Visit simply safe.com slash Tucker again. That's simply safe.com slash Tucker lock in your discount. There is no safe like simply safe. But what? Okay, so now I'm even more confused. I mean, I'm in Florida pretty regularly. I was not aware that the state of Florida is an investor in Israel. Like pension fund. Why? Well, don't do it. What is Florida have to do with Israel? It's so far away. So I actually was a government bond trader in a different life, which is say three or four years ago. And so I traded government bonds and interest rate futures and all of that stuff. And so what happened was after the tragedy that was October 7th and unequivocally was a judgment. Of course, Florida State government, state chief financial officer Jimmy Petronis who's now in Congress, he announced that to stand with Israel, we were going to start buying tens of millions, which became hundreds of millions of dollars in Israeli bonds. This was a purely political decision. It wasn't a decision that says, hey, the yield, the rate of return on Israeli debt is actually quite high. So we should buy some. No, it was to stand in solidarity with a foreign country. We are going to take taxpayer money and lend it in the form of a sovereign government bond purchase. They weren't even hiding how nakedly political they were. And just for a moment, I just want to. But what about the pensioners who rely on the returns of those bonds to fund their retirement or the people of Florida, don't they? Isn't their fiduciary duty of the legislature to look out for their interest or is it only about helping BB? The latter. Truly. I mean, you're right. And by the way, and I say this to someone who was a fiduciary as an investor, yes, think about just for a moment. A country is going to war is currently being confronted by a soon to be nuclear power in Iran, they say, is escalating tensions with all of its neighbors just objectively forget what country that is. And now you think it's a good time to compromise your fiduciary response. But what do you buy their government debt? I mean, can you imagine someone saying that seems like a good long term, best of it, right? Can you imagine someone saying like whoever they are and saying like we just invaded Iraq in 03, we should just stand with Iraq and buy their bonds like forget who Saddam Hussein was like, why would it be a good idea to buy Iraqi government bonds? Right. And by the way, they don't offer a terrible amount of interest. Actually Israeli bonds often yield less than US treasuries. No way. Yeah. So it's not like they were yielding 20% and they were actually an objectively good decision for our pensioners. No, it was a nakedly political position without any risk reward. It was all risk and no reward to appease the Israeli government. And don't. You're sort of understand. Florida. So there are a lot of very rich, very active donors in Florida. Whose support is real also? Why don't they send their money? I don't understand. Like if you're a billionaire, why are you pressuring some poor low IQ Florida politician to spend taxpayer money in a foreign country when you could just send your own money to a foreign country? I actually think it is sadistic. I think so. I think it's actually symbolic because you're right. A large hedge fund in Miami or Palm Beach, I mean, there would be nothing to buy $380 million of Israeli bonds. They could have leverage. It would be done one day. But it's the symbolism of the solidarity. And by the way, the Florida State pension framework prohibits all foreign government bond purchases with one exception. Israel. So it is serious. Literally prohibited in their investment framework that you cannot buy the bonds of any country, Luxembourg, Switzerland, the UK, and those actually may be good investments. But Israel for, and their own words to stand in solidarity with them after October 7th, we decided to send $385 million. And that's why it's Florida governor. I'm going to divest that full 385 and then start a statewide with that money, a statewide down payment assistance program. Because right now you got young couples across the state who were renting. They're staring down the prospect of the 50 year mortgage. They can't feel like they have any equity in the 50 year mortgage. So that's the craziest thing I remember. That's the solution to the affordability crisis. It's just turn everyone into a renter. Yeah. It's just imposing usury on us. Of course, I knew the answer to my own question, but it's just so grotesque. It's hard to believe that's real. But I think this is the, I think this is the frustration, not with the president, but with a lot of his advisors is there are real concerns about affordability in my state. And number one is homeownership. If you can't buy a home, can you get married? If you can't get married, can you have kids? If you can't have kids, then what on earth is the point Tucker? Exactly. Right. And so I think the president instinctively recognizes that we have to solve this problem. But the solution isn't to go from 30 years of debt slavery to 50 years. So you can save $100 a month. I mean, my dad and I did the math. And for the average home here in Florida, a 50 year mortgage would mean that if you paid $250,000 to the mortgage servicer, you would own precisely $18,000 of equity in your home. This is literally what was called out biblically. Well, we were warned as it was. That's correct. And so we have to be very honest about the system that they're creating. You know, I was kind of skeptical. I think in 15 and 16 in the world economic forum trotted out this the year is 2030 and you will own nothing. We're rapidly racing toward that today. And people are getting off on it. And actually like in a sexual sadistic way. I totally agree. We are, I think, cocked to the point that we have to bend over. We can't own anything. We can't have jobs in our country anymore. And if we ask questions about why we sent $385 million of I stand up as a candidate for governor, I am smeared by the effectively the state media of Israel and called a threat to their country. Well, you are a threat actually because, for example, I didn't know that I didn't know that the state of Florida's pension fund had invested $300 million in Israeli bonds. They know the only country that the state's allowed to buy bonds from. And I mean, I didn't know any of that. So just saying that out loud is a massive threat. I think all of this stuff happens because people don't know it's happening. And they're kind of lulled like cattle into a trance. Don't you think? That's right. So the genocide guy is the one who came up with the hate speech law. Now, was he a member of Congress then? State state representatives. State Randy fine. Yeah, State House. Have you talked to him? Well, he called me the other day actually. The genocide guy called him. Yeah, the genocide guy called me. He woke me up at like 7 a.m. That's never a good day. He was really jealous. The genocide guy calls and wakes you up. He was breathing rather heavily. I bet he was. I think he was in a car. I heard some cheese that's rumbling around in the backseat. I know that sound talker. I know the difference. She's in a Pringle. I do. I do. But gosh. So he calls me and says, I hear you're running against Byron. And I said, by the way, Byron Donald will be Byron Donald. So it goes with many names. We have H1, Byron, APAC, Shakur. We can get them that later. But I hear you're running against Byron Donald. And I said, yeah, I'm thinking about it. I'm thinking about it, Congressman. And he said, well, you know, you should know that it's not very nice to Byron. If you did that as I don't care what's nice to Byron, Congressman. I'm fighting for my state. My state is getting sold off in pieces by the property developers. He's getting sold off what were once Citrus Groves and cattle ranches are now going to be scam altmen's next AI data center. That's not what we stand for here in Florida. And some for 42 minutes he proceeds to call me out. And I'm just, I'm brushing my teeth. I'm on mute. I just let him talk. But it was very clear. And this is before I had formally announced, but it was publicly talked about that I was seriously considering running that he's sitting member of Congress in Washington, DC at the time was taking 42 minutes out of his day, not to talk to a constituent about one of their needs, but to intimidate me into not challenging. I think he was trying to intimidate you. I think so. It didn't work. I mean, if he laughs at the murder of children, I guess I shouldn't be surprised. Right. Wow. Do you see a power in the state? Really? He has power in the sense that he's the only, he was the only Jewish Republican in Florida in the state, how state Senate he of course then went. Really, he has power in the sense that he's the only, he was the only Jewish Republican in Florida in the state House, state Senate. He of course then when Mike Waltz got appointed to national security adviser and did such a brilliant job there, his seat was vacant and then Randy Fine quickly moved into the district and decided to run for Congress after quite literally two months beforehand being elected to the state Senate after having served in the state House. And that's why I'm proud to support my friend Aaron Baker who's now running against Randy Fine, primarying him. So fine, it's not even from the district now, he's not. He's from Brevard County down in Melbourne. How did he get to see how did he win? A lot of strings and of course the President came in and endorsed him as well, but a lot of very powerful people pulled strings and it's actually a very deep red district that he only ended up winning by five points which just shows you how deeply detested he is by the people of Florida's sixth congressional district. Well, yeah, I mean, if members of Congress shouldn't endorse genocide or laugh at the murder of children, no, that's disqualified. Right. Quite literally starboard away when there was an image, this is July of 2025, an image of children starving. His answer was starve away. A sitting member. I call this speaker the house from that happened and I don't get involved in anything really, but I said, I don't know how you can have this guy in the Republican party. I'm not going to vote for that. I never vote for a party that endorses killing kids. Why would I do that? I'm a human being. But George Santos got some Botox and he gets expelled. Let me think about that for a second, right? Oh, so starve away. It's everything that we have to be against. That's right. I think whichever side of that conflict, and I think most Americans, they resonate with the words of President Trump as you want the killing to stop. Whether it's in New York, Russia, Israel, it doesn't matter. If I was a Jewish Israeli Zionist, I would still feel that way. You can't ever laugh at the death of children. It's totally disqualifying to the point where he was literally disavowed by APAC. Yeah, literally disavowed by APAC of all groups. Speaking of which, Mary Madels and his already announced that she's funding a war chest against me, told that to end me. Why news last month? Against you? Against me, called me out by name, where modern, they did the meme talker, where literally monitoring the situation is what was said. And Miss Adel sin will be raising a war chest against Mr. Fishback. Miriam Adel sin is spending against you. Yes. And she's backing Byron. Byron. And that's what you call him APAC Shakur, among other reasons. So it's the second part of it for other reasons. I wouldn't call, I wouldn't call Randy APAC Shakur. That is just too funny. You don't need to be an economist to see what's happening. The dollar is in trouble. It's getting weaker. It's sad, but we're not in charge of it. So we have to respond appropriately in ways to protect our families. When paper money dies, it's going to be replaced by programmable digital currency or gold. Gold survives. The same Americans who think they're protecting themselves with gold or the ones getting ripped off by big gold dealers. After we left corporate media, we got offered tens of millions of dollars to promote gold companies. I think that money to spend that much on marketing because they're scamming their customers. We didn't want anything to do with that. So we saw it on an honest broker and together we formed a precious metals company that you can actually trust. It's called battalion metals. At battalionmetals.com, we publish actual spot prices or totally transparent about the vig what we take and we treat everyone with honesty. So if you've been watching what's happening, you know, it's not just about money. It's about sovereignty and holding something that endures and cannot be manipulated or taken from you. So if you've been waiting for the right time to act, this is it. Visit battalionmetals.com. How is he responded to APAC's Shakur? Well, his campaign called me racist. Not for that comment because I called him a slave to his donors. And I said, with all due respect, I'll stop calling you a slave if you give the money back. The $45 million you gave to your donor, that your donors gave you. $45 million in a primer that was uncontested until five weeks ago. No way. Five million dollars in an uncontested primary until five weeks ago until I enter. And that was all to encourage him to make Florida better, apparently. And his idea of making Florida better in his own words, he wants to quote, speed up the construction of AI data centers. His words. He said in a private meeting with donors, I have a friend of mine who is there. And he said, what do you think about fish backs proposal to ban blackstone from buying single family homes and forcing us to rent as opposed to own? And what Byron told the donor in that meeting is that blackstone bailed the economy. They saved us in the financial crisis. They deserve to be able to buy those homes. That's capitalism. That was his response. And I say, look, the goal here is we need to look out for our own people when a family of four is getting outbid by 1,500 bucks by a private equity firm that's taken Chinese money at the capital gains rate as opposed to the rate that you and I pay in everyone else pays. Half they pay half the tax we have. Carried interest. 20%. And he thinks that because of what blackstone did, which they didn't actually do, what blackstone allegedly did in 2008 gives them cover to run rough shot over all of us and to take homes from under our feet. And this is not a hypothetical thing. This is happening right now. I understand that. Byron said that to a donor. Because what I have said, executive order number three is that I would ban blackstone, any private equity firm, any Airbnb speculator, and any foreign national from buying a single family home in this state of Florida. You don't get to have a right to our homes. If you were I were to go to Canada right now and buy a single family home, we would legally be prohibited from doing so. Because say what you want about Trudeau or Carney, I guess they got the memo that Canadian, that Canada is for Canadians. America's for Americans. And I don't think it's okay that a Chinese national or Russian national or an Israeli national can come here and out a bit of family that's known in this state for two, three generations. And say, you know what, that home that you wanted to buy to get married to your wife and to have three kids, that's not available anymore because a foreign national wants to vacation here for five weeks out of the year. Man, you're spinning me up. Getting mad, just hearing this. What kind of reaction do you get when you say that? Very positive. I'll tell you what I bet you do. Well, I get a very positive reaction because I think and you've pointed this out, I would love to speak to you, and I'm fast because you recognized that America first is not owned exclusively in any party. Of course not. In fact, if you went out and pulled that very question, that framework that you put out, which is the American government should exclusively look out for the interests of its citizens, 90% of not just Republicans, literally everyone would agree with that. Yes. And so what I was amazed by is we had a meet and greet in Tampa Bay this past weekend and we had 50 or so people RSVP over 200 showed up and a dozen on their way out said, I wasn't even a Republican. I'm an independent, I'm a Democrat. I am changing my party affiliation so I can vote for you in the primary because just like South Carolina, I had Paul on recently, just like South Carolina, Florida is a red state. The next governor, mathematically, will be a Republican Trump won the state by 13, Ron DeSantis by 19. The next governor is going to be a Republican. The question is what kind of Republican Tucker? Yeah. I mean, if it's the Republican who laughs at dead children, I'm not voting Republican. I'm not going to ever vote for anyone like that. Anyone who's pro death, who's against human dignity for hate speech laws, who doesn't think that providing the next generation of chance to get married and have kids in own home. If you're not on board with that, then you have nothing in common with you. I don't care what you call yourself. That's right. I think this idea of the party labels is become a whole of mirrors. That's for sure. What you see is what you get. By the way, Byron Donalds, as of right now, still endorses Randy Find's reelection bid, despite that star. Oh my god. And they tried to cancel you for having a conversation with a certain someone. He's literally endorsing a member of Congress who told innocent children who were literally starving on video to starve away. That tells you everything you need to know about my opponent, Byron Donalds. I know Byron and I've always gotten along with him. He's super cheerful. I didn't realize. Is he ideological? I've never detected that. No. It's what I call him a slave. Yeah. What did, and they called you a racist for that? They did. Which is actually quite interesting because I got a call from the foundational black American society here in Florida who reminded me that Byron's mother is Jamaican. He is Panamanian and they found it quite insulting in their words that he would try to claim victimhood of slavery. That's not a single descendant of American slaves and his family. I like those foundational guys. They're so good. Reek, Nashid, and I mean, I agree with everything. But like, I they've got a perspective. If your family's been here 400 years and the descendants of a lot of American slaves or families have been here 400 years. I don't know. I think that gives all listen to you. Like you've got a point of view that is legitimate, I think. Yeah. And they're unequivocally heritage Americans. That's for sure 100% definitely heritage Americans if anyone is. And you know, someone rolls in from Ghana and like, you know, gets an MSNBC slot and starts telling you speaking on behalf of black people. It's like shut up, honey. You've got nothing to do with this. Right. That's a fair perspective. Right. I think. And so it's good to actually see them call them out for that. That's actually cultural appropriation. A pretty strong slavery. I totally agree. And the Douglas slavery was real. I mean, I don't think Republicans ever want to really whitewash that is real. Right. But for blackers slavery. We're against it. Whether it's in the, you know, West Bank or here or anywhere. Yeah, against it. And so for Byron's group, his team to call me and essentially our entire supporting base, racists for saying that you're a slave when quite literally took $45 million. You won't tell us what you agreed to to take that money this early in a primary, which is unprecedented. You know this how unprecedented that kind of money is in an unceded, desperate primary until now. But secondarily to actually go out and try to gaslight us and think that you're just one of those guys that has been here, you know, since the early 1800s and your family was in the struggle too, you're not. And it's a very interesting term that the foundational black Americans use. It's called the tether. They're tethering these tethers like Byron Donalds. They come here literally one generation in and they try to just sit around and act so folksy that we're all part of the same struggle and we're all down on our, and we need to fight against no, you just got here, dude. Like the Haitians like the guys from Ghana who just got here, you don't get to just be a part of our system and then lecture us about how our country went wrong. Well, and if you're a Republican, supposedly conservative Republican to throw around the term racist, I mean, that's what I personally speak for myself. I voted against that in November last year. Right. I don't like that style of non argument. Just dismiss someone off the top. You're a bad person. I don't have to respond to your specific charge against me. I'm too old for that. Yeah. I thought we were, are we opposed to that identity politics? 100%. And I'll tell you the, the identity politics of the right is probably the greatest ever been, but it's actually codified into law, which is as scary as notice that, right? You know, say what you want, but left wing identity politics never criminalized being a racist to a black person in that sense. Like there was never a hate speech law against, which would have been unjust to call out a black person or black culture or anything. Right. I think that's deplorable to single out any, I think as a Christian, I would, right. Of course condemn now, of course, but it's interesting that there's only a hate speech law for one particular foreign nation as opposed to anything. And I'm against them entirely because they're blatantly unconstitutional. They violate the first. Of course. But it's interesting that right wing identity politics has gotten to this point where anti-Semitic is just determined. I was, I got a call from the Sun Central editorial board. They were interviewing me the other day. And they said it's just fascinating. This is the paper of record in South Florida. My childhood paper in Fort Lauderdale. And they asked me, why did you put out an anti-Semitic proposal to divest the $385 million dollars? So how is it anti-Semitic to bring back money, our money that was foolishly sent over to not buy sovereign bonds like what? Which actually have a subpar return given the geopolitical risk premium on offer in Israel right now if we're going to be completely honest, right? What they actually said that to you. They actually said that. And I just challenged the entire bonds or you're a Nazi is that's kind of the trade where you're a Nazi. And by the way, think about this, Tucker. So bonkers, I can't. What's actually anti-Semitic because this $385 million statewide down payment assistance program, this would of course go to any Florida resident who is young and married. So the ironic thing is that actually opposing it if anything would be anti-Semitic because they're going to be young Jewish couples. Of course. Who are ready to buy a home, start a family and live out the American dream here on the Sunshine State. And so it's amazing that we've gotten to this point of debate and discourse in America where the ad hominem attack precludes the debate from even happening. If you want to have an honest earnest debate about buying Israeli bonds, fine, I welcome that debate. But don't sit here and call American citizens anti-Semitic for opposing a third of a billion dollars being shipped overseas to fund some stupid war. I totally agree. And it is kind of crazy if you think about I've got nothing against Miriam Adelson personally I know her. But I mean, she's an Israeli. And Donald Trump said in his remarks on television in the Kinesse, too hard you care about Israel more than the United States, which is her right. But how is she a huge player in my country, not her country, my country's politics? Like how is that allowed? There was some Chinese guy and he was pretty open about carrying a lot more about the CCP than he cares about the United States. It would not be cool to take money from him. And that person would not be allowed to get on TV and be like, I don't like what you're saying about my actual country. Therefore, I'm going to drown you in gambling money from China. Yeah. Yeah. Well, can you imagine like, what is going on? Why do we think this is normal? Talk about foreign interference in our elections. But it's a two tiered system of foreign interference because remember Jack Motham Ali Bob, very well, right? Can you actually jack Motham was running around telling NBC News he was going to fund political candidates? Well, exactly. How outraged he would literally get investigated by the DOJ on some made up money laundering of yours. Yes, that is right. Move some common the wrong way and it's suddenly wire fraud under the commerce clause, right? But he about it. Can you imagine how repulse we would all rightly be if Jack Ma or some Ukrainian or Russian oligarch was openly flagrantly being involved in US politics? It's totally bonkers. So when you call his Byron taking money from a pack. Yes. So that's why a pack should work. Yes. I just like to factual with these things. Because it's very funny. Did that go over well? It went over very well. And went over very well. And people like it. I think people want. I don't try to take myself too seriously. And I think we're not allowed to. We're not allowed to. Gen Z was such an important part of the president's victory last year. Yes. And they feel betrayed by a lot of these Trump advisors and what they've chosen to prioritize. Yeah, I can see why. And when I've met them and I've met them where they are at their universities, whether it's UF a couple weeks ago, albeit FSU and just a couple weeks from now, their number one frustration is that, look, they don't want to be lectured anymore. They got a degree. They got good grades. They got good test scores. They didn't study gender studies or black intersectionality. They did the stem thing that Republicans told them to do. Yeah, learn to code. Learn to code. And now they say, you know what? Amazon, Google, FedEx, no, no, those jobs aren't available for you. You pesky Americans. You want paid time off. You want to go to church on Sunday. We're going to give those jobs to an entire new class of foreign serfs known as the Indians and the Chinese. And we're not going to even interview you for those positions. They don't even pretend that the Chinese or the Indians are smarter. They're not. They don't speak our language. They have no skin in their name. They're not smart. They're not at all on them. And so the issue then becomes do we actually have a labor market that is utterly rigged against American citizens? The answer is yes. And you know that by virtue of the H1B program, these tech companies, it's not as if they've stopped hiring generally. They've stopped hiring Americans because they can bring in all this cheap foreign labor. My belief is that a market based wage is always going to attract the best labor. Right, agree. 100%. That's the promise of the market, right? It is. And someone like Ben Shapiro to come out at Amfest and one of the side panels and he said, I want white men to stop complaining and get off the couch because there are jobs that are available. No, no, no, no, no, here's the truth, Ben. When you say that, you say the Americans won't work these jobs, no Ben Shapiro. They won't work these jobs at the slave sub market wages that you are offering them. You offer someone here in my state an honest wage for an honest day's work. They'll take that every single time and they'll show up, but they'll take off on Sunday to praise our Christian Lord. It's funny to see I never mentioned Ben Shapiro because I don't think about him very often, but on those moments where you see what somebody really thinks, if you talk long enough, you reveal what you really think. It's always been my view. Ben Shapiro's total disdain and loathing for white Christian men. Every bit as real, every bit as bristling with hostility as any kind of college, democratic socialist of America left us. Yes, it's exactly the same. It's just like he just hates them. It hits the why. So it's probably because, I mean, there's a lot of reasons, but I think that entire class of people doesn't have a real solution. And in fact, it's profited on the demise of all of this. And it's not just young white men. It's young black women, literally, studied engineering and said, you know what? I want to go get a job working on this bridge. I know that job. That's not available for you anymore. That job was given to an Indian. It's actually effectively DEI for Indians in the name of capitalism. No, just to it. Right? And I think this is a part of a bigger debate that's happening within the party. They call it a civil war. I call it a genuine good spirited debate is if we are saying that we're principled conservatives, then it begs the question from where do we draw these principles? Exactly. Is it from the American Enterprise Institute? Is it from Ron and McDaniel's handbook on conservative principles? Or is it from our Christian Bible? Is it from our Constitution or Declaration of Independence? The Federalist Papers. And I think this idea of the free market. I think the free market is a great place to get to the destination. But the destination is not a free market. Tucker, we don't get to say here and say, well, our people are suffering and they're unemployed and they're addicted to fentanyl and they can't have kids and they can't own a home and there's 50 years of usury. But you know what? We got a free market and we have the freest market in the world. We have the freest market in the world. No, if the goal is a free market, Tucker, there'd be a slave auction happening outside right now. Of course there's supply, there's demand, there's an equilibrium. My view in the America First Movement is our North Star should not be a free market but a free people. And when I say free people, I mean American citizens, I don't mean the H1Bs, I don't mean the Haitians on TPS and I sure as heck, I sure as heck don't mean any corporation that wants to come here and plan a flag and say that our goal is to boost profit margins and stock price and all of a sudden, all that matters is not whether you can raise a a family or buy a home but the GDP beat expectations on your Bloomberg terminal. Exactly right. That's exactly right. Can I say something? Because I know to the extent this will be seen and criticized, I'm sure that people will say, but this guy was in a sex scandal and you didn't mention it. I just, I'm not asking you in response to this. I just want to tell you my reasoning on it. So the second you were deemed a threat, they sent people out and tried to call you a sex criminal. You've not been charged any sex crime that I know of and if you're a sex criminal, I hope you go to jail and if you're not, I hope they stop saying it. But a lot of people are pushing that have no basis. I just, I don't want to attack anyone in particular, but it's pretty unbelievable that some of the people pushing that would accuse somebody else of having an unorthodox sex life. I think it's shocking actually given what I know. So I hope they'll stop doing that because they have no basis for doing that and that's why I'm not bringing it up. So I just want to say that. Thank you, Tucker. Sorry, it makes me mad. Well, that level of hypocrisy is too much. That's Pharisee level hypocrisy. Can't have that. It is. And you know, the truth is that unlike a certain someone who deleted social media recently because he couldn't take the heat, I recognize that my entire life is going to be blown open that there is a guy who's taking pictures of me outside of my house the other day. People taking videos of me at a ball. It's going to happen. And I welcome it. I welcome that. I think if you're going to run the third largest state, you're going to control it. The life of effectively 23 and a half million people here in Florida, you should have to be an open book. But on that particular point, if you'll allow me just to address it, of course nowadays false accusations against men are all too common. Yeah. Those accusations were brought before a judge in Florida's second judicial circuit. And after two lengthy hearings, I was fully exonerated. So don't take my word for it. There was seven hours of hearing time, evidence, all of that. And a judge said, you know what? Not credible. No evidence to support it. Mr. Fishback, I apologize effectively and you're exonerated. And so I think the silver lining to this particular attack against me is that it's already gone through due process. And the fact that it's coming out now, I think shows that our campaign, our vision is a real threat to the deep establishment interests that have hijacked our state. But if all things to hit you on by those people, it's a, it's a, you know, that enraged me. Like if you're going to accuse someone else of having a weird sex life, you better have a pretty normal sex life. And if you don't, you shouldn't do that. That's really too much hypocrisy for me. So the other attack that I have seen against you is that your views have changed. Yeah. And the response I have seen for me was, oh yeah, they have. So which is a great response, I think. My views have changed completely. So I'm with you. Yeah. Tell me how your views and why your views changed. I would start on this issue of the economy first and foremost because I dropped out of college in 2015 to start a hedge fund. And I did that for five years. Really? Yeah. Good phrase. So I was a macro trader, which meant that I was always fascinated with geopolitics. I was a high school debate kid for four years and changed my life. I had a stutter or I wasn't as confident speaking publicly and turns out going to high school debate tournament every other weekend for four years will turn that around pretty quickly. Yes. Anyway, was that Marjorie Stomondogl's high school in Parkland in 2009 where we actually debated an assault weapon span, an assault weapon span. That's all files. But yeah, group in Broward County and my career has been as an investor looking at the world as a macro investor saying, how is the Fed going to screw this up next? Looking at what happened with COVID, the supply chain, the supply chain lockdowns, the massive fiscal transfers, the stimulus that was going into the economy, oftentimes to the lowest income folks, which had the highest propensity to spend that was clearly going to cause inflation alongside the money printing from the Fed upwards of $5 trillion. And so those are types of trades that I put on as an investor. And so I really viewed a lot of this world from quite literally the perch of a Bloomberg terminal. So when I was saying, looking at GDP expectations on a Bloomberg, that was me for 10 years, I spent a lot more time on the ground. I started a nonprofit called Incubate Debate to offer free high school debate leagues all across my state from Pensacola to Miami. And when I really got to travel these hollowed out places that were once teaming with life, booming with industry, I saw how detached that world was from this Bloomberg terminal where I had seen GDP and inflation and consumer spending. Yes. And said, I respect President Trump. When I hear about another trillion dollars coming in from Nvidia, I guess the obvious question is how does that help a single dad who lost his job five years ago and hasn't been able to get back on his feet? What are we optimizing for? Is the goal GDP or is the goal, as I think my friend Nathan Hablestott from new founding says, is the goal the ultimate economic statistic these days, which is what percentage of 30 year old men own their home and are married? So you think about your entire economic policy framework around that question. And I do, right? And so if the question is, well, we build this AI data center. I don't know. Does it help 30 year old men get married or buy their home? The answer would obviously be no because it employs 50 people who are all foreign laborers for the most part. That doesn't help. But if we're going to revitalize citrus here in Florida, if we're going to actually build out local businesses and help people get on their feet and create local great paying jobs and N the H1B scam and ban blacks don't. If we focus on those economic policies with the end goal being 30 year old men or more likely on the margin to buy a home and get married as a result of this policy, then sign me up. And so my distortion was look, I spent much of my 20s going to events by the Brookings Institution and AI and heritage and learning about the economy through that vantage point. And so guilty is charged. I think my views really, I voted for Trump proudly in 2016. I've always been a Republican for whatever that's worth quite literally since high school when I registered to vote in junior or high school. Didn't vote junior or high school. I don't want anyone to think I'm committing voter fraud. But you're not the only one. But my views, I think if I were to give one reason, I think X and everyone talks about X, but I want to talk about it in a very specific way to my life. I think it's hard to watch something and get really red-pilled or nationalist-pilled. I think you have to have a steady stream of objective factual information. Yeah. For me, my grandmother was your monologues in 2020 quite literally. And we bonded over those. For me the last year or so, it's been following AF post, this X account that just puts out 30, 40 posts today. Kind of punchy, kind of funny, but really factually grounded news about what's happening, whether it's a company announcing H1B hires. And they editorialize in the sense that if Amazon announces that they're laying off 30,000 people, they won't just print that headline like the Wall Street Journal editorial board will, those global issues. They will print that headline, but also contextualize it by saying that Amazon also just brought on 10,000 H1Bs. So they have no issue firing our people, but they will bring on foreign labor and not apologize for it. And so when it counts like AF post actually give us the full context around something which the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal would never do, I really appreciate that. I think for me on the issue, which I get the biggest pushback on is Israel, right? How you wrote for Barry White, you wrote for the free press. I wrote an article about high school debate going woke in 2023, which I'm really proud of. It was the basis for my nonprofit really growing to the next level because there were literally high school debate tournaments that were taxpayer funded here in Florida. They're totally young black girl before a speech about President Biden's foreign policy track record that if she mentioned Donald Trump's name, she would be disqualified in a public school. We had one judge in writing saying in writing Tucker, I am a Marxist, Leninist, Maoist. And if you criticize any of the following subjects, you are automatically disqualified. One judge wants the far is to say again, in writing, not here say literally in writing that. Which tells you everything about the world of high school debate in academia. But it's really personal to me because high school debate changed my life and it always was a marketplace of ideas until this guy named Trump came down the escalator. One judge said, if we're debating immigration and you refer to them as illegal, I will end the debate, give you the loss and lecture you, lecture you, because I will not have you making the debate space unsafe. And so I called, emailed, called called a Barry Weiss, because I knew the free press was kind of in this business of publishing edgy pieces about how institutions had been high to act in this as in 2023. And I said, I had this crazy story. I'm a former high school debate champion. I have this crazy story about how high school debate has gone woken my solution to it, which is my nonprofit and she published it and went bonkers. And so I think people are looking at that and saying, well, you were aligned with Barry Weiss. And I think to their credit to that thing, I did put out a post when her book came out about anti-Semitism because after October 7th, I think a lot of people, I saw what was happening on college campuses and said, that's wrong. Not because it was exclusively focused on Jewish students, but any black lesbian with red hair running into a math class saying like free Palestine and white men need to apologize for the alleged sins of their ancestors. That's wrong. I guess I was led to believe that that was all part of this anti-Semitism thing. I called it out thinking it was anti-Semitism, but really it was anti-Americanism. Right with it. That's wrong. I guess I was led to believe that that was all part of this anti-Semitism thing. I called it out thinking it was anti-Semitism, but really it was anti-Americanism. It was anti-Christianism. That's for sure. And my views on Israel changed in for two reasons. I was invited on one of these paid trips to Israel as a young business professional. And I very quickly found out what it was. It was a propaganda trip and what I was told that I couldn't go certain places on my own or had to follow a very simple script when I left about what I would be. I'd have to clear my experiences to share them online. Yeah. And I said, I'm not doing that. I'm not I'm happy to go to a foreign country, but I'm not doing it on your dime and have to pair it out some script that was approved by APAC. That was the first straw when I kind of became a little bit more skeptical. But there was this young man named Mohammed Ibrahim is a 16 year old kid from right here in Florida. And he went to visit family in the West Bank. February. And he was accused without any evidence of throwing a rock at an IDF vehicle. Didn't hurt anybody, but he was accused of it. So as a result of that accusation, he was put in an Israeli military prison without any due process, no trial for eight months. He lost 27 pounds and contracted scabies. And I committed the capital crime. Wait, wait, is he an American citizen? Yes. How can a proxy state that we pay for in prison and American citizen with that? How to process for eight months? That's a great question. And to the folks on the other side, I would say, I'm going to hold the Israel to the same standard. Do you want me to hold Israel too? Do you say that the only democracy in the Middle East? Well, democracies are underpinned by a basic adherence to the rule of law. And you don't get to take anyone, but least of all our citizens and who are teenagers and imprison them for eight months. And then Randy fine, that was half of the point of his call was to call me anti-Semitic. He said, well, you didn't tweet about the hostages enough. And I said, Randy, what would have been the correct number of tweets on the hostages that were given me license to talk about this young American citizen. But because he's a Muslim, because he's a Muslim to them, he is a second class citizen. I said, look, I don't care what he is. He's an American citizen. He grew up two and a half hours from where I did. I went and met with the family. And I put out a video that I actually texted the president directly. And I said, we have to do something about this. Yeah. One of the principles I'll never give up is you shouldn't be allowed to come here in a port. You're disgusting little ethnic conflicts into my country and making the focus of my foreign policy. And I would say that to any immigrant, Cuba, Venezuela, Israel doesn't matter. You may have had a thousand year war with some other tribe, but that's not our problem. And we don't do that here. And I think the Muslim hate Muslim, you know, that's what we think with that's about. Exactly. My dad showed me a video while we were on the way over here of a black pastor who I think rightly focused on the one nation under God and our pledge of allegiance. And you think about that for a moment. If you come here and to truly pledge your allegiance to our flag, it means you are committing to the one singular nation. Of course. Not to import a generational multi-generational feud between different nations. So when you come here, whether you're Jewish, most it doesn't matter. And you say and you stand for that pledge. And it's sad that we don't do that in our schools anymore. I'll change that as governor as well. That it is a basic precondition that if you go to a public school, that you do attest that we are one nation under God. That's not really debatable. And so I think it's important because if you've got different the Haitians and the Dominicans hate each other for some reason, there's a feud going on with different Muslim groups and all of that. And I say, look, if you're going to come here at a minimum, you have to commit to the whole one nation thing at an absolute minimum. And I can't think of a better way. And maybe that's why there's this insistence, this reluctance. They're so low to actually stand for our pledge. I always thought of a Tucker as they were trying to be righteous and it was kind of like their version of bending the knee. Right? It's they actually don't believe in what the pledge is. Oh, at all. At all. Like, well, we don't want to be compelled into something or we don't believe in chauvinism or whatever. It is quite literally they don't adhere to what the pledge represents. Principally, one nation, one, and I don't care what that nation you came from is. When you come here and you stand for that pledge, you must adhere to that principle, whether that nation you left was a real strong. You don't disturb in a foreign military. You don't get to have dual citizenship. You don't get to advocate for another country's interest over ours. These are not crazy ideas. These are like any nation would enforce those ideas, right? Because they're. And it just go to South America. Imagine, you know, my mom's from Columbia and I spent summers going there. I don't of course consider myself. Columbia and I'm proud American. My mom is as well. But can you like go into a Colombian just even something as innocuous as a, they call it football, but a soccer game. Can you imagine going to a Colombian soccer game and not standing for the national anthem? And like whether you disagree with the men's room, right? Right. With some Supreme Court decision or whether you had a different view of a boat or whatever, like to not stand for our national anthem to to affirm the very ideals that set this country into motion is to hold the most vile form of contempt for this nation and her people. Exactly. Damn, I can see why they hate you. So can you win? Part of my ignorance. I mean, I just, I thought politics is so corrupt that I just try and stay far away from it. But what do you think? I think so. I really do. So I think I probably should share inside baseball, but let me do that. I think what has to happen very simply is I'm not going to outrace him. I'm not going to outspend him. But you know what? I've heard a Trump to Kamala. I've heard a Trump to Hillary. No, true. And so I think this is going to ultimately, we are in an attention economy. And the attention is going to go to the person who can connect and show up and earn the trust of voters. You don't get to earn the trust of voters in that Fox News studio in Washington, DC. Oh, no. Byron Donalds is in DC four days out of a week. This is my state. I live here. My dad grew up here. My grandfather taught here. My great grandfather ran a hotel on Fort Lauderdale beach here. This is my home. And I'm not going to let it be stolen from anyone, least of all Byron Donalds and his donors. And so what I've already announced Tucker is that over the next three months, I'm going to visit all 67 counties in just five weeks. I've visited 12. I'll visit every single state college and proud to break the news here. I'm doing a statewide Waffle House tour. This is the staple of Florida. I'm going to every single Waffle House to meet voters where they are. They deserve to see a governor hands on to ask him questions. Heck, if they want to yell at me debate with me, that's fine. I am never never going to shy away from the people that I'm asking to hire me fat. I just get the bacon. I get a bacon in large Coke. Good call. Good call. I remember Jeb Bush when he ran in 2016. I traveled him for a while. He was going no carb and he lost at the end. Of course, I think South Carolina and we were in a diner together in South Carolina and he, whatever his many faults, he could be kind of funny and he's like, no, I'm getting the blueberry pancakes. I don't care. It's over. Just an ambulance. Excuse me. So you think your money is going to come from where? Small dollar donors. Yeah, you're going to need it because I mean, you even said a single thing that is going to attract Ken Griffin to your campaign. Fair. I think so. Yeah. Look, I think that I'm always meeting open to meeting with donors, but it's on the basic precondition that you are donating to the campaign that already exists. There's no influence on the campaign whatsoever. And I would invite people to hold my feet to the fire on that one. I think the biggest thing though is if you just look at what the turning point has been for Florida politics, we had an ad commissioner here in 2018 named Adam Putnam. He was the establishment darling, a very good guy. Yeah, I remember him well. His family's been here for a very, very long time. Well respected family here in Florida and then Sky name Ron to say it just comes on the scene. And there's a lot of twist and turns, but that election in 2018 was really decided by the Fox News primary debate in the summer of 2018 where it was Ron and Adam on stage for an hour and a half unfiltered. No handlers, no donors, just two and a half million voters watching at home. I think if you put me on that debate stage and I'll be in this race all the way to the end. When we get to that debate stage, I will end Byron Donald's career and I will show that my vision for my state that I've known for four generations, our family has known is the right vision. The fourth in the road. Do you want old Florida or do you want new Florida? If you want AI data centers, if you want what Byron Donald says, which is he wants to make Florida the financial capital of the world, if you want that, that's the new Florida vision. But if you like our state, just the way she is, if you want to go back to the way things were 10, 15 years ago, cattle, citrus, space, ag, if you want to end the overdevelopment that has destroyed our communities, pull back the sprawl, I'm running for governor and I'd be honored to have your vote. You really think he's going to debate you? I think he has to. What about this? So there's Lieutenant Governor. I didn't even know existed until I saw a clip from him that was so over the top, his name is Jake Collins. I think it was so shocking that I sent him to someone who works here and says, is this AI? This can be real and he was basically saying you don't have the right to criticize his real. Yeah. Like free speech does not exist in the United States. Was that real? It was real. Who is that guy? He's the newly appointed Lieutenant Governor. He's been on the job for about four and a half months. Am I misstating what he said? No, he quite literally started off by saying, you do not have a right to hurt people with your words. Which is almost like a true or false question in fifth grade civics about the first amendment. Well, it's also like the most left wing thing you could ever say. It's like the NPCs, the people I spent my entire 15 years at Fox railing against these sensitive people who want to claim that words are violence is still chastised violence or whatever. That's the whole ideology of the left. I can't believe this guy is a Republican. So called. He is what they call the transgender Republicans. They identify as such, but they're not really. And when someone actually goes out there and says, you don't have a right to hurt people with your words. I mean, Timmy, Timmy, true or false does the first amendment give you a right to hurt people with if you failed that in fifth grade civics, they would hold you back a year as governor. I would hold anybody back who failed that question. You know, it was funny. He put out a comment about Venezuela and Maduro. He was very critical of Maduro. I think a lot of people should be. Yeah, yeah. For what he's done to the country. But I responded and I think proudly ratio it. And I said, with all due respect, Lieutenant Governor Collins, I'm formally filing a complaint with the office of hate crime speech for insulting Maduro with your harmful words. Right? And that's what it's come to. And so when you ask yourself, what vision for the Republican Party do we want? I actually think everyone's talking about 2028, 2026 here in Florida. We are the formidable Republican group. I agree with that. This is going to be the proxy for what the party looks like. And I don't know what the party is going to look like in 28. But if you've got me on the ballot, Byron Donald's on the ballot, Jay Collins, I don't know what he's going to do. Okay. So Lieutenant Governor has been decided. He hasn't decided what he wants to do. He's still checking with his wife apparently. Okay. Literally, that's what he said. He just keeps checking with his wife. Actually, yeah. And so this is a guy done to go on a big tangent, but this is a guy who actually reached out to my own uncle, like my actual uncle, like my, my dad's over there at my father's brother and tried to convince him to get me to drop out. And so my uncle was calling me all of a sudden on a Saturday, hasn't spoken to me in a while for an hour and a half on the phone saying, Jay Collins, this Jay Collins that is weird, but the governor, our governor, Ron is anti-sis not endorsing Jay Collins. He's certainly not endorsing Byron Donald's. And this is a wide open race as far as I'm concerned. May the best person win. The best person Tucker was not the person who looks best on Fox, although I don't think Byron looks all that good on Fox. You're not getting invited on Fox. I'm just telling you that right now. Sorry, they're not having you. Well, thank you for having me here today. Of course. No, I worked there. I know they are not inviting you on Fox, but I think if you look at, and I, on the way over here, we stopped at Chipotle, we call it Chipotle in our family because we like to be funny. That's the spirit. We say we go to Chipotle and we say, can I have the pollable with the fajitis? But I was in Chipotle and a young man by the name of Aidan. He's 22 years old. He works for Charlotte County in the maintenance division. And he comes up to me, says are you James Fishback? And I said, yeah, I have never voted in any election, not even in a primary. You have my vote. I'm switching over to the Republican Party to vote for you on August 18th. I think, and I don't want to take credit for our vision. It's a vision that's been honestly, I've watched a lot of your stuff, right? A lot of what's happened in this space. One that I believe in, I believe it's the only way forward for my state. And I think there's a real hunger because with whatever you want to say about Byron Donald and establishment money, even the polls that have come out about him, they still show 54% roughly of the electorate still undecided. And this is the guy who's been in the race now for 11 months, who's got $45 million. He's on Fox News three times a week, regards to hitting the same GOP slop. And he still has half of the electorate undecided about whether to vote for him. So I'm in this race because I think my state needs someone to step up and I want to earn people's support in being able to do it. When is the primary August 18th? It's a close primary. So the cool thing about this is you got until July 20th, if you're an independent, used to be a Republican, if you're one of the Dixie Democrats, we've got all over the state who may have voted Republican recently, but hasn't changed the party affiliation. You can do that online for free at the Florida DMV website. Just Google Change Voter Registration in Florida takes you five minutes. That now gives you the ability to show up on August 18th because you know this Tucker. This is a red state through and through. We haven't had a Democrat governor in 30 years. We may never have one again. And so the election, if you wait till November, you're literally allowing the system to disenfranchise you. Totally right. I think if we lived in New York City, we probably would be registered Democrats because you otherwise wouldn't have the D.C. for my whole life. I was always ready to do a straight Democrat because I wanted to vote for the least crazy Democrat in the primary because I lived there. It mattered to me. And so my pitch to a public school teacher is we may not agree on everything. But if you want someone who's going to fight for the dignity of American citizens, someone is going to make your job easier as a teacher. When we have 1.4 million illegals in our state, many of whom, all of whom have children enrolled in our public schools. I'm out with a teacher a couple weeks ago in Southwest Florida not too far from here. And she broke down crying because her ninth grade class had 20 students, seven of whom did not speak English. They were illegals. And so executive order number four is to remove all illegal immigrant children from our school. I had someone asked me recently, isn't that cruel? I said, no, ma'am, what's cruel is to force American citizens to dilute their education, to take attention away from a teacher who has the second lowest teacher pay on average in any part of the country and say you have to teach half your class in English and the other half in broken, creole or Spanish for people who just got here. That's what's cruel. It is cruel. That is what is vile. And actually it's weird because the Supreme Court in 1982 found in Plilar, Vida, rather disastrously that illegal immigrant children actually have a 14th amendment constitutional right to attend public school. And so I would proudly, as Mississippi did, challenge Roe v. Wade. I would proudly as governor pass an executive order to challenge that decision. And I know we would win in the Supreme Court whether it be 5, 4 or 6, 3 would depend on how she's feeling that day though. James Fishback, that was great. That was great. And Godspeed, thank you. Thanks.