Well, thank you for the invite. Yes, probably. So why don't you go ahead and give people a brief introduction into who you are and your background? OK, so I had a pretty mixed school background. There's a bit of music in there that helped since schools. I went to all types of different schools. Really quite a mixed period. I had a great family, but I ended up as an industrial roofer. And in that time, my brother had joined the parachute regiment. I kind of looked at him. looked at what he was doing. And that kind of fascinated me. And because industrial roofing wasn't going our way, it was in those years when then having a safety equipment when I started. And therefore, we could do well, one price and coverage of areas. But they started bringing safety equipment in. But it wasn't well engineered. It was becoming fairly perilous. But also very, very hard to make viable, very, very long days, playing a lot of sport, a lot of rugby. So in that, I went effectively unemployed for a while. And then did what is a very routine story. And I walked into recruiting office, asked to join the parachute regiment. The sergeant who recruited me tried to persuade me I needed to be an engineer. I had told her my brother's a paratrooper. I know what I'm asking for. And then applied it took from what I remember about six months to start basic training. The parachute regiment is an incredible unit for a foundation. And well, as a career, I moved on. But for me, it was my foundation. It was a brilliant place to be. The Marines and the parachute regiment amongst the elite infantry unit of the British Army. The parachute regiment itself, it's nicknamed the Blood Cloth, because they stay very tight knit. And that's inculcated into you. That kind of loyalty and duty to the unit. And essentially, they are the British Army's elite attacking offensive force. So when you're doing that basic, so that the secondary phase training, a lot of it is about being out and field, doing two nuts, company-level attacks on hills. And the United States is a tough process. But it's very, very good foundation to have. I ended up doing quite a lot of boxing for them as well. That's not necessarily why I joined the Army. The Amplaying rugby, which sounds delightful. There was two Northern Ireland tours in there. But that was after the Friar Good Friday Peace Corps. So they were very quiet. We spent a lot of time cordoning off. Things in roads that then were identified as biscuit tins or whatever. But it was an interesting start to a military career. And foundations as a soldier, exceptional. You couldn't compete with them. But I put in for a special selection. And nominally, the SAS. When started selection, and past first time, which is, a lot of people don't. But selection is a very, very tough process. I've done two things in the British military that have absolutely lived up to their name. Most things you take on are not being a bit of an anti-climax that they are like, those weren't. And that was P Company for the Power Shoot Regiment, which is short and sharp. A series of tests, including milling. And your train museum is a test to see where they can jump out of plane or not, by jumping off a scaffold into a net. And other types is a very famous event called the log run, which is physically, extremely demanding. And you have to work as a team. An end selection itself, selection itself, is over six months tested every day. They quickly lose the numbers roughly an average of five or under percent do end up passing. Some selections, they have zero. So 5% end up passing. It's one of the challenges of all these special operations forces here, that have a such an important purpose in the overall military. And it's getting people into them. No one wants you to fail. I need these units populated. So selection is broken down. They test you physically to the point where you can turn up an Olympian and you're no better off than the weakest person on the course. And that's what they're looking for. And they're not even really interested in you as a person until they took you to the point when they can start seeing your mental resilience. It's really useless to start basing resources on so many people when actually, so once you've proven that you're mentally resilient enough and that ends on endurance march, which is, I forget the actual distance, but it's huge distance. Once you've done all the marching, you go into the jungle and get tested. That's a very, very hard environment to be in. It's very challenging. We train for every environment. And you need to be very, very disciplined in there. Everything wants to eat you in the jungle. Most of it's not very big. So it's very uncomfortable. You go to bed after dark and you get up before first light. It's very, very humid. And the jungle is by its environment. It's oppressive. It's, you know, everything's making noise. You can't really see ahead of you more than 20 foot. So it's a great environment in order to test an individual's ability not only individually how strong and how professional, but also can he work with other team members. Key important part of selection is to identify those that can work as a team. You can be brilliant. Absolutely superb. Benton everybody else. But if you can't make that work with everybody else, then you're not going to be much good to any military and it's be honest. Then you go on and learn all your skills, all your various skills that you'll then have to take on. In many senses, it's like, it was my university. I've came out. Did to my levels, but didn't do anything else. How old were you when you first went into the parachute regiment? So I was quite, I was a bit older, which sounds not, I was 21. So that sounds young, but it wasn't. But you can join as early as 16, right? So you can join junior parrot 16. So it's not, you can't get used as a soldier. OK. But you can train and adopt sort of the good culture that comes from being in the military. And some people do. And some my colleagues had become through junior parrot and all they had known was 16. I'd say that I had an advantage because I worked in industrial roofing gangs, had a bit of life experience, came in. And it definitely made me look at the training in a different light. And I was like, these people aren't trying to break you, right? It's like everyone says they are. They want you to pass. They're trying to identify the skills that you carry. Have you got the characteristic attributes they need you to have? And they're not succeeding in their job if there's no one left at the end. But you have to meet certain brackets and parameters. What specifically are they looking for? Like mentally. Or mentally strong. The ability to take decisions, but also listen to others. But when you need to, you need to make decisions. Lead others, but also support others. And that's very, very important what we do. We're given normally positions too lead. And sometimes someone has to just step forward and do that. So they're looking for all those characteristics in there. They are looking for soldering skills at a certain standard. They can't teach you from you. But that doesn't mean you couldn't make it as a medic. In fact, one of my friends was a medic. Was an infant here. Now, generally infant here is from elite regiments. You used to do better. That doesn't necessarily hold now. But generally, but it's open to everybody. The SS since its inception has been, if you're good enough. And to a certain extent, you have a background we understand. Then you're welcome to come and try selection. So in the unit, you've got mainly British people. But you've got many others from different countries. And that gives it a real strength in its diversity and who it takes from. You don't necessarily want in our special forces. A whole group of Marines or a whole group of parachute regiment. You need some. You need other skills and other ways of thinking coming in as well. So that's what gives its strength, its ability to recruit widely and its ability to sort people out. And if they're starting to drop the brackets and letting people into a job, the limits of what you will have to do in your job can't be negotiated. They're set. And so if you start dropping the standards of what people have to demonstrate and achieve, you're only putting people at further risk. Many won't manage to keep up with it. For people who may not be super familiar with the British military and the different tiers of military, what is like a comparison of the SAS into American forces? What would that be equivalent to? So first of all, the British military doesn't have tears. The only way we mentioned tears is to provide a comparative example. But our mission sets actually cover, because the tear represents a mission set that you're suitably trained to do and given. So our tears would be the highest levels of special forces you so come units. But we've worked with every single one of them. And especially with rock and in mind, we've worked side by side. And in many ways, learn so much from them. We weren't necessarily a suitable special forces unit to take on some of the challenges that we were then posed in some of the latter of our tours. We learned quickly off each other. We certainly learned a huge amount of them. And adopted some of their TTPs and tactics that they use, which probably protected this in a way that we wouldn't have known how to. So it's acted as a catalyst. Being able to work so closely together. And we don't share anything. But we work alongside each other as partners. And certainly from my perspective, in the British military, that's been invaluable in our evolution as such, into an appropriate military force in present day. But we're good at various, we're very, very strong at certain other factors. So I think we did learn off each other. So is it similar to like a SEAL team six or something like that? Yeah, similar to SEAL teams six here. OK. So when you join the parachute regiment, and then you applied to go join the SAS. And that is, you said, 5% of people get through that. In general, you know, I say, I mean, the figures and statistics. But in general, they expect 5% pass rate. Now, if you get a 10% that's really marvelous. But it's very much, I mean, the more important figure is how many people can you get onto that course in the first place, that's a suitable. No point in getting a whole load of people and never going to make it to the end. And to be honest with you, selection is very tough. Right? You should only get to go doing it. Because there's weight involved in your hit joints. And when you're doing that sort of, it's very, very arduous. In order to test your mind and your brain, it's your suitability, your take into levels that you shouldn't be doing on a normal, normal basis. So what can you walk me through what it was like like during that process? Like from the first time you went in, I'm sure there was like a bunch of guys that were in there for this trial period. Yes. How many guys were there? And then can you explain what that was like? So it's well organized chaos. You go down to a Welsh area. We have lovely mountains that seems to have bad weather all the time. It's either with a fresherously hot or you can't see fog. You stay in bunk beds, stand around each other. You don't know each other. You quickly make friends, but it's that sort of attitude that you don't know who's going to be there in a week. You make friends to the people who share bunks next to you. I had certain friends from the parachute measurement on selection with me. So we kind of hang out together. But every day we start doing tests, physical tests, hills, long marches. How many guys total? So I think I'm mine 240. 240. Yes. 240 is what they started off with. That quickly, quickly goes down to, I think, roughly 70 at the end of the first week, which is not surprising. Because that's when the physical tests, that's what they're doing to it leads to a test march. Nick then fanned on. You see a high failure rate on that. It's time, everything's timed march. You have to keep up an average speed. You're carrying weight. And that's really the test. And there's no real, very complex things you're asked to do. They're all pretty simple, but they take a lot of physical exertion and mental commitment. And what year are we talking that you did this? So I did selection zero to. What's that? 2002. This is in 2002. Yes. I joined that. So right after 9-11. Yes. I remember 9-11 happening when I was in passionate regiment. My drills course. And I remember seeing it and thinking, do you know what? This is going to change everything. And remembering how I joined the army, I did join a lot of people were aware of the army and wanted to do it for a lifetime career. I kind of joined it because in Dussew roof and it kind of ran out and I looked elsewhere. And noticed the opportunity is in the army. And you just thought your brother did it. So yeah, so I had enough cues to say, hey, this looks really interesting, very good. And the army is a great place to be. There's a lot of challenges involved in serving in there, in particular for certain periods. And we had a very, very intensive operational period. Through my career, I've done 19 operational tours, and varying lengths. There's been a heavy weight on a rock, eight or up tours. But a number of Afghanistan tours, a number of classified of operated in areas where people are fully aware of where we've been, but it's not publicly acknowledged. And operating against the extremist groups at a national level, in particular, in northern Iraq. Now they're threatening to destabilize the all market. They were taking over Brigade's worth of military equipment. And that really compelled people to act in a way. still to be decided whether it was genocide against the Aziddis. But it was certainly pretty severe level. So that drove an intervention into there to support the forces that are around it to help them stop their progress. And that's a tremendously interesting thing to have took part in. And in fact, that particular period of operations were all down a frontline. People think helicopters, you're moving about your very mobile. Actually, we were just given an area to preserve over. That was one of the most kinetic areas. But an area where they're just trying to break through the frontline all the time and constantly analyzing what they're going to do, where they're going to try and plant through the frontline, just to protect the ground that would be one back from them. So all of these military operations have different types. They're all complex. And they definitely teach you how to be a human being. Because when you're sitting in like dugouts and the clouds come in, you're not going to get in the air support. It will go dark. You can't really, you're kind of wondering what everyone's up to. Where the next threat's going to come from. So it's not always that we're on tremendously supported missions. Sometimes we're supporting others in trying to keep just managed in what they're doing. And a lot of these forces are civilians that are quickly trained in soldiers, not dedicated soldiers. So 9-11 happens. And then you decide to try out for the SAS. And started out with 240 people. You said, right? I had already put an application in for you. You had already put the application in. But I was finishing off my courses in parachute management. I do remember hearing about it. And it struck me just immediately. This is going to be really, really impactful. And defined certainly my operational career, which is shaped a huge amount of activity in military terms. And I think it would be very, very complacent to forget the origins of where that particular attack happened. They're not new. The risk and the threat remains in so many places. And it's the village. The vigilance of others and us being able to support them in doing that is, you know, Britain is a very small place. You know, it has quite a high risk of terrorism at times. And I've been to small countries in the Middle East that have very, very, very complicated, domestic, to merit terrorist threats that manifest themselves in extremely dangerous situations. You know, these people, not necessarily, have got degrees, but they don't have employment. They're then easily influenced into this mind state that everyone else is the enemy. You know, the institution is the enemy. And they're very capable of putting together extremely dangerous and complex problems, which take highly trained people to come up against and solve. Right. So, you know, just managing and advising, mentoring, training, however it's done, accompanying, partnering, you know, it's the best way to approach these problems. And you know, there's been a wide array over 20 years. I've had an operation throughout. I've had a really wide array of operations that I've done, types of operations. So let's go back to the recruiting part, where you said that there was 240 people. First week went down to 70. Police 70. And that was just from the physical stuff, the marches. And then what happened? What? And then we had jungle and it went down to around about 30ish. Okay. And then you drop off after that, because you're going to minus skills. People are recognized as not suitable. And you end up with your final figure. And then you get posted into how many people do you end with? 12 as far as I'm talking about. Well, that's a little bit of a story. You know, the unit is such a busy place that those 12, you know, you don't really see each other that much. You know, you're passing ships in a night, a lot of the time. But as I said, the most important figure to note is the starting figure, because they need to keep the numbers up of suitable applicants in order to get any at the end. And sometimes those figures have been down to 130. You know, sometimes those figures have been higher. You know, but you need to have that consistent engagement with willing volunteers. You know, it's the same as the British military. You know, it needs willing volunteers, same as US military. So there's any military. That's a professional army. You know, much your Russia. Well, I guess they're willing. People in the prisons that they're letting out, those people, I think I said, would rather go fight and sit in prison. Some people do it other ways. Yeah. So once it got down to 12 people, what were they kind of like trying to figure out about your, or what sort of tests were they doing on you then? So when it comes down to roughly about 35 or 30, or just below 30, it was then you start going into the real techniques that you're going to need to be able to deliver. So you start working on, you know, CKB, you start working on team techniques and TTPs, CKB, in close court, a battle. Okay. So it's all about going into buildings, being able to operate in close confines. You don't, you can't don't cover any of the additional skills then, but once you pass, and that was the 12, they go to their various teams, and then they start learning skills. And then in the unit, you never stop learning skills. And you simply bolt on more and more skills. It's like constant education all the time, you're not outworking, you're kind of educating, or you're at rest, or you're preparing like, to, you know, prove your currency in order to do the next iteration of operations. So it's very, it's quite intensive. And it's, you know, so enjoyable, you know, because you're learning all the time, and you're learning new skills all the time. So, you know, learning all sorts of stuff, how to control aircraft, how to control airspace. What was the hardest part of that whole process for you? For selection, yeah. The jungle is designed to be, really. The jungle. You know, the hills phase is really intense physically. But the jungle is the bit where you see people start and question themselves, am I good enough? And that's what they're looking for, right? You know, there's a people opt out, and that's the highest failure rate after the hills. There's people saying, I don't, you know, I can't really do this, you hear it. They start talking about something at home, and you just hear it start creeping in, and it's kind of... The cracks start getting wider. It's not an excuse, but it's kind of an explanation to others. Yeah. And then they'll choose. And, you know, what they're looking for, that's a key sort of attribute that are looking for in each individual is, you know, at certain points, do you come to question yourself too much? Do you doubt your ability to find a way through it? You know, and almost all those people that opt out, you know, they probably regret it, you know, probably... Were you questioning yourself at all during that process? I say, I'm in a sort of fairly simple approach to an exposure approach, which is just like, you know, I'll either get injured, or won't be able to do it, or you'll carry me off, but it's up to you, fail me, right? Right. Or you can fail me because I'm not good enough. I think if you take all the self choice out of it, you know, and you just get on with what you've been asked to do. Yeah. So it's not going to be easy, right? So it's not going to be comfortable. Right. So yeah, except all of that, you just go for it. Mm-hmm. Every time you do your best, every single time you turn up, it's... And resolve that it's their choice to decide you're not good enough. Then it certainly removes some of the mental pressure. And believe me, you know, all these courses are designed to make you question yourself, because I want to see how you react to it. What was the perspective of you and guys like you after 9-11 happened? Was it like, you know, did you guys have feel like a strong pull to go and fight in Iraq and do all this stuff? Or I think at that time, the British Army had been doing operations very, very close to US forces. And no one felt like this was just sort of the US had been attacked, you know, and certainly over the collective military we knew what was coming. But we had very, very good relationships built upon history and legacy with units we ended up serving alongside. And certainly, you know, impacted us, whether it could have impacted us as high as high as some of them. You know, you go from New York, just a physical impact of it. And then the country, I'm not sure, but, you know, it wasn't that much different in our perception of what it was and the fact that it needed to be confronted. And there wasn't weird. Did you guys like feel like, oh, we need to go like help the Americans fight? Or did you feel like, well, you know, this is an our war to fight? No, there was no element of it. It's not ours. I think people were, you know, there was no resistance to it. No resistance to it. So it's all, you know, the realization as a group out there that was that level of threat. And I got to that point where it could do that sort of thing. And it couldn't have, you know, been controlled in the ways it had been beforehand because it wasn't you. None of these things are new. They just met more foes into something else. Another life, you know, the fundamental sort of basis of it, you know, you can never really get rid of. So, you know, there was definitely not anyone that was disputing a tool. It was a shared challenge. How it would fall out in terms of responsibilities was unclear to us. But, you know, we know we were very closely wedded to U.S. forces. We had very good working relationships. You know, so I think we've generally assumed that we'll be as is as is involved. Does anyone else? And, you know, I never got shared out into operational theaters. And, you know, the UK is, you know, a small but very effective army. But everyone face their challenges. And, you know, military operations is no such thing as getting it right. You have to have a continue evolving strategy. You know, they're complex scenarios that kind of sort of evolve in front of you. Very, very frustratingly so at times because you think, you know, hey, remember a lot of this is done on the perception, a basis of how will these people see us if we act like this, if we do this, you know. You know, when we first went into Iraq, we were extremely popular. You know, and that's because they weren't unhappy. The regime had been removed so quickly. But there was a void behind it that then changed the atmosphere. And, you know, by two or three, we were mainly responsible for preventing the descent into civil war. You know, there were people in Iraq like an artful person called Zukawi. New exactly how to play on people in people in Iraq. New exactly how to place any off-genshia. And large bombs getting drawn in driven into Shia markets. And, you know, killing many, many at a time and they were happening on huge frequency. And they no longer stopped and that was designed to get the two to descend into a civil war. Zukawi, yeah, he was one of the worst ones, wasn't he? Where was he from? Say it's Jordanian. He was Jordanian. Was he the guy he had led out of prison when the new leader, he was formerly in prison. He was known as a pretty low-level thief. I'm not sure what his background into prison was. He was noted as being a particular type of person whilst he was there. So, but, you know, these people evolved. You know, this is why there's real intention in all our prisons. Over, you know, there's a lot of recruitment going on in there. There's a lot of influence going on in there. So, jails are incubators. Unless they're really, really, really well managed and conscious. But he, you know, he bent off on not sure quite what he did in terms of groups in his affiliations. But he popped up in a rark because of the type of person he was. He was clearly very influential on the others around him. Stephen, can you pull the pictures of Zukawi? Zukawi. All right, let me... You'll be able to find him. Sorry, I'm going to keep going. So, I mean, he created havoc when they're perhaps having. a lot of work. Right. And again, it's very, very challenging to try and bring that under control. And it underpins the security of the whole place. You know, the whole place is not going to work. If the, you know, the whole populace is set into identity groups and set against one another. And essentially, you know, people like that were a large part of the work, trying to just keep their networks involved and suppressed or they can no longer be as effective as they had become. And that process happened very, very quickly. He was trying to like team up with some of the organizations in North Africa, wasn't he? Yes, I mean, that's trouble as well. They are very good at, you know, running association with each other. Right. Living off each other. In fact, Zukawi became so, you know, so the al Qaeda, main HQ, communicated that they didn't support Zukawi in the end. Because of what he was doing. And you know, saying you're setting off bombs against fully in population, regardless of who you say and they are. And we do not support that. You know, we do not like so even he got disassociated from the main period because of what he was doing. But, you know, he was very successful in doing it. And it took an enormous amount of energy, focus and effort. Intelligence gathering, reactive operations in order to keep that under control. And you know, it's not just a karwee there, it's a whole network including who was driving the bombs, who was training them, who was equipping them, who was resourcing all of that. But one of their key methodologies was that. But of course, these are much more complex than just that one single act. You've got the financing, you've got all sorts of other stuff around it that's giving oxygen to that network. Right. What was your, one of your first operational tours that you did? And so, well, the first two were with the parachute management, but in my first with the unit was Iraq. And I had a sustained period of Iraq again and again and again. And it was, it's craggy-thong, it's 22 SAS, is that right? Yeah. And what is that? What's the significance of 22? Is that like a, it's just full-time SS. So 22 means what? Was that just how do they? No, it's just like, I don't even know where it comes from. Oh, really? Yeah. I mean, the SS is born out of World War II. An incredible group of people. Right. They did make it. I don't even know where it comes from. Oh really? Yeah, I mean the SS is born out of World War II. An incredible group of people, they did make some documentaries about it. They're amazing people in a time where the best was drawn out of them. And since then the SS was sort of pertinent and then it wasn't. And then Malaya happened. So Malaya was jungle operations, so into the imports of jungle insulation. What they realised is operating a jungle is extremely arduous. You didn't even see people for weeks. And it's extremely arduous. And those gentlemen there, some of them who sort of come back and talk to us. And it's a real privilege hearing a gentleman I had to think he's 82. And his recollections of their operating jungle were absolutely incredible. Because there's a pressure and operations they were pulling people in very quickly from other units. It just shows our humans can step up when they need to, right? When the requirement to do things. Yeah, I didn't know if there was a specific reason for the numbering before the SIS. No, I'm afraid I don't know the history of it. Okay, gotcha. I mean I know where the regiment was founded and broadly how it went through. I don't know where 22 came from. Right. So your first couple operations were in Iraq. Yeah. And then long operational career, you know, following the training path. You know, as special forces you get involved in a lot of operations that classified. And they're rightfully classified. You work in sometimes in a covert nature. Do you work with the MI6 or did you? You work with all part part and agencies. So you worked with intelligence, partner intelligence agencies and under. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. That's the only way this works, right? And that doesn't mean physically on the ground. And we worked with partner agencies across the board. We even worked with our police on council as in the UK. You know, it's important if you, you know, this is a whole, it's an intricate problem. You know, networks involved in finance. Finance happens in every other countries. So they regularly result in criminal investigations. You know, in order to influence networks, it's not just that sort of local act on the ground forward. That's effective. In fact, that's really just a very key driver. Mm-hmm. So the information that is provided to others to be able to act. So yes, we worked with all partner agencies as we needed to. We're working with law enforcement agencies if we needed to. And, you know, and essentially the, the construct in the UK is quite unusual. Because it's quite a small place. And, you know, each has other constitutional laws. We're able to work with our London Ambulate service, our London Fire Brigade, in an insiliency response to certain levels and types of problems in the domestic theater. And that's been that's something key that we have to do. You know, and so the military is allowed to support the police. If, you know, in the event of the fire brigade gun or strike or as well. Right, right. So I assume like you guys are the highest level. What were you guys chasing just the biggest bad guys in Iraq? It doesn't really work like that. We don't see them as high or whatever. You know, there's different dynamics that you have to identify in how to make these complex operations successful. So if you're looking at a network, you look at how it structured first. And what is the thing that it depends upon most? You know, finance always. How are they financing this thing? Is that right? Yeah, I was running away again. Oh, okay. You know, how are they financing this thing? You know, where do you cut off those thieves? The themes of finance. So it's not actually just about the level of the scenic manda. It's not just shooting guns. It's not just shooting guns. It's very far from new pads and guns. The, that's the problem, right? You know, it actually be much less challenging if it was just like this one person that you could sort of make ineffective. Right. And his network doesn't work. And it's not even his network. You know, and these things are very, very complex environments. It's particularly complex when that group is homogenous to the population that surrounds it. You know, so broader operations become very, very dangerous. You know, some of the units I have the highest respect for those units that were holding ground, trying to provide security in areas. Because they were under constant attack. You know, and they were under challenges they went through. a lot of them are very, very young people. Yeah. They've signed up, you know, they're going to do three, four years. And they did three or four of the hardest years. You know, and that all comes at quite a great deal of cost. And there's a big difference between a professional soldier trained for filters and filters and filters in your condition in. And someone who's, for instance, a reservist who's been mobilized. And then he's exposed to the same conditions. Yeah. It's very, very challenging. I was having this conversation with the guy that was on here yesterday. And, you know, we got talking about like the difference between young kids who go into the military and guys who just know what they want to do. Right? Like guys who walk in and say, I know I want to be S.A.S. special forces. Yeah. I've met a lot of guys that have been in the American military. And I recently had a guy who was in the British Army as well that were really young when they decided to go into the military. And they just, they went into the military because maybe someone suggested it or maybe it just seemed like a fun idea. Right? And they didn't really have any purpose in life yet. They didn't really know what they wanted to do. And the majority of them come out of their really psychologically destroyed. Yeah. Yeah. So great challenge. And remembering militaries for periods of time really don't do anything but deterrow others. You know, and they remain capable and they train very hard. But sometimes they aren't operational for periods of time. But in periods where intensive operations happening that's pretty critical. A lot of these people, you know, a lot of people who join the Army turn out to be the most impressive people you ever met. Right. I walked in off the street because, you know, they're almost there was an absence of something else to do. That's getting less and less as it's becoming more and more small and a smaller number and it's more professional all the time. But you know, it's those sorts of people that, you know, either condition very fast and adapt to it. Or the whole process does take its toll on them. And that toll is, you know, it goes on for generations. Yeah. And I just had a really interesting, I had lunch before I came here. Mm-hmm. And there's an arrest on at the bottom of my hotel. The note is the guy serving. He had Semper written on his chest. It was just a physical one corner of his shirt. And so when I was playing, I said, oh, you know, when did you leave the military? I was in the military. And he was, as always, really humble and really engaging. I said, oh, what you do now is, it's less six years ago. And he said, I'd do this main role that it's my everyday job, but I work this bar work more because the other one pays for it. And it's because he's engaging with people all the time. Somehow intuitively, he knew that, you know, as you leave the military, it's very, very tough. He clearly only taken the job. So he was interacting with others. Oh, wow. And that period of his life, that he built in that period of his life that was clearly his tonic. So, you know, it's funny, some people intuitively get the way to do it. You know, social engagement is a very, very key part of it. But it's sort of left me because I don't know whether he had any basis or, you know, some guidance that that was the way to do it. I said, right. But he, you know, he very, very quickly highlighted it. And it's very humbling when you beat these people, right? You know, he's actually Marine Corps. And yeah, and it's just incredible. When you come up, particularly, when you've been in for 15 years and you come across these young people, and they're approached to it is very, very intelligent. And, you know, the thing is called allostatic load. It's the measure of pressure. So, if you're going to a special forces community, that's a given. You know, there's no change to it. You're on a rotation. It's got a tempo. It's not necessarily measurable to a certain extent it is. You know, you can see the risk factors. You can number up the explosives you set off. You can number up the times you've not slept well on night. Whereas for other forces, it's sort of, they're less conscious of it. And so the thing grows around them like something that is a specter that is not understood. And it can lead if people leave the military having had that happen. And it's sort of been chewing away at the edges of them. But there's no awareness of it and what it is. That's when it becomes very dangerous to people. And is there a moment you can remember in your early career as a SAS guy that was like, my life's never going to be the same. A moment that really changed you. So, I don't think it has anything to do to unit. I was in. There's plenty of soldiers have to come to terms of the fact that your mortality is on a different line. Right. And I say, if you picture living in a farm and having to go and do the same patrol route to 5K every day, you have to condition yourself in a way no one in other professions would. But you're not uncomfortable in doing that. It doesn't stop all those physical feelings. So, yeah, on a number of occasions I've been come to terms that a fact that there's a much higher level of risk. Wasn't necessarily, you know, I don't think you become scared of whatever may happen to you. All of the normal feelings of anxiety around it. You know, of course you do as you're going anywhere. You know, we're going to completely non-permissive areas where everyone around you is not necessarily going to fight you, but they're definitely not going to act in your favor. You know, they're helping other people who would intentionally harm you. You know, of course there's levels of anxiety, but that's, you know, part of the performance bit. I think the way you manage it is condition yourself to higher levels. And you know, it is happening around you. Some of the soldiers I've spoke to in Infantee Brigade, you know, have done tours of Afghanistan. And I've got a friend who's bilateral empty. So, you know, you get really good insights from these people. And the levels of courage they demonstrate in going out and doing their job every day. And, you know, you can't live with uncertainty to that degree all the time. So, you do have an expectancy. You do have an acceptance that you can come to terms with. And you, you know, of course, experiences stay with you for the rest of your life, not necessarily like. Right. In detail. There wasn't one specific moment that really stood out to you. And I've had plenty of times when many of them, they are. They are. They are. They are. That's falling off. All that's falling down. You know, we've had houses fall on top of us and stuff like that. You know, so. What's your most difficult operation? I can't. So, if you think that you can tell us any walk through months, I did. On one particular trip, we did 180 to operations. I cannot remember an operation from stuff. On the trip, you did 182 operations. So, is there one that just sticks out to you? No, so there's various recollections of stuff that pop up. You know, and then they usually when someone's been caught up in something and we have to rescue them. And essentially, you know, that's what sticks out. They're the more unusual scenarios. But you know, nothing particularly sticks out. Some of the things were extraordinary events and extraordinary situations. And a lot of that is in classified spaces. Discrete it sensitive. You know, wouldn't go into detail about those areas. They're extraordinary complex. You know, if you're in a position where you're relatively unsupported, you know, that's really challenging. You know, you'd surrounded by people you're not necessarily contrast for a very long time. And you know, a couple of times that's proven to be just right. You know, and people will try and take you if you leave yourself exposed to a lot. But, you know, essentially it's been decades of work. I can't pick out like just normal or things on them. And like I said, I can't remember one operation to the next. You know, you have picture recollections of this. And remembering, and all that time, you've been acting at a level. You've been exposed to all of these different exposures. You know, you've had so much that makes you probably not be able to be like, I think you can picture on that night this from this point. And this was the intelligence picture we had. It's simply not not the case, right. I'm thinking about it now. I heard the story about the, I'm sure you have, the SAS guys that were captured and taken hostage. And then the other part of their team went in and rescued them like against the country's wishes. Like I guess like the government said they didn't authorize it and they went anyways and rescued the guys. Yeah, so I wasn't on that. And thoughts of it. Do you know any of the guys who were? No. No. That was a pretty incredible story. Yeah, yeah. I mean, all of them are incredible stories, right. You know, hostage rescuers is a zero sum game. Yeah. You only hear about when it goes right or wrong. And I, it's more like the political level. And how you plan for a hostage rescue is completely different from, from, from, from anything else. You assume a lot, lot more risk. You know, so I'm, you know, I'm more than happy to talk about nature of all any of these types of operations. None of, none of which any in their own uniqueness stick in my mind. You know, I remember a house falling on top of me. I remember someone, you know, ambushingness from the side. I remember plenty of context around that. But that's what happened on the house for on W. That was an explosive device that was set off the concisiveness of the round. It was dried out to TATP. And there was, you know, contact at the door. So an engagement in between. So they were stuck in the doorway. The customer's the round set to charge off. It's a homemade ID obviously. And the building itself, the building structure was damaged on the side. And about two minutes after, because we still hadn't got a wounded back from that particular engagement. The house fell on top of them. And in some, you know, they, they were left buried for like four or five hours. So I'm in earthquake type injuries, you know, so again, these are very complex operations. When they, when they get complex, they get really, really difficult. Where were you guys? I can't say. No. But those are the sorts of situations that, you know, you were faced with. You have to pick your way out of them on that particular operation. Well, you know, it's about 13 guys left on their feet. The other 28 number dead. No. And we're resting hospital, you know, so. Yeah, but that's the cost of going on from confronting people that you know, we're about to go and do something else. Yeah. You know, and, you know, again, if you condition yourself for the mindset of that, you know, we train and prepare for it. But, you know, these, okay, the 28 guys weren't your guys. As we were supporting them, you were supporting them. Oh, okay, gosh. So, and, but you know, none of these, there's the vernacular around military operations is not helpful. Like a surgical strike is not surgical. Right. So we, there's a lot of talk about the preciseness of it all in. Yes, it is very precise, but it's still a weapon. You're still going to an area where you're going to get contested in some way. Right. On, on a number of, you know, on a significant majority of occasions, significant minority of occasions, sorry, it's not always. Um, you know, there's other ways we, we work, you know, where, you know, on, on the British mainland, where we train and we're surrounded by the people. We're surrounded by there's no threat to us. But the focus is a threat for terrorism. Um, you know, Mumbai scared everyone. Mumbai, I don't know whether you remember the Mumbai attacks where 90% of all the people got killed. I was about 70% of all the people got killed in the first 90 minutes or something. When was this? So this was back in 2005, maybe. And it was the attacking Mumbai. Okay. Done by extremists, trained across in, um, over the boarding of Pakistan. You've got in boats and came to Mumbai. Armed with explosives, grenades, weapons, and everyone across the world, I think, what's that attack? And thought, you know, how will we respond to it? We fundamentally changed the way we, we would respond to those sorts of marauding attacks. That, you know, most countries have seen now. You know, and those weren't things that were happening in the past. It was kind of a new way they, they learned how to do things. You know, were you a part of that or no? It's just something we learned off. So any of these attacks that happen worldwide, we look at them and we analyze them. And we say, okay, well, how we're set up? Are we effective against it? You know, what are the proper responses we could do? Um, you know, you've seen them in, you know, the knife attacks now, you know, gun control is very, very tight in the UK. It's one of the biggest defenses. Um, against, you know, marauding firearms attacks. But it doesn't stop people getting knives, blades, petrol bombs, and everything else, you know. And these are the dangerous attacks that everyone fears. What are the gun laws in the UK? What it was, it was very, very tight. We always, always have very, very tight gun laws. So, um, so the accessibility of weapons and ammunition means that, you know, reduces the likelihood people are going to be able to get weapons and carry out the rewarding firearms attacks. But that still means very dangerous people can potentially get them more potentially get other weapons. As has happened in the UK, I mean, you know, it's, you know, is it how, how tight is it compared to the US? Oh, it's completely different. As in, there's no law of ownership of gun beyond, I think, a shotgun in a 2-2. So you can own a shotgun in a 2-2? Yeah, for various purposes. And you have been. So it's like Canada, I think. I think Canada is similar to that. Yeah. And, you know, in a way, because the UK is a very, very complex, dense population. Yes. Very, very mixed population. It's an island which is great. But it's very complex. And, um, like I say, we have a very close-ins' agency response, like fire service, ambulance service, all trains go down and rescue people when it's actually still very threatening for them in order to rescue people from the underground. But that's coordinated response. And it's very, very, you know, carefully measured and practiced. So it's formal, mostly, you know, was adopted after Mumbai. Yeah. It says most handguns have been banned in Great Britain since the Dunblane schoolmaster in 1996. So that's, OK, well that's the reason for that. So how has that had any effect on, like, mass shootings? Yes, I mean, really. We have a mass shooting. We do have mass shootings in the UK. I can't think of anyone that's being terrorism. But we do have an adequate response now for it. Yeah. Because here it's like, you know, there's been terrorism. There's been like the, it was the burnt San Bernardino. There was that one that was terrorists. But a vast majority of the shootings in the US are just like psychologically disturbed kids. Exactly. And that's the danger, right? On antidepressants. This is what, you know, I think, you know, these countries, the people who are in them don't really realize the level of attention and the level of praise some teams should have. You know, and it is those young, um, in easy to influence people, you know, getting a bad state, reading a diet of social media, the off of narrative, all of that sort of stuff. And they get into a mindset, you know, all of a sudden, and actually, you know, no one talks about the many, many, many, many, many, many of them that are saved because there's like an attentive content moderator. It says, okay, well, this, these posts are looking like they're going in a certain way and then passes it over to the authorities. You then go and get the due processes, get legal processes to be able to intervene. And they'll catch it early and they'll get hold of the individual. You know, it's called preventing our areas, you know, and stop this happening because that's the sad decline that happens. And when you take it, and again, that's one of the domestic problems is when you've got high levels of unemployment in some of these countries. And people feel like, you know, they were, you know, deserve more. I've got a degree and yet I've not got the job. You know, they become very, very vulnerable to people who know how to influence people very well. They turn them, give them sort of an ideological route to go down. And the outcome can be extremely dangerous once that goes, you know, and in this day and age, you know, we're living in a fascinating world where information sharing is there and it's open and it's free. It's monitored. It's monitored by companies. It's unsurprisingly monitored by anyone that can, in order to identify that sort of staff. And you know, and again, I just make the point that so many people actually get picked up by content moderators, they get reported by school teachers. They get, you know, flagged up, you know, jails and monitored. But you've never heard about that though. That's the problem, right? At least in the US, you know. You know, the, the, the, the, the diligent people who've been overlooking this got the due process to actually go and intervene and do something about it. And then I would take this individual into responsible hands and look at it and say, okay, or do you actually pose that real threat? Now in the UK, there's a lot of knife crime real, real on an knife crime. And it's very, very difficult to ascertain when someone's talking about it and actually intends to, therefore, do they present a threat to the public or whether they actually just talking to you? Yes. And, you know, there's lots and lots of clever ways of, of looking at that and assessing it. How do you assess it? Well, it's not my field of expertise. Okay. You look at this and you say, okay, well, I'll pursue what ages this person. Now, who are they, who are they sort of trying to pass this message to? But the key point is, is the large majority of it is exactly as you've said. It's these people that, you know, left unattended, they could well go down into that dangerous bracket. But a point they draw some notice. They're not at that dangerous point. And they can be turned around. You know, they can be sort of intervened on and said, look, you know, you're looking a bit. these are three posts. These, these, you've reposted this. Right. So these are vigilant content moderators. You know, that will, will flag something up because that's what they should be doing. Right. They have professional responsibility to do it. Yeah. I think a big part of it is parenting too. It is a lot of shitty parenting here in the US. People that just want to have kids and they don't want to raise kids, right? They're not fit. They're not mentally or physically or socially fit to, to raise human beings. Yeah. And that's how that's, that's, that's the root cause of a lot of the most, you know, the worst parts of America. Like the homeless problem, like, you know, the drug problem, like that. There's this guy who I've had in the podcast called Mark late. His name's Mark later. He has a YouTube channel called Soft White Underbelly. He's in LA on Skid Row. And he does interviews with like prostitutes, pimps, drug dealers, like all of like the most down and like worse off people in America. And you know, he was on here and he was telling me he was like the one common denominator between all these most, all these fucking human beings is just terrible parenting. Yeah. I mean, the easiest and best way of doing it is to, you know, provide a safe and stable and happy home for a start. I mean, wouldn't go that way. I mean, I would have two-stage problems. Let's face it. Like, like, right. Right, of course. Get a hard time at school. Yeah. You're going to have some of those issues, but certainly not going to be left to incubate for someone else to jump in influence or worse. It's just perpetuating conspiracy theories, you know, just plutes people's minds. You know, it gives them an impression. There's something you'll worry about that there's not. You know, and that's the problem, right? They're exposed to this in an equal vein. You can go on to the same platforms and research the most incredible topics. It's not the phone in the hand. It's the problem. Right. It's not the accessibility to the information that's the problem. You know, so, but I totally agree. If you, you're a parent and you took a real view on, like, ensuring that your children were guided, like, parent, it and supported, you know, and gave them a feeling. A lot of my friends tell me about sort of, you know, their daughter came to see them because someone was, like, putting a message up. And that's like the good news your, your, your children should be confident enough to come and bring things to you. So what nerve does this mean? You know, what, what, why is this person saying this to me? Right. And that, that all comes down to parenting. You can't blame the children, you know, you haven't got a feeling with you a brain to you 25. Right. Exactly. It's not fully developed. Right. And so even at 18, as even as a young person, as we would deem them, young adult, you know, you're still very, very prone to kind of decisions and opinions that wouldn't make as an adult, like an adult beyond 25. Right. That's an interesting point, you know, because a lot of people I'm sure by the time you were involved in heavy combat tours and operations, you were under the age of 25, right? And I wonder how that, I mean, I'm sure the vast majority of people who get into the military or under the age of 25. And I wonder how that affects like your development when you're that young, you know, seeing those kind of things and being under that kind of stress. It definitely leads to issues that they know fully well about. But, you know, these are great experiences. Let's not ignore the brilliant processes. Yes. Yes. Excuse the education formative experiences and pressure is not the cause of concern here. Pressure in life is quite healthy. It's a prolonged period of exposure to stress and suffering, you know, witnessing to an eye of the instance as well. That's not in order to key points. But it's that constant exposure to stress and yes, as a young mind. But remember, young body is more capable of actually dealing with it. You know, you are actually more active. Your physical function is should be tuning and chiming quite well. So a lot of most young people are actually come out of it pretty well. You know, they'll never kind of forget it as an experience. It would have shaped who they are as an adult. You know, but it's not necessarily shaped to me in a bad way. They'll be challenges. You know, and going back to the guy just spoke in the bar, you know, it's just wonderful to speaking to someone and seeing it, seeing him challenges. And, you know, and he's a pleasure to speak to. And, you know, he alluded to this. He's like, you know, he's far away. And I was like, oh, got it. Right. Because that's your social engagement, that's your way of like, you know, in order, you know, that's very, very clear and important. And when we worry about each other, you know, on a professional level, we watch behaviors, you know, and a lot of the time it will manifest in the home, you know, before, you know, how people behave very much represents their, you know, mental fitness, mental health. And how dysregulated the brain has become. Because of that presence of prolonged stress, which results in constant poor nephodrine and cortisol flooding through the body that does some really, really quite surprising things. And we're, we don't fully understand all of this, right? You know, create some sort of inflammation. You know, keep your body on a level where it's not maintaining itself. It's not kind of cleaning itself out properly. It's the harmonious balance of all your functions is lost. And that's when you see it. And it's not immediate, you know, but it's come and know what I recognize. I had two changes of behavior whilst I was in, in forces. And so changes of behavior. Yeah. So again, it's indicative. If you look at your behavior as a kind of marker of where your brain is. So when someone's very, very defensive towards me, I'm not kind of like everyone, everyone has a bad day and I'm not talking about that. And I can't indicate, why are you on a, you know, way kind of back foot in all the time? You know, it's like what's going on in there, you know, present negative thoughts. Yeah. All the time this is a firm indicator of dysregulated brain. Something going on neurologically up there that's not there and left unattended. It was slide into depression, social isolation. And a suicide ideation is definitively attached to this in this decline. and left unattended it was slide into depression, social isolation and a suicide ideation is definitively attached to this in this decline and we actually get taught a lot of this. I did the police association negotiation crisis unit course which is absolutely wonderful place to be not only does it test you to sit there and talk to people that really make it half you to talk to them. You do a lot of study into mental health and people with challenges and how to manage people who are in crisis and it gives you a real real insight and I find that fascinating and possibly the seed to some of the stuff that I'm looking into now but the soldier community, military community as a whole, they're allostatic load, everyone has got an allostatic load, you know your allostatic load is the levels of environmental factors that are adding stress to you. You know everyone has one with SF community it's really kind of exceptional levels you express. It's a subconcussive blast, a stress of continually sort of turning up and performing, you know the stress of being on standby all the time you're always on call you know you're like there's lots and lots of different areas where that allostatic load becomes a whole factor. But it doesn't mean say the millages full of human beings right everyone is human at a baseline and they're affected by these stresses and so you look in other units as equally as relevant. It's just particularly definable in the special forces community. And I think that learning and progress into this is huge but the trouble is when you've got neurological dysfunction it's mystifingly hard to tie down, diagnose there's so many different influence in factors in it. So I think it's really, the US is a long way ahead in its knowledge of this and programs to really understand it and mitigate, mitigate, you know when that stress is really inevitable. How many guys that you've worked with in the SAAS or any other parts of the military have like wanted to stay in the military and keep doing operations? So I think like everyone would. Everyone would. Yeah absolutely. Really. You know life changes around you, people have families, the conditions around it there's a lot of injuries and there's a lot of people who just get worn out. You know there's no reason you know we keep ourselves very, very fit. It's one of the main mitigations to somebody other damage that gets done and the maintenance of it. But essentially and I think everyone would stay as long as they possibly could do some it just becomes completely incompatible with outside life. You know people make their own decisions. A lot of there's a lot of high rates separation in all military special support, special forces units because you're required to go away a lot. You mean separation like separation from spouse and everything else you know. But a lot of those relationships may not have worked anyway. You know again it's those factors that it can't it's too easy to just turn around and specifically change like put the job as the single unit of fault every single time. That's not but it's a key part of the pattern, the context. Right. So you know many other professions suffer the same thing and it's certainly not not unique. But I think you know when you start everyone would love to stay on as long as they can. People want to be operational. There's lots of training jobs, there's lots of jobs of extremely high value that don't mean going away on operations or anything especially in this world. You know you've got so many domains of military effects as such as part of an overall strategy. I'm just declared cyber was a fourth space to fifth now industry to sixth. But don't a lot of guys that come out of the military or retire from the military. Don't they go back to be part of like special operations and other parts of the world like at an older age. Like I know now like in Ukraine I know there's a lot of like veterans like you know like US veterans and special operations guys that are like up there like in their 50s that are going over there to fight. So there is a network you know in your to do security security is a very very broad word. What you're talking about some do. You know the people went over and supported the Kurdish against the Islamic State. You know one of them was jailed in Turkey and I made a fundamental risk calculation and he ended up being regarded as having supported the terrorist group himself because that particular portion of the Kurdish. The Turkish team are a terrorist organization. So you have to be really careful what you know exactly how you're going to be perceived by others when you do it. There are a lot of people that go on and serve alongside others willingly and many for very very good reasons. Personally I'm not when I left I said you know I want to orientate into a different career a different sort of opportunity business and also you know a lot of people become very high level security and you know you have to have an SIA license in the UK for this and I've let mine lapse because you know I don't want I really want to engage and be useful somewhere else. So yes there are a lot you know and how valuable they are in their contribution I think differs greatly and I think there is always a danger that it's always been what you've known so you're just going to keep on doing it. Yeah and you know and essentially in my background I've got people I love my promise too as well and it stood up when I had a duty to do them you know now I'm going to do it willingly on my own volition. What do you mean? Just because so you know when I've got people to depend on me for first stuff you know you know well she's doing a duty that's you know yes that's obvious right it's not negotiable you're doing it and you're doing your job well by doing it. It's going to be harder for guys that don't have families you know guys we're just single and they have no one. I think it does go very differently and I think but also there's a risk if that becomes your only way and I remember you're getting older a chance to build a full life because the military is a full life but it's very directed down a tunnel how a lot of quite how long? That's a good way of putting it. You know you're not exposed to all of the other parts of life. When you leave you have that opportunity to do it you know it's remarkably a healthy thing to do. You know I was talking to a legal guy in tech not longer he simply couldn't get his head around that I've done him a career for 23 years and I'd stopped and now I was going to do another one. It's rare right? Most of my friends have been there with their same company for 21 at least in the same industry 21 22 years. It's not rare amongst us right? You know people choose certain parts and my path has been get out engaged find you know go embrace opportunity a bit go and explore whether that's going to suit or right you know and add some value where you can but if you're not proving your fullest amount of value there's an extent down the path to make keep on engaging you'll go there. Other people do choose to do security or and take jobs for the rest of their time you know and you know they extremely well paid but they mean long long periods of time on oil industry. A lot of oil installations you know you have a very big percents in running the security that guard them and there's lots of jobs that fall there. You said oil and gas industries. Obviously in very remote locations they need some security been doing so a lot of uh ex-members go into those sorts of industries and I've kind of elected I haven't ruled out by the elected to try and engage in you know what I'm involved in now and learn and adapt to become almost going to another whole career. So it's just your personal choices there's no right wrong in any of it you know and people are content with what they're content with you know for me I want to build that life back around me. Yeah certainly not you know sentimental in my outlook on that you know it's not like I feel I owe anything or anything I just think it's going to be better when I'm 55 or 60 that I've done that and I'm sitting there with all of that bolted together and that you know means pla-cued in certainly better paid work but it means which would mean six months year away living away. What was that quote you said but I think before we started recording you said something about nostalgia. Yeah the ancient Greeks are well yeah what are the ancient Greeks about nostalgia? All I say is there's the reason the ancient Greeks regarding nostalgia is an ailment and what they're trying to say is don't lean back and what you knew before you know and I'm quite careful and disciplined to to not do that you know so and that's smooth thing as I move further away from the military in time. I think transition window it's not even in your first step until your four years clean you know your four years gone from that career and and you're just starting to adapt some behave in a different way you're changing your mindset to single duty purpose to kind of. That's an interesting quote man because when you think about people who are getting old a lot of them just like to reflect on the past. Yeah you know they don't they don't really focus on the future as much as young as you think young people do right young people typically top generally talk about the future and really really old people who whether they've done a lot in their career their life or not they typically all reflect on the past. Yeah often that's interesting. I've asked myself a lot what did they mean you know physically lean back or whatever and I think it is that they don't let your brain to linger to be you right yeah. How do you much in the past you know get on new experiences a very good view. It's a way to stay young. Yeah and learn more things right you know try and try and learn a new career a new career you know I think you know soldiers that do transition they tend to bounce through jobs quite routinely until they settle and it's because they get put in a position where they get off of the job they can provide some value but it doesn't really suit them as a character as a person and increasingly they're able to select as they're going along but it doesn't happen by magic there's no way you're going to come out of the 23-year career in the military and suddenly go and find a job. The post office. That's like wow I'm going to do this for 10 years and this is going to be absolutely amazing and I'm so excited to tell them about it. Right. You know and it is a process of sort of navigating your way through. I think the art to it is to engage engage engage and you know and really sort of grab opportunity and be mindful of risk but don't let that be the defining factor in it. Right. You know if it yeah there might be a bit of a bump you might get a bit of a loss. Now I've found out you're not very good at something. Right so you were telling me I've ever a minute ago how many operations and tours were you a part of total? So it's the figure so some of them were posts and were tours. I count operational tours in an in a theater where there's counterterrorism operations going on or whatever I did 19 and that amounts to roughly about 13 years in operational days. So that's a huge exposure to experience you know and you know and it's all really just a blur now and I've quickly moved on beyond it but it was you know a tremendous experience whilst it lasted and that was whilst it was my professional duty to do it you know it's not like a linger for it now at all you know you know and in many ways I'm just grateful you know my operational marker was don't miss one right and that doesn't mean I've put my hand up for it when I'm asked I'll go you know there's they'd have to be an exceptional reason so I'll cover this a bit more a bit later but you know just for my third or up to my mum was hit by car. Killed very very bad injuries she went under underneath it so fatal injuries declared dead out at about an hour and 40 and obviously at turn my family completely inside out my father was very dependent on my mum he actually died 30 months later just few pure stress but I deployed six weeks I believe again my memory's fuzzy pretty close afterwards I went and deployed you know and I got stuck in the operational tempos very very high and on at particular tours there's like 180 in excess 180 operations that we we we we were involved in and essentially you know I was approved that I was valid you know I got commandated in certain ways you know I was doing my work well enough yeah I finished that or came back I came back with Alapecia and had I known what I'd know now I would have obtuded that much more closely to you know okay well it's interesting human bees can go on a long time but that you know my mum's death would be described as allostatic load and it is stresses from your professional environment but also your personal environment added up and how that compounds on an individual and an Alapecia is definitely linked to that you know at the time I was you know I just put it out to die I may even remember it kind of getting noticed because I was sort of too tired to even notice I don't to be honest with you I haven't really ever paid too much attention to what I looked like but I was having my hair cut and I remember the hairdresser saying to me oh you poor boy which is like one I found it really interesting to call me a boy but I think remembering back last about 25 so that's probably a fair one yeah yeah exactly and then obviously I started developing these perfect circles in my beard which still are still there now when they come and go and that's just dates back to that period where obviously like long term stress had just kicked in and I was performing at very very high level constantly turning over turning over out back in out back in making decisions all the time you know at my age it was almost a privilege to be able to do that you know everyone wants to work in a role in an environment in their industry when they're challenged and tested and you know you can be proved that you were you were good you were effective and you know and especially at that age you know that was important for me but I you know I'll return to my body was trying to tell me something but I continued I had been brutal man those in both your parents were there yeah no it's very tough fire so very very tough and you said you're dad passed away from just stress yeah well you know medical term is a broken heart and what that is is you know I don't know what killed him but he described how he would die right and he used to get up very early in the morning you used to have a cup of tea with my mum and that was his sort of darkest period of his time after my mum and my mum died so and I remember going back and speaking to him because I was uh I was super working on some sort of medical attachments that we do in order to protect some medical skills drive home very early in the morning and found him in a kitchen I was chatting to him and I just remember sort of looking at him and just going you hardly hardly holding it together I looked in a fridge and there was just some fish lined up and some tomatoes but he was you know he's really struggling to live even domestically you know he's keeping him good I mean my dad was pretty talented man right he's a competition sailor that he built his own place no way really yeah he's built his own boats he's a really incredible person so you know but he just simply wasn't you know wasn't managing and he said you know when I get up it's that that's that toughest time and it's almost like there's a pain and of course what he's describing and you know what I would assess is there's something called takotsuba cardio myopl and when you're deep deep levels of stress media grief after bereavement you know and other forms so financial stress can do this to you separation of loved one can do this to you and you know and he had a massive heart attack you know he fell over quite violently you know he's obviously really really big now what takotsuba is is for some reason and medical science doesn't know why but it was found in a post-mortem in the 80s in Japan therefore takotsuba so takotsuba means octopus trap and for some reason the long stress particularly pronounced through to grief or whatever um stuns um muscles in in the heart in one chamber alone I think it the right or left atrium whatever it is it makes the heart look like an octopus trap which is why they called it takotsuba and what that does is it most people it wouldn't be a problem at all you know that would be you we return to normal and unless you have other really quite severe heart preconditions it usually wouldn't wouldn't really sort of affect you but clearly in his case and if it was that you know nothing was found in nothing was found in his post-mortem you know in takotscology and everything else well yeah I was just covered in japan in just because and the heart goes back to normal why they're naturally or obviously after event the death it will do that the same um because you haven't got that effect back on the heart right you know we don't know how many people are you know have been full of victims so you can't diagnose a post-mortem yeah but what I do know is you know they've identified the mechanism of it so if you're bereaved and you've got central pains you shouldn't be too surprised don't be overly concerned you know this thing just goes back to normal in the vast vast majority cases but for some reason that we cannot put down or at least I've never read an explanation for it is this stunning muscle on the left um so I'm sure it's left side maybe right but one side of the heart that compromises the heart's function a bit um and it interferes with myocardium so it's it's driven um so you know that's a period of risk and I do some sort of close speaking um stuff you know very rarely um but when I do it I really enjoy it you know it's lovely close in the doors and speaking to people and you know meeting people and you have to prepare for it which is brilliant it's an all part of research and and everything um like that it's all all very important so um sorry sorry the point being is yeah the tight love that is a unique perspective for the challenges we all share and what I say to people is like you know human stress is inevitable pressures you know natural cause and actually very good for you but human stress is inevitable you know when you're listening to this talk about sort of special forces of military uh this all sounds very exceptional but it's not one person in this room that will not be bereaved at one time in your life you know it is very it's highly likely you'll know someone close to you that's gonna suffer a pretty challenging illness to treat you know there's highly likely you'll end up separating from someone that's been pretty you know brutal experience whilst it goes on you know and don't be surprised at this is hard you know it's your approach to it that that is absolutely critical and how you emerge from it the emergence from it is is not going to be quick you know we're talking weeks you know people think they've moved on from a death in six weeks 10 weeks 12 weeks three months no it's not not anywhere near you know it's like uh that will be affecting you for the next couple of years at least if not you know we'll have a legacy behind it you know but physiologically you you you return to normal you know and and everything but that won't be quick what was your dad and your mom together for like how long were they together yeah yeah very decades and decades 30 to 40 years I think yeah yeah yeah you know you know I've really amazing people but then I think most people are like regard their parents as that my mom was extremely hard workers for him free jobs and and a mom so me and brother so she was an architect and did a something called milk recording as well so milk recording is uh you know when the manually milked cows and I had to record all the hands so me and my brother when we're young you skip putting a mattress and driven to a farm awake up on the farms very early in the morning it's a very cool way of growing up and I remember taking a big silver earns of milk back and all that so my mom was tremendously hard working you know just sort of person that got up four in the morning did some architecture before the day started and you know what happened to her it's completely unpredictable as a shock you know my dad used to say you know I've got shout goodbye to your mom but never got to do anything else and that was tremendously hard for him you know right you know you know it was it was physically very very fit they didn't pick up too much in the post-mortem they picked up some normal stuff that you would you'd expect so yeah I mean that's the key point right right I was still going on operations I didn't stop you know but looking back my body bit back and I and uh slight adaptation of behavior then yeah the second period of time was you know we're into our ninth tenth operations now they're highly condensed together and I had a really quite pronounced change in behavior and that's from a cumulative it's not just down to one thing and how do you notice these slides from me are you constantly going through like psychological evaluations well consciously I'm aware of how I've to be fair okay and if you know everyone gets a bit depressed every sort of that's very different from depressive but depressive is a mechanical sort of process into it's a decline it's uh you know increasingly dysregulated neurological function and that's what I'm all always consciously aware of you know get up and have a bad day that's like everyone else does you know it's up to you it just makes someone else have a good day and it will change but what I'm saying is I'm very conscious about you know negative thoughts creeping in right which indicates that kind of sort of I'm not particularly in tune another thing that's very very important to realize is if you have been down into those pits of stress that leave to these challenges that you face you know the root outfit if it goes to clinical level one you'll need professional intervention you know there's no way you can drag yourself back out of it using just the processes available to you which we'll talk about but you know it's going to be a long process back out there's a process back out there absolutely is but you're going to need some help whereas if you identify these periods of stress and mitigate them before they get you probably never going to go down to that line and that can be very very challenging if you're doing a professional especially force your soldier in yeah without a doubt how much attention do they pay to your mental well-being when you're in the special you do melt right so I mean we're consciously watching each other I mean not just you guys I mean other other people other doctors around you that are evaluating extremely good medical support we're slightly less metric than others you know now there's algorithms you can do there's there's various stuff that measures your cognitive abilities you know I'd end if I cognitive decline can measure a change in mindset now I've been out there unit for three years so I have no idea what they're doing now you know it's you know I don't look back in and go one of these things that you're doing so whether they are using them I'm not sure you know at that time the best defense we had is looking and watching each other and know each other and if you see someone behaving slightly differently and it key one is getting all defensive you know it's like slightly you know everything that they're doing you know they're acting in a defensive manner that's probably the first indicator's you know they're out of balance they're going off to yeah this is a slide you know now that might have been an accumulation of factors now we've been we did intense periods of training with explosives used you know and and everything else you're subjected to the blast in each and every time and the blast reacts in different ways you never really predict how hard you're going to get it by you know we do close court combat so there's over pressure from from barrels you know this is all part of nature of special operation forces right so you know it's almost foregone conclusion you know there's subconcussive blast at results in brain shearing so brain shearing is a slight agitation between the gray and white matter of your brain so the gray matter is where all your dendrites are so the the white matters will react since follow through so they're the communication channels with its myeleneation sheaf and they appear down and communicate to the peripheral nervous system which is where you get all your stuff in when your it's constantly explosive ass with its mortars artillery explosives you know all of that sort of stuff you get that very kind of minor concussive effect you know results in that slight shearing now this can be detected in the blood now it's not this is very very new and I believe it comes from the US and it's called neuro filament light so if you can detect this it's sort of had the term brain dust then it's different from someone who's boxed or played football whatever the mechanisms are slightly differently interesting so if you have a different so I'm not quite sure because contact sport you know it results in the difference between getting hit in the head versus dealing with some sort of explosive blast it's like a pressure more than ever yeah right mechanism slightly different that makes sense now getting potting I mean it's interesting that boxes are more prone to this than say MMA fighters certainly all types of fighting you know and again it's an interesting one because do we want to take contact out sport or no of course not we can't take contact for you know you stop being human yeah exactly and so you know the impetus is to measure the risk measure the exposing responsibly put measures in so the exposures in that point of competition yes not in the training unnecessarily you know and but then also you know and again use every measure available to you including technologies to mitigate it and promote your own physical physiological function because what's inside you is your best defense yes so and I think we've got to a point now where you know no people people are responsible and they always have been for the people that are doing duties on behalf of them in professions in sports teams in anything personal choice in there but that's part of the contract in the deal you know by now not measuring exactly what the exposure is and kind of taking on the risk and mechanisms are getting put in place you know this is all quite new again one of the problems is neurological function is you know these conditions are extremely difficult to diagnose I want to go I want to go deep into this stuff but I got one more question about the the combat yeah so when you guys leave these program like the SAS and these highly high special forces divisions is it normal for you guys to have to completely scrub your identities when you get out of there because I know a lot of a lot of guys we were talking a little bit before the couple of guys that you know had to do that why would they do that and how how normal is that it's just I mean it's personal choice at the point where you get out you know there's no guidance on on on things but it's personal choice it's what you what you want to be comfortable with again in transition you know people may not be fully comfortable with you know it happens in phases rather than anything you know and you can talk endlessly why people aren't comfortable about that but it's really a personal level of approach you know in everything that you do what you choose to do and everything else and why so like what kind of blowback do you get when you leave the military or what kind of blowback have people like yourself gotten once they've decided to retire like and it's not really about blowback it's a bit really about you know for a long period of time you've been in a very classified environment yes you will not have social media and you've been completely contained to you unique purpose that you're designed for you don't share anything you know why would you share anything and essentially when you get out it takes a little bit of time to unwind that in your head and become comfortable with it so you know for me it was like okay well I'm going to step and I'm going to walk down this path and I'm going to get involved in technologies and I'm going to get involved in careers in industries where I'm pretty much learning from from the beginning there's question remains is everyone am I ever going to adapt sufficiently yeah that means engaging in the world on a flat level that's learning from from the beginning. There's question remains is every I am I ever going to adopt sufficiently. That means engaging in the world on a flat level. I'm like what I'm trying to say here is the major people like you who retire from these forces how worried do you have to be about your safety? Like when you're traveling the world or like people that you've like enemies that you've dealt with in the past trying to come back and find you or stuff like that. Places you'll travel to if you take those sorts of roles. Present a lot of risks. Yes. You know so I think people are very mindful of that. Until you're sure where you want to go with your life and whether it's going to include those travelling to certain areas that may be risky that's probably why they control it to a certain extent. And you know everyone you want to do it on a measured basis how you want to engage with industry, society, everything else. I guess name changes are pretty common. There's no standard to it. People make personal decisions on it. There's no standard to it. You know and you know essentially a lot of it is defined by what you want to do when you go out. For me on a flat panel on my apps, flat flat plane you know. I'm pretty sure I know where I want to go wherever it works out that way. But you know, you know, it doesn't make any difference to me. Do you feel like now that you've been out for three years and your in civilian life, do you feel like your heads on a swivel, hyper visualance always have to be looking over your shoulder? Did you have that in the beginning? Yeah, absolutely. I mean one of the key behavioral things that I manifested in the second time I had a bit of a time sort of spiraling back up. And again I was working all the way through. So let's not like, you know, I was conscious of it. It was you know, hyper security awareness, you know, which other team members noticed. And it was kind, constant looking and saying, okay, well, you know, doing assessments on risk and security. And I can't do neuroticism about who I was sort of engaging with, who gave me their number. And that's a completely dysregulated brain, right? You know, when you're kind of assessing too much and trusting too little, then your brain has become dysregulated. Now in that work, of course, you fairly assess everything you do. In particular, I'm not interested within myself. And I wasn't comfortable. And I was like, and this is not like me. And it's not by character. I'm not like this. So that's the bit I end up finding myself. I didn't intuitively go, this is what I got to do to solve it. But I pulled my way out of it. Like I said, it wasn't affecting my work. I didn't disclose it to anyone. And it wasn't affecting my work to the extent where I was, you know, not effective. And not even not pleasant enough to work with. And I became a dominating factor in everything I did. You know, that's, again, that's just not me. Right. So, you know, that's just a sign of a dysregulate brain. Right. All of the neurodifunction is going at that point. If you leave that unattended to, whether it's down to lack of sleep, lack of nutrition for periods of time, just quite like piled on stress. Or whether it was a cumulative over the years, whatever it was that led to it at that particular point. And it was over a few months. And I'd say it probably to reverse the whole thing to, you know, because it's where's the line back over a year. So how did you end up getting into this world of neurophysiology and working with NASA and DARPA and all these companies? Yes. I work at the moment employed for a satellite company. I'm probably moving industries quite soon. But it's been a pleasure to be in a space industry. It's an incredible place to be. Whether I can prove to be of really high value every day in there, I'm not sure. You know, that's one of the problems of that adaptation takes quite a lot of time to learn. But I've had a, you know, I'm really grateful for the people in the experience of had since I've left. And when people, when I've needed people's help, I haven't asked for help. But they've given a lot of support, which is fantastic. And it's like, and I've noted how much people have prepared to support you. And what you do. But it's up to you to keep on moving on. So I'm not saying I'm staying in, staying where I am at the moment. But I was trying to get on a course in period of college. Because I didn't find I needed to educate to make myself more relevant in certain fields. And through a gentleman who is the head of the Institute of Security and Science Technology, Professor Deep Channa, he on a walk round of a place called the IHUB introduced me to Richard Statham, who's a CEO of MMS Group AB. So he invited me in for a demonstration. I had a demonstration on the technology that they've developed. When I have developed technology, they've innovated with a child's trusted technology, which I'll come on to. Now, having tried that and experienced it, I was put for a few gaming scenarios, where, you know, people jumping out and sticking swords through me. And then I had to sort of back them my way through towards a radioactive nuclear core. And essentially, the technology put stimulus through your muscular sleep system. And a neuromuscular sleep system. And, you know, immediately I picked up on the benefit. And I don't, I'm not interested in stronger fit faster. And I naturally actually was perfectly physically capable of doing my job all the time. A little bit extra would, certainly would have been welcome. And if I could potentially have done my job better. But essentially where the, I sort of potential was that you can't in that real kind of promotion of all that physical function, which is so important, keeping yourself stable and balanced. From a career that's definitely a neurological deficit, you know, there's something I'm attending to. It's not going to quickly go out into disarray. But, you know, I also can't take my off it. So what was this technology? What was the purpose of this technology? What was the in goal of it? So the purpose of the technology is to be used. So it's an old technology is used in medical therapeutics like TENS machine. It's the same sort of family of technology as EMS. But they've developed and over eight years unique membrane. Incredible membranes about paper thin has unrivaled abilities take information from the human body. It's got super, super conductive. And they live a stimulus in the stimulus in, in artful waveforms that have been created by someone called Vincent Talonbach. He's an Parkinson's expert. He's got 30 years experience. Just under 30 years, I think 20 years, 27 years experience writing these waveforms and working on this in this area of expertise. And he's an incredible person. He's got legacy work and we can't agree. You're in student John Hopkins. And, you know, that's probably, you know, if you wanted to pick the most crucial and valuable elements of the whole piece. Because it's a number of technologies all put together. So that knowledge to write the waveforms, the waveforms themselves in the unique membrane. But also in that team's a lady called Dr. Victoria Sparks, who's a neurologist physiotherapist. And then a number of others says a program manager, Veddi. And so it's a very small team. But whatever achieved over seven years is really, really incredible. And what they've done is take, took an old and trusted technology and gave it applications in almost every area you can think of. Because it's a fundamental, it's a human application. And your muscular skeletal system is a gateway to a happy, healthy, and probably longer life. And it's attentioning and torsioning your muscular skeletal system is the most effective way of regulating your brain. Without doubt, you know, you have to still say to the... You're talking about the muscle that is, or like the closest to your bones, the skeletal muscle. Well, in every end point of a muscle, you have a connection with a neuron, an innervated muscle. And they appear at the top of your bones. But the whole muscle is... When you voluntarily recruit muscles, so when you pick up a dumbbell, your recruitment is however much it needs to be in order to do that. When you put a stimulus in, you can divine design a waveform to stimulate it in various ways. So in a program I've got on my phone, because I use this suit, you know, not every day. And again, it's wrong to talk about a technology like this. It's a habitual thing you need to do. You can do it in phases, you can do it in programs. But it's good for an approach to using over a period of time that you want to train. You can train without it if you want. And it's a technology that will adapt to what you want to do, or you can follow a program. But essentially, it's putting that physiological stimulus in. It's optimizing the promotion of other physiological functions through that innovation and stimulus onto the musculoskeletal system. Now, inside you is your most promoteable elements. You've got your blood-brain barrier that is very fussy and quite individual actually in every human being. What can't be argued with unless there's a genetic issue with you, which can be identified. So if you can promote those functions, all the more better recruiting the musculoskeletal and getting stronger. But also promoting those hormones, these creations of hormone and extracellular vesicles, that sort of cross-seals that move between, cross molecules that move between cells and promote them up into your brain. In a more effective way that can do by voluntary alone, then that is going to have a very good effect on other core elements of your physical physiological function. So these are where I've become extremely interested in technologies, not just the fact that by using it, you can achieve the strong fit faster, the fat loss, the cardiovascular health, whatever every element of fitness that you want the technology can be used to promote. But essentially by stimulating your musculoskeletal system, so when I describe the musculoskeletal system as a gateway, and you probably need to include your own one here, because of the latest research in the University of Illinois, is definitely indicating that innovative muscle is more effective at promoting these hormones and squishions of extracellular vesicles. That's your gateway as such. What people tend to go down the line of is, well, it's one padlock with a key, no. It's not. It's a combination lot. Some of the combination numbers, good nutrition, good sleep, healthy balance in your social existence, including good relationships or whatever. All of those are absolutely key factors. You need to remain on those pillars. But one of the most effective ones, you can actually directly influence. And that puts their numbers in bold, is that stimulus onto your musculoskeletal system. And we recently did a paper for people involved in spaceflight, in a space community, relevant to institutions like NASA and ESA, and gained their attention very, very quickly. Because what it is, is a technology that can be put into almost any garment. You know, the membrane is unique. It can be rendered into any garment. And it haven't stopped innovating. We're looking at various communities that definitely have challenges. So this stuff could essentially be implemented into like astronauts, spacesuits. Only they could ever say whether that is feasible or not. That's why they were interested in it. No reason why not. Well, there's no reason why not. So I think with any technology, even a non-invasive one, an awareness trusted one, you have to look at it, you have to ensure that it's doing what. You need it to do for your particular challenges. And a spaceflight community here, really interesting, because they're the very epitome of humans going beyond their biological limits in what they aspire or need to do for their professions. And you know, it's absolutely stark. Once you go into a microgravity atmosphere, which you're not well adapted to, the decline is extremely quick. And it's very, very hard to mitigate that damage. You mean that you're talking about like bone density. Mainly muscle mass and bone muscle mass and bone. Once you lose muscle mass and bone density, you start having a compromise, enter cry and function and you fizzle logical functions, in concert. All this needs to be harmonious, right? It's all as important as each other. So one of these suits that you could wear with these devices that stimulate the muscle could essentially mitigate the bone density loss and the muscle mass. Yeah, so there's a number of ways you can promote bone density, because nutrition is always there as the first one, but more or less so the most effective. And then you've got, you know, the go out running, an axe called the Piazo electric effect. So as your heel is hitting the floor, your body turns the mechanical force of that impact onto the floor into electrical charge within your eye and gateways and promotes it into your bones. So that promotes bone density. Your problem with impact, of course, is, you know, over time it will impact the joints, but you know, that's not a good reason to stop doing running. And certainly, you know, running is one of the most effective ways. And the third one, I mean, is other minor ones, is tensioning and talking your muscular sleep systems and as strong your muscles are on the stronger their contractions against the bones, that's developing that bone density growth effect as well. Right. And what's important in this is, is not just that bone density is really, really important, but you've got, you know, there's a lesser known hormone called osteo-cousin. I think only really identified in 2000 thought that lies within the bones. Osteo-what? Osteo-cousin. Osteo-cousin. Osteo-cousin. Okay. And so even the bones are really important in your other physiological functions of the body, including in your illogical function. So, you know, so all of that needs to happen in harmonious concert. You know, none of it is going to be, if you're training, we're not eating and sleeping, it'll mitigate it for a bit, but you'll end up in a bad place. If you're eating, not sleeping, but training, you know, the whole thing has to be looked as a number of disciplines all put together. Right. Socialization, music, you know, all of these key aspects of ensuring your neurological balance. Right. Another way of looking at its emotional stability, right? So how you behave for your emotions that you display in reaction to the things that are happening to you. That's core to indicate you know, how healthy your brain is working, how fit it is, how mentally fit you are. And you know, if you're out of emotional balance on everything, or you're acting like a, basically a stone to everything you come across, that is in an indication. And then go back to my changes in behaviour in number two face. You know, that's what I've become really. And I was not in asympthetic to anything. You know, it's like that can be quite hard. And it's not, you know, sometimes people say, well, that's what you've got to be in order to continue to do your job. Right. And that can almost be a bit of a misnomer. Yes, it is. Of course, you're controlling yourself emotionally. And you're not going to become, it's not going to be a good thing to go down until sentimental pool of whatever else. But not being emotionally intelligent around how you behaviour around other people is also not indicating a good level of mental health, mental fitness rather. And I deliberately call it mental fitness because you have the ability to change it. Right. And through all of those stimuluses in your other functioning, promoting physiological function, promoting brain-derived neurotrophin factors, and neurotrophic factors, no growth factors that will move through your bloodstream. They'll land up in your brain. They play a very, very important role in regulating everything that happens up there. And you know, you've got a family of glial cells, good astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglial cells, astrocytes, responsible for expression and in their inhibits certain sort of cellular interactions in the brain and key expression and signaling in particular in your dendritic areas. So the ends of the neurons themselves, the end of the synaptic. And then you've got oligodendrocytes that rebuild the mildly and end of the chief that I alluded to earlier, which is if you take the axon, that's where the signal comes down. My leon and sheaf, to rebuild body oligodendrocytes, that is key to the conductor of the signals that move along it. Right. And then you've got finally microglial cells, which are like the brain's janitor. So it goes around and it cleans out all of the dectitus and cleans out bad proteins that have existed. So if you look at, they've got a key function out outside this for instance. And if they aren't performing their role or in in any way inhibited in their role, because of inflammation or because of whatever else is going on there. And they're really, really not sure about the cause or effects of this. But the process is absolutely essential. And one of the ways we are thinking, certainly in my mind, and one of the most tragic elements of Parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative conditions, is when physical symptoms are there. And that's the third, that's the last third of the disease. And when you, sorry, the condition. So when you roll back the clock to maybe 20 years earlier, when that started to the conditions around it where it would manifest. And believe me, I'm not talking about genetics here. There may be a more likely hood of it through genetics or whatever. But the environmental factors that you've experienced for your life, absolutely fundamental in what, how your brain is shaped. And if you know that you've been exposed to subconcussive blast, if you know that you've been reaved in traumatic circumstances, if you know you've been in a particular managed position at work, that's just absolutely not to all over the place for years. You all have preconditions. So we can identify the risk factors at the very least. There's a number of ways in growing our biomarkers where you can actually identify it present within the body. And then, you know, what can you do to mitigate at that point? At the moment they're sticking neural interfaces deep within brains, deep brain stimulators in order to control the motor symptoms of Parkinson's. And at that point, really, it's... There's things people can do with people with Parkinson's where they can implant something in your brain. Yeah, so for Parkinson's, you know, where the motor controls are invasively going to the brain and stick a deep brain stimulator. So a neural interface deep within there that sends out signal that interferes with the lack of motor control or the motor control. Is it mentioned on the view of the effect of it? I mean, how often do you visit? This is one of the problems, right? That's very, very clever. There's no doubt about that. It's an incredible intervention on an absolutely tragic disease and a tragic condition. But the key point is if you look at it, it also demonstrates how little we do know. Because actually, through that neural pathway that's affecting the motor in any way. I've heard... In the books I've read, I've seen two neurophysiologists refer to it in the same way. as it's like playing a piano with a mallet. Right? So you can actually only see a tiny amount of the neural activity that's going on. And you're sending a signal in. But through that same area pathway, there's all sorts of emotional behaviours going on. There's so much else. It's like a whole orchestra going on in there. And actually what you need to do is be playing a melody along it in ASIS. And the trouble is, introducing an invasive device into the brain. How much you trick it. It identifies for an object in the end and wrap it in a sheath. So that signal will become degraded. And that's a problem. So whilst it's really incredible that they're able to do it at all. And it does mark the progress in medical science and the practice of medicine. It also does highlight how much further we've got to go. And progress in this area is really interesting. It got deeply interrupted for the times of COVID. A lot of people lost their funding. But if we can find other ways in which to promote these. sort of the physiological function well before. The overall question in my mind is, could you have prevented it in the first place? If you really promoted those functions at times of stress, times of whatever else is leading to those neurodegenerative conditions becoming on sets. So you can't mitigate them anymore. Another tragic element at this is by the time they're visible physically. And they're generally at an age where your muscular school system is degraded slightly. And your own corrections are a bit degraded to a certain degree. So those people, particular individuals are less able to effectively get that beneficial stimulus. Yeah, how did you detect it earlier? Exactly. How did you detect it earlier? And even if you can't detect it, you can identify the risk factors that likely would lead to it. Is there more we can be doing with non-evasive wearables? Now in all of these topics, you can argue to the cows come home. Like, okay, to what point are you optimizing them? Is there a changing cognitive ability? That's for people to go out and work with research clinics to establish as quick as possible. Right. So to keep point with these technologies, I... No, no, no, I was just going to say I was... I've become aware of... You mentioned DARPA earlier. I know DARPA, I read this lady, Annie Jacobson's book about... She's a whole book dedicated to DARPA and some of the stuff that they do. And some of the research that they've been doing for a long time. And one of the things that they've been focusing on is creating super soldiers. And they've been doing these invasive brain implants since the 90s to try to do things like mitigate pain, like to try to like reduce the amount of pain that soldiers can bear in combat. And things like hunger, try to like get past hunger to survive longer without food. And all kinds of things. So it makes a lot of sense that they would be interested in something like this. Yeah, and I mean, I've just read a book where electric by Sally Adie, which is absolutely illuminating in so many aspects. And in it DARPA is mentioned so many times. There's been so, so critical in this advance of this research and technology. And of course, a lot of it is done for military purposes. Right. Right. And so, you know, I kind of got a need for it. You know, the need for human augmentation in the military is a given. You know, the military have a lot of people breaking through stress. So there's a piece of documentation called the dawn of new paradigm. Joint piece of work by the Bunders vier and Dasser. And essentially it's, you know, identifies that we should be able to promote to our human biological limits. You know, people aren't doing that. You know, we're not effectively going to our full biological potential. Now, if you go beyond that, you talk about enhancement. So you can take people's eyes and laser them and get them to see in the dark. That's relatively easy actually. You're going to see the dark. So you can just open up the rods so you can see better in the dark. Oh, it's about. Yeah, yeah. That means you can see in the dark. Right. There's as good as many man animals would. I thought you meant like give him like night vision or something. Yeah, night vision. So, you know, how cool that be. I bet you DARPA's trying to figure that out. Trying to make people get night vision in their eyeballs. Well, the key bit is could you do it biologically? Exactly. Exactly. You can actually take a laser and open it all up quite a lot. Perfectly safely. Add more rods in that allow you to see in the dark and you get better clarity at night. Now, night vision's come on a huge distance from when we first started. But it's hard work seeing on in those pictures that you see on, especially if you're doing it over over such a prolonged period of time. And then you've got all your different levels of information coming in. The overall load on your brain to interpret what's going on outside it. It's been getting pretty a lot and it's acknowledged as a significant challenge that they face is we're opening up all of these abilities to sense and surveil and learn and all this and be told something by something else. And the human brain is amazingly adaptable and it can survive. Whether it's neural. Yes, the least. Yes, a neural overload or whatever. Everyone talks about now needing to take a neural logical reserve. Even just a cope, let alone to condition. And you know, NATO's just released their statement on human enhancing technologies. You know, the importance of being ethical about it, but you know, important. So, you know, looking after the soldier, looking after the military is ensuring that they're well fair is good, but also they're conditioning suits what is what is going to be required of them. And getting them in a good physical state, good physical conditioning, but also augmenting their biological ability. And there is no reason why you can't do that. Right? If you're using, we can voluntarily do what we can do and individually and biologically on a biological level, we're all quite different. You know, we're all very, very similar. But the small differences between us manifest quite big in how we appear and how we behave. Right? So, but using a technology, a non-invasive technology to improve that conditioning. And there's no good in a set, in the hands of a small set of people. It's effective when you make it available to the whole and improve them by 10%, 20%. A quick room rehabilitation, more conditions do their role. If you're having, you know, a lot of back pain or people falling from particular condition, like a particular use in conditional to your roles, especially with the forces community. You know, lots of climbing and jumping. Right. Because that result in bad knees. You know, okay, we can see that. So we can condition that to become less of a, become a preventable, wingerous such. Right. And there was an interesting one we were brought with shelf people who worked in super stores. They were putting things on shelves all of a certain way. They're getting a particular type of problem. And you know, it's costing the company a lot of money. And that could be easily be treated by, you know, the right physiotherapy advice. And a very easy and accessible technology. And you know, the point I made when I come across this technology, what really blew me away. And I must add that I'm not paid by this company at the moment. You know, I don't, I'm represented. I've become an ambassador for them as I was invited to do. And, you know, I was just taken by, you know, a potential that it offers in so many applications. And, yeah, and in the use of this technology, you know, the fact that you can render the membrane into anything you choose. So if you take female motorsport, for instance, you know, they don't want to change the suit. They spent so much money on, on developments. You have to make the set of technologies that offer this, this stimulus. To be able to be rendered into the garment that they use. Yeah, and that makes it quite special. It makes it very accessible. And what struck me at the beginning of being introduced to this technology is, well, why not? It's an old-and-trusted technology. It's got no ethical intentions to it whatsoever. The risk side-affinable, because they're well known. And it's affordable, accessible in the business of units. You know, it's the applications that we'll go into. And it can be delivered at effective scale. And that's a key question with technology. Is it great? Yes. Can people use it? Who need to? Yes. Can it be made affordable and accessible to them? Yes. And that's a key point in this technology effective. So, I mean, that's sort of Emma's group AB. You know, it's effective in the four lines is gaming. So gaming is very easy. And much like haptic, this is a beneficial stimulus going into a body. The way form is extremely simple. It has a very simple product. And essentially, you know, FIFA 20 years. a haptic. This is a beneficial stimulus going into a body the way from it's extremely simple. It's a very simple product. Essentially, you know, fee for 24. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you get tackled and you just get a stimulus into your quad that's promoting good factors inside you as well. So it's not only the immersive gaming experience, you just make gaming healthy. You know, so then you've got interest in sports and recreational fitness world where you've got sort of a very focused focused programs on the pursuit of sports, recreational fitness, which is usually fat, last muscle conditioning. You know, all of the different pillars of health, but done at a certain level and done in a routine that makes sense to the user. So you can push it out in any model you want. But the safe brackets are written within the programs, you know, so within this older technology, you get a sudden called Robdomo lysis, which is bleeding within muscles. That's only if you take it to extreme levels or you're biologically particularly vulnerable to that. You know, and I would say that voluntarily you can give as Robdomo lysis, you know, by overtraining on in particular ways. So it's not just the technology and the technology arguably doesn't make you any more susceptible to that, but it's easily definable and it can easily be captured in these programs. So it definitely has applications in sports and recreational fitness, you know. You brought a sample with you. How does this one right here? This is, this is, I will mention there's some very artful prototypes coming out. So just bringing it over to where you are. Mainly it's, I mean, this is the membrane. So the membrane is the special bit. The membrane can be rendered into anything. So if it's medical therapeutic application, is it a knee sleeve? Is it, you know, what you need? Right. This is a suit I wear for my training. I've got numerous programs on my phone. So when I want to train and you know, the stimulus, the particular way form that allows me to deliver resistance in my muscles, that's what I use. I've used capillarization this morning because it's quite sort of nice. What's that? It just encourages blood fro. All of the area. So yeah, I use it most of the times when I train. It's great because it kind of- What kind of training are you talking about? So how did I train what this week? Yeah, like when you say when you use it for training, what kind of training are you talking about? Any training I want to do. So all I do is put the suit on and enhance my training. And that's the art to it, right? It's basically a stimulus that is when the stimulus goes into the muscle, when I voluntarily recruit the muscle, I can never do it into its fullest extent. It's impossible. Muscles got three types of twitch. You can never really access the slow level of muscle to the fullest extent for a start. The way forms a very, very cleverly designed that your body won't get used to them for a start. I don't understand the full technical aspects of it because it's like an art form. But essentially it's end-to-end recruitment of the muscle. So it's 100% recruitment of the muscle. Now if you want to get muscle mass, you adapt your training and the technology will make you more effectively in achieving that. So you can wear that and you get super jacked? You can do. I mean, I've never tried and I don't think I want to be super jacked because it's actually a bit of a disadvantage. But for my part, I want to be as quick and as kind of like work. But I want to be as quick and as strong as like it can be. Certainly that requires a certain mass of muscle. But the different programs, different waveforms, there's hypertrophy program on that waveform allows you to build muscle mass quickly. Right? The key point, and I make a really, really important point in this, is at no point in any of these technologies, the panacea, right? You've still got to be motivated enough to get up and train if you're using it for that. You can't just stick it on and it will go. What we've found through the research is the most powerful way of using any of these technologies. What this is is an involuntary stimulus into muscular spleal systems. It's cutting your brain out the loop, basically. So when you voluntarily train, your brain is moving, using what is conscious neuronal pathways and the moats going in, it's picking up and recruiting as much muscle. But you've got an involuntary stimulus going in the muscle, it's a glute system that's emphasizing certain elements of it that you wouldn't achieve. And it's optimizing the promotion of physiological function. So like, is there a full bodysuit version of this? This is a, there are some trousers. So this is a full bodysuit. Oh, that's, oh, there's pants and a shirt. Yeah. So, but equally, and that's the key part is really you're, it's an innovation of trusted technology. Okay. Now the, the, the membrane is absolutely unique, the waveforms, you know, it's like, what are some of the things that you could, if you could put that on and like, go for a run, there's something on the phone where you could type in like running. Yeah. So I'm, my phone's over there, but I've got banks of programs. And we've got, you know, a lot more on the bank data. And there's new prototypes out, you know, so we're working very hard on seeing development forward. But essentially, um, yeah, I mean, I stick it on and I stick it on my abs and my back to strengthen my core and my hinge. That's a resistance program that works particularly well for running. And what, so you, you do that when you're going on a run? Yeah. And then I go in and do some strength training. Uh huh. You know, and I don't, it's not like I'm turning to that and going, you're responsible. Right. And I'm putting it on and working intuitively works the way you train equally. I can just put it on a program. So the new programs, dedicated to, you know, they're built for people who know less about how to train for instance. So it can even go down to telling you how to train if you want it to. But most people don't want that. Right. Most people want something that is going to help them get to their goal quicker, like a catalyst to do it and do it better. Now, I'm using a non-invasive technology to do that with your own voluntary and motivated process to achieve that. You know, you're going to get better results each and every time. And the conditioning ability of this has been tried and proven. Right. It's also been used in a medical and therapeutic world for a very long time with bad bound patients, people who've had muscles that have, you know, being an active, there's actually a program on that for that on my phone. That's amazing. You know, so, but this is only the basis of where the potential can start. You know, as well, further understanding comes on how harmonious balance in endocrine function, physical function is attached to that tensioning and talking of the musculoskeletal system. And the most recent research as I said is innovative muscle is more effective. It's creating the hormones and the extracellular vesicles that, you know, go up into your brain and boost brain function. And so it's a very exciting area. But just on the simple basis of what the suit does, you know, sports record out from fitness, it's a great technology to use. And actually, you know, it's the same technology you've used, you've seen it, but it's a totally different application of it. You've seen the lumps, you've seen the wires coming out. There's got no wires on it. The membrane is incredible. You know, so that means its applications can be very exciting. You know, when you talk about sports records fitness, you know, special applications are defined by any profession that challenges your human biology, biological limits to do it. So consider spaceflight. You know, you go in into a microgravity atmosphere. They're probably the epitome of the example people have got challenges in achieving what they're aspiring to achieve, but also militaries are, you know, defined very quickly, massive human performance challenges, both in the health and welfare. Readiness of all their soldiers, you know, which, you know, they're keeping up. But the point is it's not just good enough to keep up. And it's very important to have every human being as ready as they can and as conditions they can for every trial they may face. And then you've got medical and therapeutic and medical and therapeutic as an incredible world where the technology has already been used. And we've been, we're going to go on a trip to Ukraine and that's kind of sort of a very good exemplar of where the immediate application of this technology can help incredibly. And, you know, Ukraine has got a huge amount of amputees and dramatically wounded people. You know, inside, you know, please don't take these figures for about them. But you're looking at 110,000 or something, you know, it's like, and then the levels are processing of the amputees and trying to get these humans back into a stable and social existence. And, you know, and a happy one, but also being able to get them back to doing some sort of work. And, you know, and again, the members of that economy, that national economy is critical. And the challenge is a huge. And this is an interdisciplinary area. You can't just give them a physioanalyt at all work. So the technology can perform an extremely important role in not only being a catalyst that I'm going back and, you know, getting rehabilitated. They can play a very important role in preparing them for their conditioning for surgery and post. And it can help them condition further afterwards. So if you think about someone who's an amputee, they have got a mechanical disadvantage in tensioning, talking in their muscular, skeletal system, right? So this means that, you know, forever more, they will have a kind of neurological deficit. They will have to attend to. The imbalances in visual function and redress in them are big as well. So this is a preserve for experts, you know. And again, this technology can be made available to anyone when they're following a program with conditions built in. But when you're actually treating sort of people with very, very complex injuries, when you're addressing communities with you know, professional challenges, that's when you have to have the experts involved to inform the process. You know, analyze, you know, how is this immediately useful to them? Where can we prove it can be useful in the future? So, you know, the end of the day, that trip to Ukraine is all about delivering them a technology that will help them rehabilitate these people, being conflict-affected. And potentially will become, you know, people that, you know, will take a massive amount of resource to support for forever more. For, you know, these are generational problems when conflict takes place. It's a massive impact to a whole population. You know, generational levels of problems, you know, you've got, you know, all sorts. And that's the cost of conflict. Right. Yeah. Absolutely. Is this available commercially or publicly right now? So yes and no, in it's moving out to sports and recreational fitness market. I think they've got the new types of suit ready. I haven't spoken too much about the business plan recently. You know, medical and therapeutics, it's being used already, but we're working with Imperial College leads of department in Muscles, Skeetal, Biodinomics. Some other, you know, talking to the NHS about it's why do you think these non-invasive technologies, it takes a long time to prove their data. Right. And that's where, you know, from my point of view, you need to differentiate between a non-invasive technology and an invasive technology. Because the non-invasive technology, as long as you can define the risks pretty clearly. And this is an old and trust technology that's been used for a long time. You should be able to hypothesize, you know, quicker. Right. Before. And, you know, you shouldn't need that mountain of data. Because you can get on with using non-invasive technology. Because it's keying into your own biological systems. You know, it takes out that critical point of error. Now, you can't be complacent with it. You need the expertise to advise on all of this. And we'll get on with clinical research and everything else that proves to what extent it improves cognitive ability. Right. But the fact that, I mean, it has immediate applications in multiple, multiple use cases. You know, there's big communities that can benefit from it, you know. People, you know, people who have become quite obese. You know, these sorts of technologies can be used to help them. You know, when you get to the critical point where you you've got to be really, really careful about, you know, how much you do and stress when you're other internal organs. You know, these technologies can be using quite some artful ways in the hands of the right people. And again, it's an interdisciplinary area. You know, no physio should be on their own without a neurologist. And you need all of those expertise come together. There's certain strength in having a commonality of knowledge in the middle. Nice. When you talk about some of the amputee treatment rehabilitation, you know, physio's are there on their own and they have no idea what's going on in your own or overload. The changes in your own or function that's having to go on. You know, and that's why it's important. You know, and it's especially when you're applying a technology like this, the benefits really arise from the knowledge. Now, again, it's the way you form the does the art. You know, there's decades of knowledge that's took to get to that point. Right. And again, you know, you know, love podcast because they're platforms where you can actually hypothesize. Yes. And you can say, you know, why, you know, there is no reason why technologies like this cannot be partnered together. You know, innovating with their applications and applying them. You know, you can chase further down the path quicker. You know, you can make it more accessible quicker to a large amount of people to benefit from it. That's really cool, man. That's exciting to see what you're doing and how this can be implemented in various ways to to help people maintain or to help people that have been afflicted by, you know, physical injuries or diseases and stuff like that. So where can people that are watching this learn more about this technology or or this program that you guys have going on? Yeah. I mean, so more than welcome to look at the product. You know, at the moment, it's quite a closed off, but it's in a way I describe them to be is with the right partners. You know, move quite quickly. I've just been soft week, which is a absolutely lovely. So really enjoy coming here as well and happy I'm not leaving just yet. But essentially, you know, these companies that we can partner with quite quickly and working together in a collaborative manner can get, you know, quicker to the solution. If you can measure brainwaves accurately and you can promote physiological function and measure what you do with it. But again, I emphasize, you know, the nascent nature of measuring what's going on in the brain, you know, making very, very quick progress. So yeah, at the moment, go on links, have a look at companies. If you if you're interested in this, and it will start appearing in research, we're working very heavily with Metropolitan and Manchester Metropolitan University, Northampton University and Imperial College. Imperial College is absolutely key because it's got the innovation hub. So this is an ecosystem of innovation like not just small startups, representation of big sort of primes there as well. And it's quite a special building because of what goes on in there. But you've got this amazing ecosystem PhD students start ups to SMEs with these amazing visions that they put into practice like MMS. And and essentially been used sort of assessed for their dual use nature. So dual use being applications in civilian environments and both in security environments, you know, and and essentially working on all of the really, really sort of key challenges that are facing collective militaries, which you know is is all a part of essentially harnessing industry, partnering with academia and answering some of the challenges that government places. And government, including the medical institutions, we have the NHS in in in a UK, you know, which is one of the most precious things we have, but you know, I'm going to to archaeally, whether it's kind of sort of in continuing to hold its head up under the pressure. But it's you know, it's incredible. You know, when I think about people that they've treated at a very, very close to me, you know, I've just really thankful we've got something like it, we can turn on. But they need a lot of help, you know, during technologies and non-invasive technologies are accessible now. And again, you know, I go back to that, you know, no technologies were talking about if it can't be delivered at effective scale. You know, when people need it and old and trusted technologies have not got the levels of risk associated to them, essentially there's new ones, you know, maybe there's not the data on the way you're applying them, but a different culture and different approach. And, you know, and a lot of the discussions I've been privy to, you can see how people are naturally sitting in their silos. Now, there's some of the most brilliant people you come across, experts in all collegey experts and it's essentially sitting in their silos. And there's some fascinating research going on, much of it interrupted by COVID unfortunately. But you know, these companies should, you know, be identified, you know, have you got a usable non-invasive technology that can be accelerated through sort of collaboration. You need to get those inter-disciplinary eyes on it. And I look, look, from one point from their silos from their one perspective, but broadly opening up to, you know, the whole point about harmonious function and how you promote those factors. And I think we'll reach the conclusions much sooner and certainly be able to progress on. Fastening stuff, man. I can't wait to see where this goes. It's super interesting to see innovations like this take off. I'll link anything below where people can learn more. Is there any specific websites you can think of off the top of your head that people can go to to learn more about those? Yeah, so look up Emma's group, baby. Okay. And dipoles as well, give you an introduction to it. I'll provide my links to you as well. Awesome. And, you know, it falls under that same subject. You know, let's get going against challenges using non-invasive technologies where they can be identified that they can be, you know, active as a catalyst. Perfect, man. Well, thank you so much for your time. And I learned a lot. It's a fascinating conversation. Thank you. All right, it's fair. Can everybody?