the general gun experience. Jimmy, I watched your whole series on Atlanta all day today, I've been watching for hours. I've been watching impact videos, videos about the Atlanta structure, and so let's just get into it. Let's do it. So the Rishot structure, I was on your show a little over a year ago and shared some details about it. To people who aren't aware, there's a location in the Western Sahara desert of Mauritania called the Rishot structure. It's also commonly referred to as the Eye of the Sahara. It is a site that most people have never seen or heard of before, which is truly peculiar because it's so spectacular. It's a site that astronauts typically use to reference from space. It is a geological feature that is said to be volcanic in nature. And what's so spectacular about this is that it just so happens to match more than a dozen striking similarities to what Plato had described as the lost ancient capital city of Atlantis. I almost feel like we're not going to do your video justice by just talking about it because the video's so good and you go into so many details. By the end of it, my job was dropped. I was like, holy shit. From what you had the last time you were on the podcast to what you put out now, it's even more compelling. Every way more compelling. I appreciate you saying that. And I guess to anyone that wants to check it out, I have a YouTube channel called Bright Insight. It's right at the top of the page. And it says lost ancient Roman map has Atlantis in Sahara, Africa. And that's kind of where it goes from there is that there is a, actually, let me just mention real quick. Like you're a very inquisitive individual. You have many interesting people that come in chat with you. And when I had asked you last time, you said that until you had saw my video, you'd never seen or heard of the matter. Yeah. Anytime I meet somebody new or if I'm at some party, I'm like, oh, what do you do? We start trying about YouTube. The first thing I do now is I show them a picture of the wrist shot. And I've never not once ever come across one single person that has seen or heard of it before. Other than people who are familiar with what I've shared. But there's so many things like the, where the water flows to the South, where there's clear evidence of water erosion that took place after the volcano. There's so much that points to that possibly being Atlantis. It's spectacular. So just to run down real quick, play to had described Atlantis as being the capital. Let me just mention that because it was an empire said to be made up of 10 kingdoms. And what I'm focusing on is the Lost Capital City, which was said to be made up of concentric circles, three of water to a land, which matches the wrist shot structure. It also was said to have an opening to the sea at the South. And if you look at it from satellite imagery, you can clearly see that water had ran through it. And I'm going to take a look at that. But tell Jimmy what image to pull up sort of. And furthermore, it was said to have mountains to the north. And you just so happened to have mountains called the Atlas Mountain Chain, which Atlas was said to be the very first king of Atlantis. And what's interesting is that the very first known king of Mauritania, which is where the wrist shot structure is located, is also, they're very first known king was also named Atlas. And though I'm not saying that that's the same individual, but what we do today is we pass down names, right? Like people like, oh, my dad's name's John. And so is so is my son. And so it's another striking similarity, but it goes further than that. Like there's geological similarities, such as the fact that Atlantis was said to be made up of red, black, white color stone, which is another similarity you see at the wrist shot structure. It was said to have an abundance of gold and that the outer walls were lined with it. And it turns out that Mauritania is loaded with gold. And not only that, the richest person ever known to exist in all of mankind is Mansa Musa of the Mali Empire, which consisted partly of modern day Mauritania. And he was so rich from gold that he would be richer than Elon Musk and Bezos combined almost. Like many unfathomable amount of billions of dollars. So that's another similar thing. What are your reasons? Oh, this is 1300s or 1400s? There we are. There we are. 1312, 1337. Yeah, it's a name too, Mansa Musa. But the similarities don't end there. There was said to be an abundance of elephants, which is one reason why to suggest that Atlantis would have been in Africa is because besides the fact that elephants are known throughout Africa, the used to be in Mauritania, they're unfortunately pretty much extinct there today. But another little detail that most people aren't aware of because they think of Atlantis, like, oh, it must be at the bottom of the ocean. Well, that's not exactly how played awarded it. He did describe that the aftermath of Atlantis followed a catastrophic event involving water, is that what was left of Atlantis was reads of grass and a soul of mud that prevented ships from navigating to and from. And what people don't realize is that Sahara Africa up until about 4500 to 5,000 years ago was totally green. It was tropical. It had the largest network or one of the largest networks of rivers ever known to exist. It had the largest freshwater lake ever known to exist, which is mega lake Chad, which just to put this into perspective. It is, if you take all the North American Great Lakes combined, that's 94,000 square miles of surface area, whereas mega lake Chad was 139,000. Whoa. Massive. The additionally, Atlantis, the capital was said to have a river that went just north of it, or next to it. And the Tom and Rossa River went right through the rishot structure or just north of it, when all the way to the Atlas mountains that I described, which is in modern day Morocco. And the evidence is that it existed at that same period of time when Atlantis was said to be around 11,600 years ago prior to its destruction up until about 5,000 years ago. So going back to my point, like a lot of people see the Sahara desert, and they don't realize that this place was unbelievably different than it is today. And one of the things that's so important is that I know some people listening will, you know, the here Atlantis, they think, oh, it didn't exist. Right. Whether it existed or not, the evidence that we're going to chat about today to show you that there is conclusive evidence, I would say, that catastrophic water erosion that the ocean had blasted through the Sahara, tens of millions of years more recently than previously known. According to the science, 56 to 66 million years ago was the time of the trans-Saharan seaway, which was the last time the ocean blasted through it. However, there are a few lines of evidence that say otherwise, besides the fact that anyone that looks at the Sahara desert on through, you know, the Google Earth app, you can see fluvial striations, which is signature traits of water erosion. This is confirmed by other experts that look into these things. As far as I like to mention, Rianne L'Karlsen, he's someone that's analyzed the area and said, yes, this is catastrophic water erosion. But so one of the signature lines of evidence that suggests that the ocean blasted through it far more recently was the largest volcano in Sahara Africa is in Chad. It's Mount Cusi. And there is a lava flow that goes through it that is dated at 12,000 or so years ago. The volcano itself is supposed to be somewhere between 1.2 and 2.3 million years ago. But if you look at Mount Cusi to the south, you can see, and I don't know, Jamie, if you're able to bring up one of the photos of that mountain chain, but you can see that the water erosion cuts off that lava flow directly to the south. Yeah, keep going over. A little bit right there. Okay, so go over a couple, that is the mountain. And you can see those striations, which are signature traits of water erosion. All those white blemishes are salt. And I should point out real quick that it is the confirmed fact that much of the Sahara has surface level salt. And you see those white blemishes on that mountain that is not cloud, that is not snow. Those are salt deposits. And surface level salt that would have been from the ocean. That is what I suggest because in the middle of that caldera, you have huge patches of salt. And is it reasonable to suggest that that salt existed before that the creation of that volcano? Because it seems to me that that mountain that salt would burn up. And not only that, there is scientific studies that show that there are gastropods, which are sea life, that existed inside that caldera that used to be a thousand feet deep and dried up just a few thousand years ago. So the fact that this is an 11,000 foot volcano that has salt on top of it, I would say is corresponding evidence that the ocean had once went through it. And if you go over a couple more images, Jamie, you will see far better images that show you that, okay, so notice how it cuts off. You see to the black right here that that is a lava flow that stated around 12,000 or so years ago. And regardless of whether the volcano or that water erosion happened 12,000 years ago or 2 million years ago, that in itself is evidence that the ocean blasted through the Sahara desert. Literally 50 to 60 million years more recently than previously known. And the implications of this as far as climate science, as far as the topic of geology and cataclysm cannot be overstated. I mean, does it not look like that water or excuse me, that lava flow was cut off by whatever type of erosion that is? Does it, I mean, that's yeah, completely. Yeah, it's it's such a clean line. And it aligns with all the water erosion marks that are to the left of it. Can you make that smaller, Jamie? Can you make it stretch it out? Yeah. And I'll start going ahead. Nothing. It's just like you could really clearly see that it looks like a line, like a water line passed through what was marked by the volcanic eruption. And this is one thing I say. I'm like, it's it's visible to anyone that has eyes to see, but it turns out that the Sahara desert is one of the least studied places on earth. Mostly because it's so inhospitable. It's an average of 125 degrees Fahrenheit much of the year. It is so unbelievably big that just to get out there. I mean, you need reliable aircraft or vehicles. There is most of the countries out there are I regret to say third world and that you just don't have supplies. It's not feasible to just travel out there with a whole team at on a whim. So most of it is essentially undocumented and it's not a site. The Sahara is a whole isn't a site that gets much attention unfortunately. Ben, we got to bring you in. Otherwise, I was going to say something that you mentioned about the origin of, I guess, the play those description. You said it was mud and grasses was like the aftermath. It's interesting. The topic I've been exploring recently is that that does match some of the translations of origin stories from the ancient Egyptians. So it's like the temple of Horus at Edfoods is amazing structure, but it's literally covered head to toe in hieroglyphs and descriptions and all these types of things. But one of the stories in the translations they do talk about is this what they would call the original point or the primordial mound, the primordial island. They describe it as being an island that was surrounded by water. That was sinking and essentially these reads that were growing on it that created a Falcon's Purch. And then the God, it was either Horus or Horun, one of the Falcon Gods, are lights on this Purch and then Gaines Divinity. But as part of that story, I mean, they, they, and then he goes and forms Kemet, the essentially the motherland Egypt. And it's this tale of them, I guess their civilization moving and migrating to this new land. But they, they do talk about a whole stack of unknown gods and a whole culture that existed before that. It's, it's, it's an interesting correlation. It's something that Graham Hancock speculated about in his work with the Temple of Horus at Edfood. You know, they also have, you know, catastrophic flood myths and things like this. But it, it may be that whatever prior civilization and that's might have been where the dynastic Egyptians actually got their origins from. Because it seems clear that they've inherited some things from the past. That's a story they themselves tell. It wasn't aware that the story of Atlantis had come from Egypt. That's one of the most bizarre parts about it. I didn't know this until just a few years ago either. It's like, oh, it's like, I played O'Din't just Plato, his, his distant relative soul on had traveled there in search of knowledge because Egypt was the place to go for it. And yeah, it was, it was the priests of the Delta that told Solon. And he said, he said that, yeah, so 6,000 years, or 9,000 years, sorry prior to the time of Solon was when the, the sinking of this city happened. And that, that works out to be 9,600 BC, so 11,600 years ago, which is bang on exactly where now the geological evidence points to basically the end of the younger driest cataclysm. Like something, we know something happened at the start at like 12,800 900 years and then 11,600 years ago was that end of the younger driest that brought us up out of the cold spell and into the, the Holocene. Isn't it crazy that that's 4,000 years and we think about it in like the same time period? Like, yeah, I mean around that time. I know, we had to play in the early 11,600, 12,800, literally talking about a thousand fucking years. Yeah, it's so much time. It's so much time that actually if you go from 12,800, you know, so basically let's say 1200 years. The English language, Old English is only like 1400 years and modern English is only like 400, 500 years. So this is such a wide, a long period of time that are we weren't even speaking the same language that in that same, you know, 1,000 years ago. It's a, we think of it like that. It's a different world. It's nuts. And if you think about the people that lived a thousand years ago and how they lived.