the Joe Rogan experience I want to hear more conspiracies Eddie. Let's go I like it. You know what fuck the submarine bags. Fuck the submarine. I didn't The hunter-biden stuff though. What's other? The Biden stuff is interesting UFOs UFOs it's Project Blue We used to be all in on UFO's Are you kidding? I was a UFO dude. How was the UFO's there? Is there ice in there? No. No, there's no good. We don't have any ice those those ball ISIS are awesome. Get some more ice. We'll get some more ice I got more whiskey here. Do you remember when you and I first got in his Zacharias kitchen? Yeah, yeah, I don't know. You know, I got into it. You know, you know I remember how he got into it because remember Jean at the girl I used to make music with yes, she was like, you know, she was uh, you know, had some party and she We were working on some music because last night this guy told me about There's this guy who who wrote about some transcripts or something like that and he said he was telling me that that we're created by aliens to mine gold and I remember like what? She was yeah, he was telling me about the girl. What's his name? His name was like Jodie because if my friend Jodie was telling me about this guy And I'm like, can you call him call him up and because it made sense to me like I wait a minute We were we were created a slaves to mine gold for this other planet I was all ball steep in the UFOs so I called this motherfucker. Oh my god. Do you remember when you were telling Jean? No, it goes yeah, there's this guy named Zacharias kitchen look him up. He wrote a book called the 12th planet and I'm like, okay, so boom got into him like oh shit I do I believe that shit. They got me hookland and sinker man, but um, yeah, you know And so so and did you think that they do you believe that whistleblower like that he's actually seeing the You know, I believe a lot of the people that see UFOs really believe they see it They just get set up. I think they're just what they're not seeing UFOs. They're seeing like there's a drone The holograms drones some high-level shit. They're pushing it so hard. It's so obvious So you're fucking on the pushin it so on those mainstream. I'm like what's going on there No, come on and then at the same time the Biden crime family shit's coming out. Oh, that shit where they said really Rudy Giuliani Was fucking crazy. Yeah, he's a crackpot. They do two three years ago They made him look like a fucking crackpot and all they was doing was I got the laptop right here We got it all right here in the scariest part was they got 51 intelligence officers the sign off on it Scary scary scary you have 51 guys bullshit. Yeah. Oh my god when scary you scary They knew that it was legit 19 dude scary that's scary I've seen if you looked up a laptop scary is no one is facing any repercussions You got a slap on my nose. God not just him. I'm talking about the people who told everyone that it was Russian Oh, they suffer no conscience, you know what they stick with the joke is they're saying that The just the system is corrupt by saying that it's not Yeah, oh, they're lying. So it's just a lot of confusion. Thank you. Jamie. Dude I went to the website where they released all his pictures and shit that boy a wild boy Looks like a good time. I'll be honest. Oh, I have the ball. What can have the ball ice? I'll get some more That is ball ice. No, I want the ball. I want the ball to but I love you And you're talking I always there. I owe you. I know you conspiracy is best the best in the world. I'm not dude I'm getting my mom shut up when 51 intelligence officers Say it's Russian disinformation when it's not in my own. Oh, it's scary Every what kind of country are we living in and all the shit they're throwing at Trump They're trying to get rid of that motherfucker You are not keeping your mouth shut I'm keeping my mouth shut. It's just fucking rattle. No, I said tell us no, no I'm just saying what's already out there. Thank you, bro. I'm just saying what's the matter out there dog You know what I mean? I'm not trying to get fucking killed. I'm good. I got I got a Let me get some that It's not crazy dude bow calls they could have got pants still bourbon dude They could have got pen guys the sign off on and that would have been a lot a lot they went 50 because they know they know they get 50 It's gonna be no doubt everyone's gonna believe that shit, right? And they stick with it even today the mainstream media they still stick with it Let me ask you this why did they still keep seeing them in national anthem at a boxy fight cuz that shit takes so much