The Joe Rogan experience. See, because that seemed like everything I see on Joe Rogan podcast, people don't believe me. Oh, that's why. That's why the... Because somebody told me not to mention mermaids. Don't mention mermaids? I saw mermaid. Really? Yeah. When? It's the Shell's Africa. You saw an actual mermaid? That's what it was. It was a swimming person. Really? Yeah. And how long it was this? I don't know. As well, Sylvance. It was... You think there was like a small population of mermaids that are out there? But anyway, me and this little French boy, and they said, they said, don't swim in the lagoon after dark. Everybody's up at the bar and everybody's... And so everybody's gonna go to everybody's kind of racing high. So me and him go and I'm me and him getting the water. From a distance, she's something coming like a fucking missile, but it's coming. It's coming fast. We both kind of stop. And then it turns and it jumps out of water. And it's maybe at least 10, 12 feet long, man. And it do like this. And look at both of us and go boom. The water was only about this deep. They make a splash and nothing. And then for a mayhem turn to fuck around, we run it high. And everybody's coming down there and laughing. I got the drinks in their hand when I know fuck that. And the little boy, the little boy, the little boy, the little boy, the little boy. And his mom is apologizing to me. And he has a very vivid imagination and no bitch. Listen, we saw a fish man. And it wasn't like a mermaid. Didn't look feminine at all. Look at man. A fucking man. A fucking dude who said get the fuck out the pool. Basically, he was like, do you know, do you know, Aquaman? Do do do. Yeah. Yeah. See, then it looked like a fish person or a living or a human being came out. Did it have scales? It was kind of dark. Dark like a dolphin? No, but he had the back of him with fish. The back of him with his head was humanoid. Eyes about so big. Then if you Google it, the legumes of the shells. OK. And I think the first person see some shit. Really? And the one is, and the guy who does the horseback riding, you know, he grabs his, and he says, how do you? And I told him, he says, he's from America, right? Yeah. He says, so this age, pretty much if you see a turtle, and I tell you, that's not a turtle. He says, you know, it's a turtle. You have the age, you know what you say. He says, people pay a lot of money at this resort. He says, yeah, it's maybe not a good idea to go around. Go on. I saw him, mermaid. And he goes, Mike, he's saying how long his family has been fishing in these waters. He says, and he's heard some things. He says, I've heard some things like what you say. I've never seen what you say you saw. But it's not the first time I heard that. And I said, thank you. But basically he was saying, if you ask me to cosign that shit, fuck you. But you sure it's gonna be crazy by yourself, I'm sorry. So who told you not to talk about mermaids? Nobody told me that's so wrong. You said that. I just said that. Oh. Because I'm like, if y'all don't believe the coders bear. You definitely won't believe the mermaid story. Why, I definitely believe the coders bear. Yeah, I got it for my own place. Please, no, I can't, you know. Tell you what, thanks for being here, man. Thank you. Let me know when your special comes out. We'll let everybody know. I'm sure it'll be hilarious. I'm trying. I'm trying. I'm trying. If I found out what the product is. It was in the lagoons around, like how you know how to island and shit, like this, in the lagoon part. Well, they say they won't discover 10% of the ocean. Yeah, so yeah. Maybe it's in the other 90.