Tell me what it's up for folks who would just tune in on you stream We just started talking about Sam Harris a big big fat Islamo phobe What is that man is that it because they're brown is that because people are trying to be like super progressive is that What whoops It's it's a very dangerous irony in double standard. It's really it's one of the most disturbing phenomenon I think To just to be found on the landscape now. It's a For folks tuning in on you stream just to keep you up to date We were talking about how you can make fun of Christianity with no problem whatsoever Make fun of Mormonism nobody cares, but if you make fun of Islam progressive people will call you Islamophobic Yeah, it's a combination of very understandable fears of racism. Yes, and xenophobia So we have this we're obviously trailing a legacy that we should be mortified by this theater legacy of slavery and colonialism and and all of that is something we should we should Have a critical distance from and not want to recapitulate in any form and so it's it's it's important to be mindful of that obviously but there's this this combination of white guilt and political correctness and just sheer Stockholm syndrome and some people that has made it impossible to criticize Islam Without being branded a racist and Islam Traditional if you're not going to buy traditional then conservative if you're not going to buy conservative then extremist There's some version of Islam that is the most odious ideology operative now it's just it is leading directly to the emissoration of millions of people and the moment you try to really draw a straight line and Miriam straight lines exist between that phenomenon and the actual doctrine of Islam the actual idea set handed down from Muhammad You're accused of a bigotry and you're you're put right next to Michelle Bachman and anyone else on the right who obviously you can't You can't ally within any sense. So it's it's very it's very troubling because because you have a whole websites and magazines like salon and Alternate and even the nation that just reflexively Demonize anyone who has said anything about Islam the religion that's negative and that's it's a double standard We're gonna have to overcome. Salon goes hard They go hard with you know progressive silliness I mean they they got mad at Patton Oswald for making a joke about someone making a joke about Chinese accents like it was so stupid It made them look so petty Pedantic and silly. It's just like what are you guys doing like there's a lot of like real issues going on in the world There's a lot of real things to think about in this day and age. Yeah, I wrote a blog post about Malala Yosafzai the 16-year-old girl who was at 15 shot by the Taliban and was up for the Nobel Prize, which she didn't win but should have and my blog post was totally praise worthy of her I said she's the best thing to come out of the Muslim world in a thousand years She should have won a Nobel Prize. She's elegant eloquent and brave and and the headline in salon was Sam Harris slur's Malala and my slur was not Basically accepting her view of Islam as the canonical Islam because she's not an atheist and and they thought I was sort of co-opting her as an atheist Which obviously wasn't doing so it's just it's incredibly frustrating because so many smart people or otherwise smart people are taken in by this because people really want to believe That all religions are the same and that people everywhere the same and want the same things and if we just Gone our act together on the world stage if we just if we just cease to exploit people and we cease to be selfish and we just and when we we just pulled back all the drones Everyone would behave the same way we would have rational actors everywhere and there's just no evidence for that and there's there's just as much evidence as you could possibly want to find for The antithesis which is there are some people who are in a death cult who are certain of paradise and very eager to get there and there's not there's no talking to them and then there's a there's a a Much vaster number of people around them who support them who are not jihadists but who are basically aligned with them in terms of the worldview so You know we have to win a war of ideas and we have to win a war and We have to be honest about it Yeah, we certainly do and there's this weird thing going on right now in Saudi Arabia where women are protesting The right to drive they're all driving This is a big issue and it's crazy that in 2013 and that is directly related to religion Oh, yeah, yeah, and it's it's incredibly edgy and risky to do. It's just amazing to get if you're a woman to get behind the wheel of a car and Saudi Arabia is a A life disorienting risk, you know, to make that kind of social protest I mean so if at best they're behind us by whatever 50 years 75 years in certain social Epiphanes, you know, so if you should roll back the clock in the US and look at racism. We don't really have the same analogous religious Brainwashing, but but if you look at racism in the US What was going on in the in the teens and 20s and 30s? It's just unthinkable now I mean just lynchings and and newspaper editorials that were Starclay racism they're in newspaper editorials Not op-eds, but actually the editorial of the New York Times and the LA Times in 1910 1915 That read exactly like a KKK pamphlet. I mean just just mind bugling so At at the very least we have societies that have to catch up in their attitudes towards women and homosexuals and pluralism and atheism and We have to facilitate that process by not Caving in when free speech issues come up so when when someone draws a cartoon in the prophet Muhammad and people start burning Embices the move on our side can't be to apologize for cartoony and to and to become self critical and masochistic about you know Why is it that we had these cartoonists that did this terrible thing and and that's and that's essentially what we did and when we pulled all No magazine with exception of one For inquiry in the US published those cartoons. They're totally benign cartoons. I probably saw that are available online, but We we practice self censorship to a degree that it's just just astonishing and and really just harmful to to to this This conflict that both the hot and cold conflict that we're having it's caricature It's a like a caricature of Overblown reaction that you get from someone that they maybe was is putting a situation where they want to always use This is an excuse for why things are like it's racism man. This is racism or you just hate women like there's a bunch of these like oh You're Islamophobic. It's like boom. They throw that on you this wet blanket and That it's a weird thing because you call it a cult And I agree with you, but that's a very controversial thing to say if you say that people get very upset with you But the reality is somebody's in a cult, okay? If you got 20 different whatever how many different religions that are practiced worldwide I don't know how many how many other probably hundreds, but just there's the big handful of main ones we care about Yeah, the main ones we care about. Okay. Let's just say there's only four Someone's in a cult Someone's lying some day of four different stories. So what's going on? Who's telling the truth? Someone's in a cult and no one's willing to admit that this part that of course everyone believes the other people are in a cult But just the cognitive dissonance allow involved in picking some ancient ideology and thinking at some point in time somebody actually had a conversation with a divine wrote it down verbatim It is perfect and it's never been touched by the hand of man or distorted It's weird that you get that from something like salon And that's essentially what they're doing but calling you is lama phobic Yeah, they're endorsing this idea that this racky cult that makes you kill people they draw a picture of their guy Women aren't allowed to drive cars Suicide bombing in this day and age is like very very common and Religious based and assure that's the most extreme faction of that religion and there's many people that are moderate Muslims who despise that as much as we do but still it's it's an ideology and ideologies are real problems Yeah, yeah. Well, the dispute is that The link that I'm drawing and that many other people draw between that behavior and the religion is being challenged So so the people who would brand me as an Islam Islam a lama pho would say that This behavior has nothing to do with Islam in principle is that one you have extremists in every religion and they all misbehave Or bad people will do bad things Anyway, and religion is always a pretext and that is just not true that the scary phenomenon I think the most scary phenomenon really to be witnessed anywhere is that you can have psychologically healthy rational Otherwise competent and capable and charismatic people who have other Opportunities in life, you know that the quarterback of the football team Can become a geodice to given the right ideas And if you just Admit to yourself that certain people actually believe in paradise And believe that there's a specific way to get there that entails Violent defense of of the faith then it becomes totally rational to behave this way Then you and I would be flying planes and to buildings if we actually believe this doesn't matter what other opportunities you have in life and The thing that most secular liberals can't get their minds around is that people actually believe in paradise People actually believe that that a certain book was dictated by the creator of the universe and it has provided a blueprint and a moral framework that Many many people millions of people believe is perfect and unchallengeable for all time and then Once you admit once you admit that you just have to look at the blueprint and this this particular blueprint says a lot about a holy war and Fighting the infidel and subjugating the infidel and killing apostates So you know if you if you convert to Islam now on this show and then by the end of the show say yeah I thought better about it. I don't feel like being a Muslim anymore. I'm unconverting That is a crime punishable by death And that's just that's not extremist Islam. That's not I was in a training camp in Afghanistan with 10,000 other lunatics Islam That is plain vanilla Islam Now you can sort of dicker around the edges of that dog mob by saying you're dead to me or no Can't go that far unfortunately not dead, but you're dead to me. You can say that well the person has to speak out against the faith or repeatedly he has to beat obnoxious apostate but you what you don't get are Millions and millions of Muslims who belong to some bona fide tradition of Islam Who say oh no apostasy is fine? You should you should be free to change your your mind about the faith And we don't care if you were once a Muslim and now you become a Hindu or you were once a Muslim and now you become a Christian or an atheist That is fine with us if if that existed well, then you could just point to that brand of Islam and say well Go over there guys. That's that's the Islam. We should be encouraging but we have to and clearly we have to figure out some way to massage the faith into conformity with that kind of pluralism and secularism but it's just not there and for for magazines like salon to pretend that that Killing apostates has no connection to the real religion of Islam is just a just pure delusion And it's a dangerous one. It's it's also dangerous just to have a very strict ideology to have a thing that not just You're supposed to do because the culture wants you to do it, but because God wants you to that's weird dumb it's weird It's it's insane If you think that in 2013 with the kind of access to information We have that we really believe that someone actually wrote this stuff down from the divine It's craziness. It's a critical Christianity whether it's more monism or monism is hilarious More monism and Scientology are my two favorites because we know the guy who made them right, you know those are and we know they were Conmen, but not just comment way too much about them Yeah, I mean Elrod Harper was a fucking science fiction author. He made a science fiction religion I mean, it's really beautiful in a way. It's hilariously beautiful and in someone like me who appreciates the folly of life I can appreciate that in a big way. It's just it's it's like endless comedy. It's just so stupid. Yeah. Yeah What is it though? Why do we need something? But why does everybody need something but the the the it's crucial That you acknowledge the difference between the various ideologies on offer because Just have just believe believing that your worldview has come from God It's not necessarily a deal-breaker in terms of living in a global civil society if that worldview Prescribes lots of benign things. I mean, so if you think God told you to be a vegetarian and never harm anyone and learn everything you can about science and mathematics and Economics and become a really energetic Contributor to civil society if that's your religion Well, then you know you're never gonna show up on anyone's radar as a dangerous person It's just the the the mean religions on offer don't have that kind of those kinds of ideas and you know they have first century and Iron Age platitudes and strictures that that have now Been canonized in these books and there's just there's no way to rewrite the books You can't edit the books. We people effectively edit the books by ignoring the most barbarous stuff in there But there's no way to say we're going to we as Muslims or as Christians are going to craft a new Scripture that's in line with all that we've come to learn about the universe And follow that as though it were the word of God because The they would know they were making it up and that's You know that's not satisfying Christians are funny because they ignore things conveniently Like I've met so many Christians that have Christian Bible quote tattoos Like right did you read that thing? You're not supposed to do that Right? Just the right on yourself. They're supposed to use a magic marker And here you are getting a tattoo of a Bible quote. That's like you know God's like Jesus Christ Did you pay attention to I said? Well, it's a long book Unfortunately the Quran is not as long a book You can read the Quran in a weekend It's a much shorter book you read the Bible cover to cover it takes you a month and a half But you read the Quran It's a much more unified document and There's not you can't cherry pick you can cherry pick it a little bit But you can't cherry pick it in quite the same way you can't just take Jesus in half as moods the way you can as a Christian and say well This is all about turning the other cheek and I've got I don't care about hell. I don't care about Any of these culture war issues You just can't you really can't do that with Islam and that's that's why that this fusion of The religion and the politics is so difficult to break because it's explicit and there's just no There's no render on to Caesar those things that are Caesar's in the Quran as there is in the Bible So my favorite religion is Mormons. They're the nicest people. Yeah, they're so sweet. Yeah, like every time I've had a Mormon neighbor or you know Meet Mormons. They're the nicest people They're almost like child life in their belief like childlike in their their approach to religion Like my wife as a friend who's a Mormon went up dinner with her in her husband and Somewhere along the line the subject of higher power came up. She was grilling me like do you believe in a higher power and You know basically I said why don't not believe I don't know I mean who the fuck knows She's like you don't know if you don't know how do you sleep at night Okay for her like someone had a teller So she could talk herself in a bed like a little kid like my five-year-old like sweetie God's watching over you and everything's gonna be okay. Okay. Okay Like now I'm gonna sleep for her. It was very challenge fucking 40-year-old woman Like she had this child like narrow tunnel of thinking that she prescribed to Yeah, X Mormons are awesome because there there's There's no group of people that are more energetic in their atheism I've met that in an X Mormons because they they're coming out of this thing That it's just so obviously made up. I mean it's like you got you've got Joseph Smith as a dowser and a con man and and 14 and just and just getting it on with everyone's wife and just making up Principles and he's getting it's new revelations to appease his jealous wife He goes into the closet and God's in God tells him that he's got to have you know more hot girls So it's just and it's just so it's just there in the floodlights of history to be inspected And so once they once they get out of it and they see just that they're trailing all this nonsense They're very they're very fun to talk to what is it about people that we need or some people need that They need that they need an ideology They need a framework and it's scaffolding to live their life on they can't just free-ball it They can't just go who knows let's just figure out what we already know and apply that to wonder they can't do that they need an answer Well, I wouldn't be the first to observe that death has something to do with it this anxiety about What it all means in light of the fact that it all apparently ends is Really a Defense against grief. You know, I mean these beliefs a belief in paradise It's really the only thing you can tell yourself or tell another person or tell your child in the presence of death that makes death fundamentally Unproblematic I mean so so you know the closest person to you in your life has died or your child has died and So what are you gonna say to yourself or to the people around you or what can they say to you that is just Not only not only takes the the sting out slightly But it's just perfectly consoling if you could believe it It's this proposition that you're gonna meet again in some perfect place And you're gonna spend eternity there and you can be perfectly happy and all you have to do is believe the right things in the meantime And not screw up too badly as a homosexual or whatever else you is on the checklist of don't and You will get there and you'll be reunited with everyone you care about and that and that is there is no secular or Atheist or rational alternative to that and That's that's a bullet. I think we just have to bite is there's that you know at the grave side of a child The Atheist doesn't have something to say that says this is not a problem You know this is your tears are wasted and Christians and Muslims and Mormons and Basically everyone who posits a heaven that you're that is assured based on the right beliefs they do have something to say that that the The crowd buys into and There's no question that it relieves that suffering Now I think it's I think it it comes with a host of other problems that That that even that trade-off is not worth it. I mean if even if we grant that certain kind of suffering is is Relieve there There's other kinds of suffering that spring up and people are not learning how to grieve They're not learning how to teach their children to grieve if they're not they're not learning intellectual honesty. They're not And they're mired in a way of thinking that Is constant is causing them constantly to collide with reality in Unfortunate ways that they they actually don't get what they want in life Because they're believing things that that just don't line up with how the world works and so you I think it's it is If you look closely you can see that even that You know the best thing I mean the baby and the bathwater of faith is still dysfunctional the Mormon friend she applied for a real estate license And didn't get it she failed the test she's upset. She's like I'm a good person Why didn't I get it? I'm doing all the right things and I'm a good person like that's she kept saying it's like being around a crazy person Yeah, she just believes that if you do God's word good thing is gonna happen to you. I'm a good person Why didn't I get this right? Well, I'm not looking at the fact she's rich as fuck lives in a great house Healthy kids like there's always wonderful stuff going on in your life like maybe just didn't apply yourself enough to this whole real estate thing So it's not to do it God failing you right Do you think that religion is something that's allowing human beings to make this jump from animals to enlightened Connected beings it seems to me that with The connection that we're enjoying through technology through the internet and through the the access of information It seems to me that we're we're slowly but surely dissolving all the boundaries between people and information and we're gonna have Much more truth about life and death and the very origins of the universe in a hundred years or a thousand years Then we had a hundred years ago or a thousand years ago and I always wonder if like Religion is something that's allowed us to keep our shit together Just long enough for some really fucking smart dudes to figure out the internet keep our shit together Just like keep together morally give give these fucking crazy apes some sort of an excuse or a reason to live and You know so they don't just go marauding and jump off clips out of despair and give them something that that allows them to continue the work and that work being society ultimately moving towards some sort of technological innovation Zero point you know like everything we do whether it's cell phones or laptops or cars every year it's better No one ever goes. We're good. This this cell phone. I have this galaxy note. No one's ever gonna look at this and go This thing's perfect. Okay, we're done. We don't ever have to make another cell phone again We're gonna continue to move forward faster speeds more connections more apps more things that they can do holograms Time travel whatever the fuck it's gonna be it's never gonna stop and it almost sometimes I wonder if What what religion is is just like some sort of a scaffolding that lets us build society on Yeah, I actually don't view it that way. I think it's that there are people who think that religion paid Evolutionary dividends because it allowed large groups of people large groups of Kind of dimly related people you know not just just family but larger tribes to cohere in a way that they couldn't otherwise So it's the way to get a bunch of strangers to cohere is to put a big idol in the corner and say you know anyone who trespasses The god is gonna be killed and we're gonna we're gonna commit a sacrifice of a few kids, you know every month or so and keep everyone in line and we're gonna and Outsiders who come into our world who don't understand our Teboos and our and our precepts are gonna be easily Recognizable as outsiders and so there's a long list of things that people think religion may have given our ancestors That may be true. I happen to think that that religion most of what explains religion is just more fundamental cognitive and emotional mechanisms that have nothing in principle to do with religion and which have also given a science and reason and everything else that that we that is recognizable as as human cognition so I think the most rudimentary Peace here is belief formation you and I and every other human being who is neurologically intact Has learned that comes into this world equipped to represent Reality in language and to trade in those representations and to and to give them credence to one or another degrees So you tell me where this the studio is I believe you I it's just language right and and the language got me here My belief in the language got me here If I thought that I had transcribed the address wrong That belief would have caused me to call you and get and make sure I got the I so I mean this is all just these are all just you know ones and zeros in our in our computer at the moment, but Virtually the totality of our worldview is Linguistically mediated in this way Everything is not a matter of direct sensory perception in each moment so Religion is just part of that is part of it's the set of beliefs people form For which they have very loose evidentiary criteria and which govern All these no-go areas for science. You know what happens after death. What is the meaning of life? What is you know? What's? What's the most important thing to live for? And now I think I think actually reason can capture all of those conversations as well and it is in the process of doing it, but it really is just a matter of believing certain propositions and The rules by which we we vet those beliefs when we are in conversation with one another and the problem with faith is that it really operates as The permission people give one another to believe things strongly without evidence and we don't give that permission in any other area of our lives We don't give that permission in science. We don't give it in in politics. See insofar as we're we're practicing politics that anyone can tolerate and it's a That permission that the taboo around criticizing that faith is something we've we're Hopefully getting over we're gonna have to get over it because it is the reason why people Oppose game marriage. It is the reason why people want laws that that make blasphemy a criminal offense and so that's It's just it insofar as you actually believe something it can't help but show up in the public sphere And believe people think beliefs are private They're not they're only private if there's nothing in your life or in the environment that is calling them out But the moment that They are relevant to your behavior. They can't help but inform your behavior insofar as you actually believe them and that's It's just I mean, this is an example. I gave and One of my books by is like a belief a true belief in the efficacy of prayer Is dangerous if you if you in so far as you really believe it you're gonna be tempted to rely on prayer You're gonna be tempted to rely on prayer for your children You got these people who won't take their children to doctors because they think prayer is gonna work I mean imagine if you had a a a pilot who's who's trying to land the plane with prayer I mean it's clear that I mean it's a ridiculous example because we think no one would ever do that But in some sense people Do that in situations where the stakes are just as high and certainly everyone who's waging G-hod thinks that their belief in paradise is is true and and and it's the is the credence they give to that that Real just pure language in the mind that is um is so dangerous did religion? Did religion ever play an important function society did it ever allow people to get past the barbarian ways and and apply some sort of moral and ethical rules to society did it ever have any function or any positive benefit that Maybe wouldn't have come about if people were just a bunch of savage tribal people Well, yeah, you can you can say that it did but I mean I look at it from the other side so so for instance when you say that When you look at all the good things Christians have done under the ages of Christianity uh Occasionally you can you can point to something in the doctrine of Christianity that seems to be the operative variable So that if that doctrine were different Behavior would be different but for the most part What you see is just people being people trying to get what they want out of life They're building bridges and they're learning about disease and they're they're they're trying to To develop scientific principles and it just so happens They're all Christians doing this and and with Christianity doesn't really get credit for the birth of science It shouldn't get credit for the birth of science. It shouldn't get credit for all the bridges we built or or the roads we paved um It's just there was no one else to do the job in in Europe You know this this was the everyone was a Christian everyone came into this world and was indoctrinated into A worldview that they got on mother's knee and there was nowhere there was there was no other worldview on offer so um I mean it's just indoctrinated into a worldview that the God on Mother's knee and there was no other worldview on offer. So it's just as true to say that virtually everyone who ever fought a war or saved a life or built a bridge did it in complete ignorance of Darwinian evolution. That doesn't mean that ignorance of Darwinian evolution was the crucial variable there or is a good thing or is something we should want to promote or something we should safeguard. It's just so happens that prior to 1859 this notion of evolution was not an idea that had appeared in anyone's head. And so there was no alternative but to not know anything about evolution. Now we could have gotten, if you could draw a line from ancient Greece and give us a civilization with a very rich dialogue about ethics and about social norms that would not have needed to invoke the war god of Abraham. Plato could have given us the basis to think rationally about the good life and Plato and everyone like him in ancient Greece. And that is a stream of ideas that is unencumbered by this notion of maybe there's an invisible monster out in the desert who wants a human sacrifice from time to time and maybe had a son who died for our sins. So I don't think it's actually, even if religion has seemed to do it in certain circumstances, I don't think it was actually a necessary piece. I think we are so deeply wired as social creatures to care about ethics that ethics was going to show up anyway. So Christian ethics was not just Christian and Jewish and Muslim ethics were not a necessary scaffold for us. There are also examples of dehumanization of the other, really common examples. The way societies are allowed to look at their enemy as not being human and commit horrible atrocities because of that. There's a ton of examples of that. Well that's our default. Yes. Our default is the guys over in the next valley, we don't know them. So chimps have that. So chimps will band together in war parties and kill other chimps who are not part of their tribe if they happened out. Number them. And that is a behavior that clearly we have a tribalistic xenophobic violence is clearly something we are good at and do reflexively in a state of nature. So yeah, that's where we start. So we overcome that by extending the circle of our morality and extending our relationships with our economic relationships, our cultural relationships, our peaceful collaboration with stranger. This was civilization. Civilization is a machine to get us to peacefully collaborate with strangers. And the frontal cortex of every human brain is a machine that allows for that collaboration. And if you damage that in an individual, you get as many different pathologies there, but one is psychopathy. And once you have the right damage to your brain, you are someone who sees no basis for collaboration. You don't feel empathy for other people. You either don't care that you make them suffer or you actually take sadistic pleasure and making them suffer. And you, the very basis for trust breaks down in relation to such a person. And what I would argue is that there are actually cultures that are for all intents and purposes psychopathic. There is in which you can put perfectly normal individuals, people who are neurologically intact, who don't have any of the anatomical problems of psychopaths, but put them into a sit system of poorly aligned incentives and bad ideas. And they essentially act like psychopaths. Why have gone on the bus and shot Malala in the head for wanting to go to school? That's essentially what happened. The Taliban, the Taliban gunman, tried to assassinate a 15-year-old girl for the crime of wanting to get an education. Most people look at that and think, well, he must have been a psychopath or he must have been crazy. And I think the situation we are in is far more sinister than that. He, very likely, was a perfectly normal person, and very likely a father who thought he was doing a good thing. And in every other moment in his life, it was probably a nice guy, probably a compassionate guy, probably a guy who's capable of every thing. Why would you think that? Because you just have to look at the kinds of atrocities that normal people perpetrate in mass movements that are for want of a better word evil. So you look at Nazi Germany. How did the Holocaust occur? It was not that there were hundreds of thousands of psychopaths eager to collaborate in the destruction of a people. There were a lot of normal people who given the requisite ideas and the requisite incentives. And the ability, as you described, to dehumanize the other, just saw no problem. They could burn people in gas chambers by day and go home and shed a tear over Wagner at night and play with their own kids. And that disjunction, morally, never had to be inspected. Obviously, there are some people who were racked by guilt and some people who refuse to collaborate. But this is one of the scary features of the human mind. It's possible to be an otherwise good person and do horrible things in the right situation. That's not to say that there aren't psychopaths who are evil and essentially monsters. Normal people are capable of terrible things. And in the context of certain religious ideas, I think it becomes quite rational for them to perpetrate evil. I agree with you, but I don't think there's any evidence that this guy was like a normal nice guy in everyday life. I just don't understand why you would assume he was. I don't assume that if everyone knew that she was going to school and there were so many people that knew, it would take an extreme version of that ideology in order to get on a bus and shoot a 15-year-old girl. That's what I mean by a little kid. Well, let me just say, I know nothing about this particular person. I'm just guessing. But I think there's no reason to believe that every member of the Taliban or every member of Al Qaeda is a psychopath. Or he's a person who would otherwise do terrible things to innocent strangers. There's no reason to believe that and there's many reasons to believe otherwise. And you can just look at how people get radicalized. And you don't have to round up all the Jeffrey Dahmer's of the world and brainwash them and turn them loose. They're far more functional people than that. Isn't that what we do when we train troops? Well, we do it. You can even go into a more stranger direction than that. When you look at what a surgeon has to do just to cut into a human body, there's a kind of desensitization and a shutting down of empathy, the kind of normal circuits of empathy and compassion to do that. So you and I, in the presence of the suffering we would see in E.R. say, would probably be physiologically and emotionally really amped up because we're not used to it. And we see someone in tears with a major wound or a broken arm. And all of our empathy circuits kick in and we're not very useful in that circumstance. I mean, leave aside for the moment that we actually don't know what to do. Even if we did know what to do, an E. flux of empathy in that moment is not especially useful. And to be a great trauma surgeon, you want to be somebody who is not distracted by the tears and the obvious signs of human suffering and who can just deal with this like a machine that has to be fixed. And there's even a point of contact between that ability, just to kind of shut out the other human stuff and deal with the machine that is on a continuum with this cognitive emotional gesture of dehumanizing the other. And just seeing no moral implication in just blowing up bodies. I see what you're saying. So it's essentially you're talking about a broad spectrum of possibilities of the way the mind operates and there's some people that can learn how to shut things off. And that's what you're doing when you're a soldier. You just learn how to do this is your new reality. There was an article recently with an interview that guy who was a soldier who got in trouble because he was urinating on a dead insurgent. And they interviewed him. And it was really interesting because he was very honest about how he felt about the situation. He said that people have this idea of what they want at a marine. They want a guy who's on the commercial, who slides the sword into the holster or the scabbard and stands up straight and is wearing a perfectly trimmed suit. And you don't want a guy who's going to piss on a dead guy. But you don't get one without the other. You don't get a killer. You don't get a guy who doesn't have total disdain for the enemy. And that's what develops. You see your friends die. You see those around you die. You see these people shoot at you. You develop total disdain. That it's okay to kill people, but it's not okay to pee on them. It gets real weird. And I'm not saying that it's okay to pee on people. I'm certainly not saying that it's okay to kill people either. But I'm saying it is weird that we get mad at one and not the other. It's almost like there's a thing about sexuality that's I always found really odd. You can't watch sex. But you can watch graphic violence. You can put a movie. And if it's sex, it's everything that there's legs covered. There's angles. And you don't ever see genitals. Except it's very brief. And there's no actual intercourse. We don't allow to show intercourse. Intercourse is somehow or another ridiculously taboo. But we can watch people's heads explode on regular television. The Walking Dead is just every episode is just boom slash fucking swords cut heads off and guns blow people up. And we're weird. Yeah. And some of that weirdness can be laid at the feet of religion. There's obviously the conditioning we have around sexuality has religious norms hammered into it. And yeah, it's always been strange to think that very explicit violence is something just acceptable entertainment. And any kind of sexuality, whether it's objectifying or obviously romantic and imbued with love, is so charged that we have to protect people from it in very careful ways. I don't know that story about the Marine. I don't know whether that's true. I think it's close to something that must be true. What do you mean what part is true? Well, just whether you can't get one without the other. Oh, yeah. I don't know whether you need clearly in order to function in that mode of defending yourself and your buddies against the threat of the enemy and killing the enemy wherever you find them. That is a that's a mode in which you can't be thinking about how the enemy has kids just like you and is eager to get home to his wife. And that's just not that's not helpful. And it's easy to see why that would start to get drummed out of you. So, and it's I mean it's a huge problem that we can dehumanize other people. It's also a huge problem that we can be part of systems and collaborate in ways which effectively destroy other people's lives. And we don't even notice it. We don't even have the mechanism by which we would notice it. And we don't see, which don't see that there is kind of a zero sum game here in the operating in the background which we are all. We can't help but participate in which leaves people trying to eke out their survival from trash heaps in developing nations. And you and I wondering whether we should get the iPad air. And there's no way to really square in a moral ethical sense the way we use our attention in that space. So, it's like there's no clear way for me to help the person on the trash heap in wherever in that roby. Because just cutting another check to the Red Cross or UNICEF or doctors without borders. That's you know while that's a good thing to do. It's this sort of telescopic philanthropy where it's not a real connection that it's not a real imperative. You know, so when I get a mailing from a charity, you know, help another person who's near starvation in East Africa. My failure to do it, my disinclination to do it, my sense that I've got better things to do than open this junk mail. Never shows up in my mind or in my conversation with anyone else as a shocking misuse of my resources. And this is not, this is what I'm in a very loose way. I'm sketching a series of thought experiments that people like the philosopher Peter Singer and Peter Unger have put in really blisteringly clear ways where you where we all seem to justify to ourselves by default is living in a way where we care about our own happiness to a much, much greater degree. Then we could possibly justify in the presence of someone else's abject suffering. And because we're not in the presence, I mean, so if after this podcast you and I walk out onto the sidewalk and see someone starving to death in front of us. It's you know a child starving to death. We wouldn't be able to ignore it. There's just no, it's just clearly it's our responsibility to figure out, you know, we have to call the authorities. We have to get some food. We have to get a blanket. We have to do something. But because it's happening in another society and the only evidence of it that is being thrust in our face at this moment is an appeal by email or a letter, just hitting delete doesn't strike us as analogous to stepping over the body of a child on the sidewalk and say it's not our problem. And it really in a global society, it is analogous. And yet we don't have the mechanisms in place to make it friction free for us to feel the imperative and care about suffering elsewhere. And we have to, clearly we have to figure out how to do that as a species. Yeah, it's almost overwhelming. Well, it's not almost overwhelming. It's totally overwhelming. The sheer numbers, you look at the amount of people in Africa that have AIDS, you know, the amount of people in third world countries that are struggling to find food every day. It's the sheer numbers. When you look at India, there's a billion people in India. It doesn't like, I think 500 million or something live in total poverty. It's not crazy like that. I just made that number up. Totally. It's probably right. It's not far off. It's probably right. But that seems like a lot. I'm just going to go to the fucking store. I'm time to do this. I got to take care of my kids. I got to go to dance class. Yeah. It's like there's at a certain point in time. It seems like it's not your responsibility. There's this diffusion of responsibility that comes in large numbers that allows people to ignore a rape if there's 100 people around and not if there's one. Right. You know, they've talked about that before. People can watch people get robbed in Times Square and not do anything about it because they're surrounded by other people and they're waiting for someone else to make a move. It's okay to be a coward. But if you were alone in the woods and you saw some man beating some woman to death, you would feel compelled to try to do something. Yeah. Well, actually to segue to questions of self-defense, I think that diffusion of responsibility idea has been oversold because I think more of what's going on for people is they don't want to be the first one to get stabbed. You know, in many of those situations you've got somebody with a weapon. It's not just a guy. It's a guy with a knife. And especially in that case, the original case, the Kitty Genevise case where that notion of diffusion of responsibility was coined, you had a guy with a knife stabbing a woman to death on a sidewalk over the course of many minutes and there were many witnesses. But the problem from the point of view of the herd is the first guy to rush the guy with a knife is very likely going to get stabbed and terribly injured or killed. And maybe the second guy is too. But if five people rushed him at the same time, if there was some sort of tactical intelligence in the group, very likely he could be taken down and neutralized. And that would, and maybe someone would still get hurt, but it's not going to be like one guy after the other getting a fatal stabbing. And that's just a problem we have in that people are frozen in people's freeze and no one wants to be, we don't have the knowledge tactically among untrained people that if you all go in at once, you have a very good shot. At bringing down even a very scary looking guy. If you hit him low and I hit him high and another person hits him in the middle, it doesn't matter who he is. If he's got 380 people, 180 pound guys hitting him, we're going to bring him down. And obviously we have training and that's all the more likely. But what we need in situations like that are people who are going to take responsibility for the safety of others. The innocent bystander, whether you're talking about bullying in schools among 10-year-olds, or you're talking about crime in public, the fact that we're so willing to be just bystanders, that's a problem that creates a lot of suffering. Well, in this soft society that we have, our society is so soft and nice and it's the easiest society that it's ever existed. There's not a lot of conflict in people's lives and new things like conflict or terrifying. Especially physical conflict with another human being wants to hurt you. It's absolutely horrifying. I've told the story in the podcast, but I'll tell it again for you. I was watching a guy, he was at the comedy store and there was two guys arguing and they were in the middle of the street across from the house of blues. And they started arguing, I don't know what happened, they're saw in the middle of it, and they start swinging at each other. And it was a white guy and a black guy. And the white guy just went into full panic mode and was literally standing square and just flailing, closing his eyes with his open hands flailing. And then a bus pulled in front and I couldn't see him anymore. And then as soon as the bus moved he was unconscious. I didn't see what happened to him. It's very cinematic. It was, it was, it really was. But I've never forgot that because I knew what it was because I've seen people fall apart before. I've seen it in much lower levels in fights. But to see it in that, the street fight, I've seen it in competition. I've seen people being intimidated and not performed to their ability or be paralyzed by the moment. A lot of people don't know what to do and the shit hits the fan. We never have to. We don't have any character. But the truth is you don't even, ten people don't really know what to do, what they have to do. As long as they're going to all rush in at the same moment and just swarm the guy. That's a good idea on paper. Yeah, you get ten people together. Hey, who's with me? We're going to talk to this guy. But you come back to me. I'm not going to go near that guy. He's going to stab me. He's not going to stab us. We all go together. But he's going to run it after you. I'll tell you whether the rules have changed or people's intuitions have changed. It's a 30,000 feet on airplane. That's true. So we haven't decided this. This hasn't come about from the top. This has come about organically. But I think we all have the sense that if something starts going down on an airplane, we're all going to rush the guy. And there's just going to be no hesitation because we know how bad that can turn out. Yeah. And that is a, I think that attitude could be brought down to ground level. And so when you're talking about an active shooter situation in a movie theater, the fact that everyone is just running everyone is running away from the guy. And it's just, he basically has as much time as he wants to just pick targets and reload. That is what makes it a circumstance of just a massacre by, in principle. If everyone rush the guy, some people would get shot, but you're not talking about a half hour with a guy stalking the halls, assassinating people. You're talking about someone who got off a few shots and then was covered with bodies. So yeah, you always wonder, you know, what you would do in that scenario. Everybody has an illusive bro, they're not helping them to me. If I see that shit, I'm going off that dude. But real conflict. I've seen it many, many times. I've seen thousands of guys get beat up, like real up close. You're talking about competition. Yeah. Yeah. And competition. And it's, conflict is fucking terrifying for people. I've seen plenty of people get beat up on the street too. But there's something about the potential for things to happen badly to you that are absolutely horrifying for people. Yeah. And it's not that it's, it is rational to be the first person to run away. It's not that that's bad advice for the person. And it's probably advice that we should all take if our only concern is to avoid violence wherever it appears. And that's, you know, and there are situations where you're going to want to do that no matter who you are. So if you're out in public with your six year old daughter, that's probably not the moment for you to try to be a hero. That's the moment for you to get the hell out of there as quickly as possible. And that's, that may be true even if you're a cop. You know, you have to rank order your priorities and do it very quickly. But I just think that there is, there's an ethic that we could have much more of in this society. They could, could be tuned up by, I mean, it would certainly be tuned up by martial arts training in many more people. But it could just be tuned up even without the training that things are a lot worse when you give the bad guy, the endless freedom to move. And, and there are very few bad guys, even armed bad guys who can deal with a crowd. And, and so when these things go down in public and you have a natural crowd, if everyone's just running away or clinging to the exits, it's, it's very different than if, if we all, took the responsibility of being the first to take them down. I think that martial arts should be taught in school the same way we teach writing, the same way we teach math. I really do. I think if you wanted to avoid bullies, avoid people becoming bullies, teach people how to fight, teach people to compete, all that bully stuff will go away. Bulliness is mostly born out of insecurity, mostly. Yeah. But born out of insecurity and born out of this desire that animals have, you know, to assert their dominance. You know, and you see in the animal world, you see it constantly in people. It's almost like a natural reaction to try to gain some security by making others feel weak. It's a, a terrible answer to this conundrum of, you know, of insecurity. I think a far better one is not being insecure. Learning that the actual martial arts techniques and learning what your characters all about, learning how to do something that's really difficult, learning how to push your body when you want to quit, learning how to escape a situation that looked hopeless. Those things are regular lessons in a martial arts class. I can't tell you how many times. I've almost tapped and then gotten out of something and like, whoa. And then you learn. You learn how to not tap. You learn how to get, you know, and tap when you have to. You don't get injured, but you learn how to keep calm and not freak out. Whereas I've been in class before with new guys. And it's really, it doesn't, I don't, it doesn't have it very often. I don't really grow with white belts very often. But I would roll with them and you would feel them panicking. You'd feel them going a full panic attack. You could feel them like hyperventilating, you know, and I'm always, I'm the guy who's always like just chill out, relax dude. This is what you need to do. And I'll try to talk them through it. But it's a weird thing to see this, this natural animal reaction simply because of person is not trained. Or I'll be in that same position with a guy who's like a blue belt or something like that. And they just stay calm. They know how to do it. They've been there done that. They know how to do it. And they might get taps still, but at least they're going to do what they have to do to try their best to get out of that situation. I think that martial arts for men especially. And I think for women too, I shouldn't even say men especially, I don't know what it's like to be a woman, but I think for men, it's a critical part of developing your personality. Not because you should be fighting people, not because you should be. I think people need to do difficult things to explore their character. I think it's important for human beings. Yeah, yeah, I completely agree. I think we'd want to distinguish between or among the martial arts. Because I think there are martial arts that tune up the wrong part of the ego because you're actually not ever having your skills confirmed or disconfirmed. Because it's all in this domain of fantasy and pantomimes of violence. And it's just this cooperative exchange of attacks and replies to the attacks where you're not actually fighting. You're not actually poking the person in the eye and seeing what happens or getting poked in the eye. So this sort of the cut between either the fantasy-based martial arts or the so-called realistic self-defense martial arts. And something like Brazilian Jiu Jitsu where you're really, you're pressure testing at 100%. Now, I think there are pathologies to the sport, pressure testing as well. I think you have to have to get a very clear view of what works in the world. You have to be an intelligent consumer of all these things. But there is something toxic about training in an art where you're always left wondering whether it works. And especially as a teenage male, the feeling that you might have something to prove and the fear of being someone who couldn't actually prove it. And that whole paranoia that happens in a school where you have teachers who skills are by definition never tested. Like the black belt, Sensei, never is going to roll with his students in these arts. I mean, all he's doing is walking around teaching his fantasy techniques. And the students wouldn't be comfortable wrestling him to the ground and sweating and tapping him out. So, I mean, it's just, you have this hierarchy that is never... You just imagine that the guys got mad skills, but they're never demonstrated in a way that is other than, you know, maybe he can do some very pretty kicks. But he's not actually fighting anyone. It's very cult-like. When I was doing Taekwondo when I was a kid, it was very cult-like. I mean, we showed that it was effective against Taekwondo in training. But they didn't take advantage of the cult. It was a very good school. And it was just about discipline. And for me, it was hugely important to have that discipline as a young man, the bowing and all that stuff. There's rules that you just don't cross. Like, I remember when I was... And it was just about discipline. And for me, it was hugely important to have that discipline as a young man, the bowing and all that stuff. There's rules that you just don't cross. Like I remember when I was when I was 15, I had a crazy girlfriend and she's to want to do it all the time. She was crazy. And she wanted to do it at the school because I was teaching at the time. I used to have the keys to the school. And I wouldn't. I wouldn't let her. I mean, there's the only time ever. The only rule that could have prevented you from doing that. is a horny 15, 16 year old, whatever it was. That's ridiculous. You know, I mean, I had a clock key to a building. And no one was there. And we could just bang it out. No problem. There's couches. There was no problems. I was like, nope, we can't do it here. You know, and I'd never had any discipline whatsoever as a young man. But I remember when I started learning the type of window, it was like very limited. There was a lot of holes in it as a style, especially when it comes to punching. Like, type of a window is all about kicking. There's benefits to that because you learn like really incredible leg dexterity and some of the best kickers ever are tikwondo guys who eventually learn Muay Thai kickboxing, boxing and wrestling. There's a lot of guys in the UFC now that are super effective with those techniques. But when you start training with kickboxes, you just get beat up. It's a really humbling revelation. I realize, oh, fuck, you know, I've been wasting time. Like, I'm doing something like I had a revamp my whole style, a complete. And then I started kickboxing and then I thought, well, at least I've got, you know, that whole patched up. And then I went to a Jiu Jitsu class and I got fucking mangled. And I was like, oh, no, I'm helpless. I was like, at least I thought like in a street fight with striking, even if I wasn't like the best kicker or puncher, that I would be able to keep somebody off of me. But there's this kid that was a purple belt, this Brazilian kid who just raped me. He just run through me, just smash me every time we train. I had never had a chance. He wasn't trying to let me survive. He was getting great delight. He was about my age, getting great delight and strung on the shit out of me. And it was very important because I could quit. I could quit then. I could have said, you know what? Fuck this. I'll just go to a kickboxing gym where I'm proficient and I look good. I'm not doing this where I just get humiliated. Anybody's watching. I look like a bitch. But I decided I want to do what he's doing. I want to be able to do that. That's incredible. This guy just man handled me. We're the same size. And he could do anything he wants to make. He was mounting me, arm bar me, trying to me. He was just running through drills on me. I was like, this is a ridiculous. It's such an astonishing epiphany. It's probably true for anyone, but it's especially true if you've come from a background in martial arts where you think you have some skills. Did you? What was your background? Well, so I studied with a guy as a teenager through maybe, I think I stopped when I was 22. And as a guy whose background I never totally believed. I mean, he had real skills. And he taught something that was very analogous to Krav Maga or something. It's like a street oriented self defense where you're learning. You're basically taking the boxing, the striking from boxing and the kicking from Muay Thai and just a smidgen of grappling. But I basically did not know how to grapple. But I felt like I knew a lot about how to defend myself. But I hadn't done martial arts for 20 years and I get back into it and start doing Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and got on the mat with Chris Houder. And it was like wrestling with a Martian. It was just like that the rules of physics did not apply to him. He's probably 10 pounds lighter than me. He's maybe an inch shorter. It was just this most surreal experience of making 100% effort to survive and failing every 30 seconds or minute and a half and just then being resurrected by just the sheer fact that he decided not to kill me and then doing it again and just gat. I mean, there's nothing like gassing under that kind of pressure when you have no idea what to do and you have no idea to relax. It's like you can't. He can't talk. Chris Houder's old school machado black belt. He's been around for a long time. I think he was one of John Chakra. He can, I don't know who he's under. He can, he can. When he gets first black belts, he's got some skills. He's one of the, I think they, they're called the Dirty Dersan. I think the first 12 American black belts. He's one of the, he's one of the first 12. As one of the without a doubt, one of the greatest compliments in my life. Yeah. When I got my black belt that was sent out. Yeah, that's awesome. It's like, wow, wow. That is hard to believe. You know, it's like, whoa, you know, when I can do that to people, that's the weirdest thing ever. When I can do what that purple belt didn't mean, I don't do it. I'm not mean like that. But when I can just, just play with somebody, it's so funny. It's so strange. It's like, and then people can play with me. Like if I roll the Jake Shields or Marcelo Garcia or Eddie Bravo, they just mall me. I mean, there's an, I'm doing a surviving. If I roll with Eddie Bravo, it's just survival. It's not on jock same thing. Survival. Try to survive. Try to hang on. Survival. Try to use defense. And John Jock goes easy on you. He's like, my friend, look up for your arm. You know, he jokes around with you as he's rolling with you. Right. But the, the, the technical aspect of Jiu Jitsu is very overlooked to people who don't participate in it because it's weird when you're looking at it. It's just a bunch of guys swimming around the ground. Like they don't understand it. I remember watching the original UFC's before I started Jiu Jitsu, like what is he doing? I got understand what he's doing. I didn't understand the movement. So all I was seeing was the end where I take great pride in when I do commentary, explaining the various steps that a guy has to do. This is what he's got to do. And this is what he's got to avoid. Like there's two things going on right now. There's a battle of position. And I've had so many people come up to me that said they started Jiu Jitsu based on listening to the commentary. They're like, I gotta learn this. This is so cool. It's so weird. And it's one of the few martial arts where the little man really can defeat the bigger, stronger man easily. And there's a lot of that fantasy martial arts that you were talking about where there's people that have the death touch and they can, you know, you see those videos online where guys throw their hand at people and they follow the ground. And you've got to wonder what's going on. Whether the person's helping out and they're following the ground on purpose or whether they really believe they get zap with some chi. But when you see a guy like Royce Gracie, defeated guy like Ken Shamrock or defeated guy like the old school Dan Severman. Yeah, when he caught him in that triangle. He's back. He taps him. I mean, madness. Like how does this happen? How is this possible? This guy's 250 fucking pounds. The other guy has 170 soke and went, Bill like a popsicle stick. And he just tapped that guy. He gave up. Yeah. It's so technical. You know, and so it's really the one martial art that actually has that whole Bruce Lee thing going on where the one small guy can defeat the large guy. It's also the one art where it has what a keto claims it has. It really is at least potentially the peaceful art. Yeah. It's just a negotiation. I mean, you control someone's position. You control someone's ability to harm you. And then you can just start talking. Like how far do you want to take this? Exactly. And it's, I mean, in principle, all grappling is that and all joint locks added to grappling. I guess is that. Brazilian Jiu Jitsu is, I think, the, if you're just going to take the off the shelf solution to that suite of problems where you've got two people trying to dominate one another physically. And you want to do it in a way where the violence is truly incremental, where you can just, you can turn it up as slowly as, as the laws of physics allow Brazilian Jiu Jitsu is, and whereas a striking based solution is not that, I mean, you don't know what's going to happen when you punch someone in the face. You, you, you may break your hand. You may knock them out. You may knock them out and have them hit their head on the curb and die. There's a lot, there's a lot you can't control for and you, and you can't, I mean, you can't apply a punch incrementally to solve the problem. And so it's, and they can hit you too. Yeah. When you're grappling with a guy, if, if I get a guy down and I mount him and he's a white belt, he's not choking me. It's not going to happen. But if you're swinging with some guy out in a parking lot, you could easily get knocked down. I've seen fights in the UFC where a high level striker gets KO'd by a guy who has no business in the ring with him. Yeah. He just happens. The guy swings a punch. He connects on the jaw and that's a wrap. Yeah, there's not a lot of luck in grappling. Zero. Zero luck. And that's what's amazing about it. I mean, no one ever says you got a lucky triangle. Yeah. He can't get a lucky trigger. That's a fucking complex move to set up. You have to cut angles. You have to, you have to, you have to make sure it's not over the foot. It's over the ankle. There's a lot of variables involved. You were talking about your instructor not quite believing in him. Eddie Bravo has a great story of a guy that he was training under before he found you Jitsu that was doing one of those sort of multiple art bait systems. He had like, you know, five black belts and different arts. And he told everyone he was going to China to train. You know, he had a great master in China that he was going to train. And he went to the supermarket and he recognized the guy's car. And so he goes inside and the guy was shopping. Right. He was pretending he was in China. He just took the week off and was just hanging out and shopping. And he was going to come back and tell everybody he went to China and let him see gone. Have you seen those videos online where they have those old masters that think that they can actually fight? Oh, yeah. No, I posted a bunch of those on my YouTube page. They're so sad. Well, the sad one with a guy offers the challenge and then gets punched in the nose by the very ordinary looking martial artist. That one's sad. But the, they just mesmerizing to watch the ones where there is no discrimination. There's just the cult in full splendor and you just have everyone complying with this magic touch. I mean, either the distances of 20 feet, you've got people, you know, writhing in pain and flopping around. And I don't know what explains it. So I don't think it is conscious fraud on the part of most of these people. I think there's a kind of induction. There's a sort of a hypnotic component to it and a suggestability and also social pressure and self deception and just many things get conspired to make people participate in this thing that is seemingly the most delusional thing that has ever happened. Explain to people of no idea what we're talking about. Okay, so you can actually a good place to see it. Do we have a video? Yeah. On my, if you go to my YouTube page, there's a fake martial art stream and Sam Harris or G is my YouTube page. But there's, and also I wrote a blog post, the pleasures of drowning where I talk about Brazilian Jiu Jitsu. And in that blog post, I think it's in that blog. And that blog post, I linked to one of these videos where the, he builds himself as some machito master. I can't imagine he's actually an Akido guy, but this is the guy who is causing people to fly all over the room at a distance of 20 feet. And then he issues this challenge. And I think it was a $5,000 challenge to any martial artist who had the courage to test his powers. And you see the challenge match where, oh no, this is, these guys are also awesome. These are guys amazing. Yeah. It just throws them off. So there, there's so many, there's so many videos out there that are just priceless. And they should be impossible. And this is really, this is not because this is just, it has all the features of religion, except the thing that that's a guy. Oh yeah, because this is the guy who's got a, so you see his skills. This is, this is where his, his skills work. But then you see his challenge match. And he, he clearly did not know that he couldn't do this because otherwise he would never would have issued that challenge. But he really believes that this is working. He's not necessarily working. But you can imagine what if you open a school and for the next 30 years, everyone cooperates with you. You know, so you've never met someone who wouldn't fall down to your magic touch. You could see how he would believe this. He's basically run a psychological experiment on himself and brainwashed himself in the presence of all these compliant students. But anyways, challenge matches is somewhat depressing. But also, it's also pretty satisfying to see a mass delusion disconfirmed that emphatically. I mean, this is what you want to see go down with religion. The problem is the, the religion really is tennis without the net. I mean, there's just, there is no, there's no disconformation that is so clear that the religious person is going to accept it. Whereas this guy getting repeatedly punched in the face, he has to accept that he's lost the fight. I mean, what, what, what, what, what, what. Maybe he still has a school somewhere. But it's just, it's clear that his, his martial art doesn't work. Well, he gets so confused when he gets hit. You can see the look on his face. Put, see, play it through the part where you get to beat up. He gets so confused. Pull it like it's way ahead where he's, there's a, looks like a, a Kilkoshan guy who's wearing a pair of shorts. Yeah, this is the guy. Some sort of crowd. So this, I mean, just imagine if he got in there with, with Anderson Silva Anderson Silva or someone who really wanted to prove a point. I mean, the guy he's with here is, is just Joe, Joe Carante. The guy's skilled though, the way, when he did a really smart thing, he grabbed his guy, he grabbed his guy and just started whaling on him in the face. He punched him three or four times and then he kicked him in the face and he's a old man. But also you see the, in the other video, you see that this guy really doesn't want to hurt him. I mean, he's worried about hurting him. And so after the first blow land, that's it right there. That's, that's post first blow right before that. He hits him for the first time and he stops. Right. There's, there's another angle on this. There's a video shot from the other side where you can see, um, he can see more hardly. But it's kick while he's holding on to his arm. Yeah. Can't even move. He just holds him in there and punch him in the face. Yeah. But it's, it's, it's amazing. So I mean, this is, this is the, uh, the perfect look, the perfect window at what the human mind is capable of. And so it's, the fact that human minds can do this proves that religion can be every bit as delusional as atheists say it is, or at least the, the, the, the doctrines about the afterlife and, you know, all the garish stuff that, that, uh, we think of in terms of religion, it can, it's, it's so much easier to deceive yourself about that than it is to deceive yourself that you can knock, you know, 20 opponents down with your magic touch. And yet this is possible. What's the mechanism? What's going on there is your neuroscientists tell me what's happening in a person's mind that allows them to just accept like hypnotism. That's real, right? It is real. I, you know, there's, there's, there's a frontier between what's real and what, uh, and just, just what I, you know, I don't know where fraud starts and genuine demonstrations of hypnosis and, and, and so, um, but clearly some people and there's a spectrum of, of suggestibility. Some people are not hypnotizable. It's not something everyone can, can be, um, you know, the Manchurian candidate. There's, there clearly is clearly a phenomenon where you can be given a, uh, a, you can be inducted into a state where you're given suggestions, which then are operative at the level of your behavior and emotion and, um, and about which you may have no recollection. So I think hypnosis is, is real. Um, and it's a, uh, there's also, there's, there are other features to this. So there's the, the social pressure. I mean, so it just, and then just the sunk cost. I mean, what imagined of voting years of your life to something, which does not work. Um, but pays all, you have the, you know, the, the, the belongingness to the group. You have all of the, you know, all of the, uh, the rituals and, um, just the sunk cost of how much time you've spent doing this thing, whether it's religion or a fake martial art, uh, the, the pressure, the, the, the emotional pressure, uh, not to realize its bullshit is, it can be excruciating. And, and when you meet people, I mean, one of the, one of my favorite conversations with a, a, a former person of faith that I've ever had was, um, I met someone at dinner who had lost her faith that day. Literally I got her just fresh, you know, that just, just when the, the thought bubble had, had burst, uh, she, she showed up at this dinner and the, her overriding, uh, feeling was just of, uh, depression over how much time she had wasted. Just like this, like the, the, the, the sunk cost of it because she had spent decades fixated on this, this stuff. And it had, it had completely distorted her relationships and it had been the center for life. And she finally admitted to herself that day that in this case with Catholicism that none of it was true, you know, this is, she had just been, you know, brainwashed. Uh, and, but, but the, the regret, the level of regret over the time wasted and all the things she could have done with that time and all the, it's just, it's, it's, that is a wall that, that many people just can't clear because it's, it's just too painful to acknowledge. It's very painful. What was the mechanism for her? What was the, the, the reason? Um, well actually, she, she credited one of my books in that, I mean, she maybe something else had, had, had helped her along. But no, the last thing she had been reading where she finally realized, oh my God, I've been deceived about this. It was, it was one of my books. Hoodwinked. Was it letters to a Christian nation? I don't know. It was either that or the end of faith. Lying is your new book. And, um, what it's, uh, there's a really important thing that you, uh, you bring up and I, it's not on the front part of this, I read it online somewhere that you, you can avoid a lot of problems in your life. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Simply by not lying. Almost, almost all of them. Oh, I mean, of all the ones that are avoidable. Yeah. But when you just look at how people screw up their lives, lying is, if it's not the reason, it's the thing that enabled the other reason. I mean, it's, it's, it's, people complicate their lives massively by a willingness to deceive others. Uh, and, and it's, this has many features to it. One is just, they're all the things you, you can do based on the cover that lies provide that you shouldn't be doing because they're not good for you and no, and everyone would hate you if they knew you were doing them or you, you know, your wife would leave you or whatever, whatever it is. Uh, and so the lies, lies create a space in which you can let your life run off the whale, uh, run off the rails, whether it's becoming an addict or, or, or, um, uh, you know, perpetrating financial frauds or whatever it is. Uh, but there's, there's also this component where you don't actually, you never actually discover who you are in social space. If you always leave yourself this out of line. So it's like you never discover that if you keep canceling plans with people and just tell this white lie that you're too busy or you're not feeling well or you never have to confront the fact that these are people you actually don't want to see. You know, like you know, people in your life who want to go out to dinner with you, you don't want to see them and you're never having to confront that because you have this out that you're just going to lie. You know, and, and there's, it's just, if you want, I mean, there's actually no change in a person's life that I think is more important in terms of getting your life straight, your relationship, your relationship straight. You're just getting into the future without screwing it up for yourself. Um, there's no more important change than, than a commitment to being honest in, in, in whatever the situation is that presents itself. So you don't fake it till you make it. That's not good. You ever heard that fake it? Yeah. Well, no, you can, that, I mean, that's not good. That I think, well, you can fake, you can fake something until you make it, which is, you can fake confidence. A positive attitude toward uncertainty. I mean, you can, so you can, so you can go into a situation without any guarantee that it's going to work out or that you're going to develop the skills that you need or that you're going, that people are going to like you. But have a positive attitude and, and, and sort of a good will toward the future that you can develop. And that is a kind of, I mean, it's faking confidence and faking comfort maybe. But that's not lying. Right. And that's a line is, is when you are intentionally, implant, planting false beliefs and others when they expect the truth. So it's not, I mean, so, so being a card magician or being a poker player, I mean, this is not, this is not lying. It's not to set me the, the, the, the deception I'm talking about is when someone has every reason to expect the truth. And you are purporting to give the truth, but you're not. And you're actually deceiving them. And what I focus on in the book, because it most virtually everyone recognizes that some subset of, of, of, deceptions are a problem. The egregious lies that, you know, the frauds that, that really harm people and the lies that, you know, when a pharmaceutical company says the drug works and they're lying, everyone recognizes that that's a problem that we've, we've all paid a huge price for the, the skepticism we now have about governments and corporations because of whenever we catch them in a lie, we just now for the next 10 years can't forget that these people in power often lie to us. But the, the lying that people, there's, there's, there's another set of, of lies that people think are actually unavoidable, you know, or, or, or good. And this is usually called white lies. And I think that, I think the price we pay for a white lies is also excruciating. And it's, it's not something that people are quick to, to see. And actually, I didn't see it until I went to, when I was a freshman at Stanford, I took a course with a professor who I actually interviewed in, in the back of the book, Ronald Howard, who is a, really a brilliant guy who started a whole academic field called decision analysis in the 60s. And it's, it's a, it's a mechanism which allows someone to make as rational a decision as possible by putting all of their information about a topic into, into a essentially a calculation. It's got nothing to do with, with, with, with lying or honesty. But he's a, a professor in the engineering economic systems department at Stanford. And he, as kind of a sideline to his, his academic work was teaching these, these courses on ethics. And one course was just on the question whether it's ever ethical to lie. And so as a freshman, I was sort of put in the machine of this course and came out the other side convinced that in virtually any situation apart from like a self defense situation where you're, where things have really broken down and you're not in the presence of someone who you're going to collaborate with. Lying is just unacceptable. It's just not, it's not how I want to live. It's not how anyone should want to live if they look at it closely enough. And it's really one of the, the huge problems that we have as a race is we, we know how to communicate. We know how to, we like when you were talking to that rabbi that we were talking about earlier and he has this like very eloquent and, you know, very theatrical way of communicating. And, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's kind of tricky because when someone's really good at that, you want to believe that they're telling the truth. You want to believe that someone who is lying to you in a very charismatic way is telling you the truth until we actually can read each other's minds. There's a lot of confusion that goes on in human interaction just bumping into each other. It's not getting anything done. Not figuring out what's really going on. Not figuring out the real relationship that you have to other people in your life. You know, I know people that lie constantly and they never get their shit together. They just have like these little lies here and there like why didn't you call me back? Oh, this thing came up. It's always, they just, they, and they're always in a mess. There's just a mess. And I think you're a hundred percent dead on. I think that that that part, that the be honest part, that's one of the most critical aspects of human behavior. We're making agreement with each other. If you're going to be in my life, we're going to be friends. We have to be a hundred percent honest with each other. And as soon as someone's not a hundred percent honest, well then what percentage are you honest? Is it 90? Is it 80? Is it 70? What do I got to do? I got to throw everything through a filter? Yeah, it's not worth it. And then there's the question of whether you want to have a different ethical code for your friends and for strangers. And then you run to situations where the stranger suddenly is a friend and you're now confronted with having had a different ethical code or you discover that this is, this person is somebody's brother and you just lied to them. It's just, it's not tenable to live this way. What I'm interested in are the subtle ways that it erodes trust between people because there's one example I used in the book where a friend was out with her, her girlfriend and she wasn't like her best friend but they were very close friends. The girlfriend had plans later that night with another friend and didn't want to have that plan. And so this friend A watches her friend call up the third friend and lie about why she can't have plans and she lied so convincingly and effortlessly. And it was just something with her kid being sick, whatever it was. And then you got off the phone and then went back to the conversation with with friend A. And what friend A experience in that moment was just a subtle but absolutely obvious erosion of trust, like a permanent erosion of trust but it was something that could never be rectified because it was not, they were not so close that she was going to perform an intervention there and say, well, why are you lying and why do you do this and have you ever done this to me? She was just left with this vague sense that probably this woman had lied to her in the past and would lie to her in the future. And we go through life like this with people and the people who are telling these little lies are just, so the liar in that case never knew that she had subtly degraded her friendship with the first friend. And these things just don't get discovered and it's very toxic. I find also that people that lie are very difficult at seeing lies and others are very bad rather at seeing lies and others. I think that people who are bullshitters can be bullshitted. People who are con-arneurs can be conned. There's some sort of a disconnect that people have that don't live in especially an introspective, really objective version of themselves, like really looking hard at all their issues. If you're lying, you're not doing that. So if you're not, you know, you might have some walls up that you might not know about and they could lead to you getting lied to. It's very possible. Right. Right. To go back to the rabbi though, I think in that case he wasn't lying. I don't think, I think most religious people believe what they say they believe. And that's the smart though. I kind of think that he knows. Yeah, but that's the scary thing about it. And this is not, this certainly doesn't apply to rabbi Wolpe, but this applies to the jihadists who thinks he's going to get 72 virgins and paradise. You can be smart and believe that. That's the scary thing. You can be the engineer who could have had everything but decides to be a jihadist because he believes that the afterlife conforms to the Quran and the Hadith. And that is a, so I don't, I mean, deception is part of the game and self deception is part of the game. But in many cases, I think you have people who have been indoctrinated from birth or get a message from their culture that or get emotionally hijacked in ways that allow them to believe the unbelievable. And then they're being perfectly honest when they spread those ideas. They're not, they're not frauds. And that's, that I think is, it's a different problem. A deception is, is self deception is certainly a component in many of these cases. But do you think it's possible that technology will eventually make lying obsolete? Like what, what we're seeing right now with this invasion of privacy thing with the NSA, we're seeing in a, it's a one sided trip obviously. And then you have WikiLeaks and Eric Snowden, they're the Eric. So this name Edward Edward Snowden or the other side releasing, you know, scratch bits of information that they can scratch together and, and, and, and, and smuggle out. But it seems to me like that's where that. releasing scratch bits of information that they can scratch together and and and and Smuggle out But it seems to me like that's where the trend is ultimately going the trend is ultimately going To you're not gonna like if you send someone the picture of your dick online It's gonna be out there someone's gonna get that if you you know if you send You know blank if this happens if that happens if you know if it's gonna It's all gonna be recorded you're gonna know where you were you have a GPS chip on your phone or your Google glass It knows exactly where you were it records you all the time. I think this NSA thing is fucking terrible I think it's terrible mostly because it's the government that has all the power in this situation It's these people that are they're not using it. I mean the ideas that they're using it to prevent terrorism I guess maybe but there's so much evidence that points to the fact they were spying on other world leaders that they didn't think were terrorists there is essentially using as a vehicle for control right and but it brings up a fascinating new area of technology and that is this this new era that we're entering into where everything's getting closer and closer and closer to the point where One day we're gonna have this one Database that we all draw from all the time if we have the internet We're gonna have something that it's like a pair of glasses or like something that you wear inside your skin or something That's gonna allow everybody to be connected all over the place. I don't know how we're gonna manage it But all that information we're gonna be able to get to it. I'm gonna be able to know what you had for lunch today Yeah, yeah, well, there's there's so there's that component. There's that just the sheer transparency Based on having so much data. You know, but there's this other technological Fix for deception which is just actual lie detection and I think that is coming I think there's no question that at some point we are going to have Line detection that we're it may not be perfect, but it will be valid enough and reliable enough that we will rely on it In the way that we rely on DNA evidence. So as if it was your DNA at the scene You know we we think you're involved if you are caught lying as measured by this machine We're we're gonna think you're lying and that's gonna be you know, forensicly actionable I think that's we're not we're certainly not there yet, but I think that it would it would really surprise me if we don't get there I want to talk to you about this because I had one of your colleagues on my show Joe Rogan questions everything I can't remember her name right now. Oh blonde woman was a pam Pam Douglas I believe so yeah, I believe that was yes And she was talking about fMRI results and how a woman was actually convicted of a murder I believe it was in India because of fMRI that she had What they called functional knowledge of the crime scene right right? Yes, I mean that I think that strikes almost any Neuroscientist as a premature use of the technology and in that case you're talking about a I mean that I think that I think that mode of inquiry is problematic because you're talking about just just familiarity with the crime scene or with it with the evidence and there clearly other sources of familiarity and and you know if if the per if the dead girl is wearing a dress that you just bought out of the J Crew catalog you're familiar with the dress and I don't know that they have a I don't know that they've operational Just in the way that that will will protect you from just just accidentally being familiar with the would the Some features of the crime scene to say nothing of the fact that we just cannot resolve brain function that clearly enough to to Base those kinds of decisions on on a judgment that the person is is lying or not We don't understand the the the neural correlates of of honesty and deception enough to know but it's I think it would be very surprising if we never get there and so and again I'm just speculating if it was Pam on your blue Joe's She actually took she was a what's her name and then Pamela Douglas is the woman I'm thinking of she was I she was a graduate student in the lab I was in UCLA and she after I did a yes her after I did a study of belief Where I compared belief and disbelief and uncertainty with fMRI She came back and and used all of my data To look to to see if she could discriminate what subjects believed at the single trial level Which is that on each question? So it's what I did is I put subjects in a scanner and I gave them propositions to read that we They're clearly true or clearly false or clearly undecidable and Just compared belief versus disbelief versus uncertainty and that is if you could do that if you could do that at the single trial Level you essentially have a a lie detector because if you believe that you were the person who committed the crime And we can we have a Understanding of the neural correlates of belief versus disbelief then we could easily ask you You know whether you were involved in a way that would tease that out so she she wanted to see Whether we could see the difference between belief and disbelief and uncertainty at the at the kind of the micro level just just you know on the single question level and her her Classifiers were over 90% accurate so she was she was over 90% in In guessing essentially whether someone was but could believe or disbelieved a proposition And so if you had a it's easy to see how we would now with available technology have a lie detector That was 90% accurate now that's not accurate enough to put people away and you know for for misstatements in court but if we could get it to the level of accuracy that we now rely on for DNA evidence I think we would It's it's it's an interesting question philosophically and experimentally how we'd ever bridge that cap and how we'd ever be truly confident that no matter what sort of Histrionics and protestations This person is lying. This is those person is is claims. You know on his mother's life that he's telling the truth the brain scan evidence says otherwise somehow I feel like that is going to be harder to achieve than Him saying it's not my blood. It's not my blood. It's not my blood. It's not my blood But the DNA evidence says otherwise But in principle, I don't see any reason why we couldn't get there and that and that I think would change things a lot because when you look at the price We pay for not being able to determine whether someone is lying It is huge. I mean it is I mean we were talking about their people in prison for the rest of the people have gone to death row and been executed Who we know were innocent? Not just one. Oh, yeah. I mean and in the most horrific There was this one guy whose name is now escaping me, but there was a new order profile on him where his house burned down and He was charged with the crime of having set the fire and killing his two kids Now imagine being someone whose house burned down and your two kids die in the fire and the world thinks you did it and not only do they think you did it? They prosecute you your defense fails you go to death row and you're executed right for the crime of having murdered your children Now that if we could just tell whether someone was telling the truth that that problem goes away and and and there you know there It's to think of the think of the the implications of You know negotiation among you know leaders of countries where you don't know whether people are telling The truth and you know we do or do not have nuclear weapons. You don't know whether they're telling if if if there was transparency at the level of all For all of those conversations. It would it would really be a game changer not only that women will have to finally accept what men actually think We could stop bullshitting we could stop sex in the city and notebooking our way through this life That would be nice. We'd also have to find out what women think Could be a revolution. It would be awful. Well, it would be great But you know for a while it'd be awful. Do you Do you think that that Ultimately is going to lead to the change that we need in world governments? Is that what the big one is going to be the ability to discern whether or not people are telling the truth because if that it That seems like just that alone Would change everything if you could see clearly motivations you could see clearly benefits to certain actions You could clearly see deceptive tactics based on you know Well, you know what really they what they're trying to do is this you know Read it out, you know what they're actually trying to do is make money for ex corporation They're pretending that they're trying to save the country from an evil dictator But really what they're trying to do is extract resources. Here's the clear data like what do we do if we have everything out on the table What a weird world we would live in it would that could be the total 100% game changer even bigger in fact than the internet if we could find out what everybody actually thanks Yeah, there are there are a few wrinkles to it because if you were self-deceived You actually believed what you were saying but you're what you're saying is not true Then you could sort of game the system right like I detected test. Yeah, I mean so so well, you know if we had if we totally understood the the Neural neural correlates of deception we wouldn't necessarily be able to detect someone who believed to their own lies And there may be some way to to be confused enough or Confabulistic enough about reality that you can just bullshit or spitball or or Say what you want to be true or kind of hypnotize yourself We just don't actually know what's true at the level of the minds Cognitive elasticity so you so it's possible that you could have people who are not good subjects of lie detection in some sense and That's something we could we would Understand if we understood all this but I think in the general case And certainly in the case of big lies Virtually all the time the liar knows his line and is hoping not to get caught and is picking his words carefully So as not to get caught and keeping track of the things he said and and is consciously calculating against the expectations of cogency and and Plossability in his audience. I mean there's a massive calculation going on Virtually all of which is conscious in a liar and it seems to me that that is It's going to be detectable in with great reliability at some point It just seems like it's inevitable what everything progresses everything gets better and that's something they're working on on a constant basis Whether it's a hundred years from now or two hundred years now What but people will they'll hate this? Oh, yeah, this will because the the Orwellian Fears of the misuse of this or the fears about the Orwellian misuse of this are pretty easy to to Get a hold of and and I think People feel like there's the kind of the last and most critical Loss of cognitive liberty. I mean it's so if you if you didn't have the Fundamental right to privacy That could be safeguarded by lies Something crucial to our humanity has been lost. I think many people will feel that and It won't matter how High you pile the benefits. You talk about the guy who was in prison for and and killed and and he didn't kill his daughters But we thought he did and we killed him and you multiply that guy by a hundred thousand And you talk about you know treaties and deceptions at the level of you know nation states where you know millions of lives hanging the balance There are people who are gonna say no, no, this is not acceptable and and I think They'll they'll have a few points on their side, but I think they the the cost to us Personally and economically and socially for consequential lives I mean, I'm not I'm not imagine a world where we would have a live detection technology running all the times of that every time you You know someone says how are you and you say I'm fine, but you're actually not fine And some of red lights gonna go off on your you know sweater turkey test. Yeah, I mean, there's not there's not I don't think any of us would want to live in that world, but when The stakes are high and conversations matter. I mean even just in court say you know the conversation is is important enough and Consequential enough that it has now moved into a court and we've got lawyers on both sides And now we've got people swearing owes of honesty Let's have this conversation Under in a framework where we know that lies will be detected. I think I think any sane person is gonna sign up for that Isn't that the the progression though? It's always existed like people were resisting books You know when books were first printed because it was gonna erode our memory which it probably did but Yeah, I mean they thought that was something crucial to our happiness would be lost by by Literacy well, there's a lot of people that also believe going online is bad I've talked to a lot of people that take pride in not going online. I think it's hilarious It's like dude, you know, you're just the guy who doesn't like books you're the same guy You're the guy who doesn't want a cell phone. You know, I'm wanting people to know where you are You know, you want to be free. Yeah, those days have gone man. Those days have gone There's those new world going on by the way if you're driving around your car Everybody knows where you are they can find you super easy, you know You have a GPS in there. It's very unique Try it's if they leave the police need to find you they trace it they find you instantly So I like you you're not hiding. I just know hiding anymore. Yeah, although it's interesting. I don't know. I clearly there's some form of progress that is Harmful and you could be only Dimly aware or just surely oblivious to the harms until after it's too late and I I'm not sure how I Mean just speaking personally my own use of of the internet and my use of the way in which my my day gets Segmented by the checking of email and and just the way I can disappear online in the middle of a conversation You have to I think we all have to be mindful of what that what that's doing to us It's a very good point and it's I mean just to be on the phone with someone and Also be checking your email. I mean that's something that that you can in a very lazy way just do more times than not and it's a It's a I mean they're now a thousand moments like that that we all confront and if we're not if we're not aware of how it's playing with The fabric of our lives that you just you you can just wake up one day with a very fragmented kind of attention and It's just a It's just it's a it's a less satisfying there's something about multitasking that is I think intrinsically stressful and not rewarding, but you know what the real issue is it's not really multitasking Yeah, you're sitting there dinner with someone and someone's checking their phone. They're not really talking you know You're just you're just segmenting. Yeah. You're the experience. I was at a dinner the other day And there was four dudes and they were all on their phone I was like this is the craziest shit ever like no one's talking to anybody We're all just looking at our phones like this is bananas like let's make an agreement shut these bitches off for an hour Wow my kids and I don't want it then what if someone calls you know work is within the middle of the deal Nobody wants to just Detune yeah vacation do it on vacation. Should I didn't check my email for five days? It's like a big deal. Oh Disconnected from the fucking hive you're crazy What do you make of this whole? NSA privacy thing do you think that can be rectified? It seems like when the genies out of the bottle with something like that like once they can do that and then once they Justified doing that like you know and not all that Obama's been lying about it like left and right. It's fascinating when you find out that he oversaw a lot of these These decisions to to spy on people and there's a lot of things that were done during the Bush administration before him With that go way back to 2002. Yeah, German counselor Chancellor Confronts Obama about us spying on our cell phone. Why would you spy in the German chancellor? Do you think she's a terrorist is she evil? Well, no, but that I mean that we have this history of espionage which in which that is just clearly What you would do so that no one problem here is just that and this is this is one of the consequences of increasing transparency It went one one certain facts are acknowledged people have to Respond to them. There's there's a you know I know you know and you know that I know that you know and Now this is now this what was a essentially an open secret has to be explicitly talked about and reacted to and so everyone knew for Decades that we would make Every effort we could to spy on everyone we cared about spying on and that is that is allies and enemies and everyone did it insofar as their resources allow and That is just what has always happened, but the moment you actually put to find a point on it and declare Angela Merkel's cell phone has has been bugged by the the NSA or the CIA that is Intolerable and it's just it's not it's it's a little bit like What would happen to us if we saw a photo of everyone we killed in war? You know if it was just all transparent What kind of war is would we actually emotionally tolerate? It might this might be a good thing it might be a bad thing it might be it might be we might be defenseless because we would find the the act of waging war so unconscionable that we wouldn't do it or we'd be slow enough to do it that we would be you know sitting ducks and so I don't know. I just have a this is a big question mark there how much there are cases in which true information is Prevent you from being able to do something That you actually would want to do or and and perhaps should want to do to protect people who need to be protected Protect people from the realities of the world that they're not necessarily aware of that they haven't come to Grips with like that some people aren't looking for your best interest some people will shoot a 15-year-old girl on a bus because she wants to read These people are real people and you're not going to change them You're not going to enlighten them instantaneously unless you know that's the next invention and until then you're gonna have to deal with the realities of the world You live in yeah, so so either we should have Espionage or we shouldn't now a lot of people think you know there shouldn't be a CIA there shouldn't be an NSA There's something couldn't JFK Yeah, so it's just if you're one of those people if you think we shouldn't be spying on anyone then obviously anything we do in that sphere is is unethical and problematic but I'm not one of those people it's obvious That that we want information that people don't want to give us and that's and this is this information that relates to The most consequential things that could possibly happen a nuclear terrorism We want to know if someone is is trying to get loose nukes in the former Soviet Union and blow up an American city They're not going to tell us and if there's any way to find out so as to interdict that process um That's let's call that espionage and that's gonna be a matter of tapping people's phones or watching their email and and so and if you just have to imagine how you would feel if In new goes off in the in the portable as Angeles killing 150,000 people and making a region of Los Angeles uninhabitable for decades if not more How would you feel if The NSA said yeah, you know, we actually we had the technology to detect all of those Mascinations that led to that catastrophe But we decided not to use it. We decided not to use it because Glenn Greenwald made enough noise that it It just became politically inconvenient for us to use it or we were respecting the rights of People to you know to have private evil thoughts that we weren't good. We just didn't we it was something unsavory about reading email We didn't want to tap tap anyone cell phone I think we would clearly the price is the price for that kind of delicacy is too high in the aftermath of that kind of event So if you live if you live in a world where you Think that Or if you think we live in a world where those events are are not only possible, but there are people waking up tomorrow morning trying to do that um Then I think you want some level of of Very energetic eavesdropping on certain people and and then then the question is just where do you draw the line? And you get like a TSA pre exemption Like one of those things, but now you could do TSA pre they know you're not terrorists right. Oh, you're Sam Harris Yeah, the writer you can just go right through but the only way your exam is is to invite that intrusion into your life in the first place true Yeah, so you have to be willing to To part with some kind of private But it doesn't mean that the devil's advocate position would be that there's a reason where these people are upset at us We're occupying Holy Land. We're doing terrible things. We're stealing the resources There's a lot of things that the United States is doing that actually promotes this radical jihad well To some degree that's true most of that is Based on their religious perception of the world in the first place so that I mean this so many of these grievances are are Liberals tend to describe them as political, but but they're actually religious grievances so you know if the if the Saudis invite us in to help secure the oil wells that Saddam Hussein is threatening right Someone like Osama bin Laden perceives that as the sacrilege of having infidel boots on the ground in the Holy Land Right and then someone like Glenn Greenwald will describe that as a political grievance That's a religious grievance. That is that is you we were invited in by a government in that case to Protect oil wells We're not stealing the oil. We're buying the oil. I mean, but it's a bit disingenuous because Saddam wasn't really a religious guy Oh, no, he no he's he was not religious, but he was using him. He won. He was tamping down the the Religious sectarianism of the Iraqi people which you know with the moment we removed him can chaos exploded Yeah, but so so who but what's who gets the blame for all of that? We've got Sunni and Shia killing each other Based on is that politics we can call politics, but that that is religious sectarianism No questions in that way can actually be argued that it was better for the people that have that ruthless dictator and power Then it is to have the United States sort of loosely helping them govern themselves I don't agree with that obviously. I think you know ultimately the the best thing for everybody would be Some sort of a compromise But when you look at the fact that these people are both Muslims They just have a different sect of Muslim of Islam and they they kill each other like a regular basis like the amount of slaughter involved Most people don't even know that that's going on. We're not we're not paying attention to it It shows up on you know page eight of the New York Times sometimes, but you know sometimes but but the The I mean this is that's one thing you have to keep in mind whenever you hear people rail against US foreign policy being the engine is driving this Global jihad and Muslim violence you just have to look at what Muslims are doing to other Muslims in context that have absolutely nothing to do with With our overreaching our colonialism our stealing of resources You can you can make us as bad as you want But go to Pakistan and ask yourself. Why are they why are Sunnis blowing up Shia or a Madi mosques But you know some guys willing to lay down his life tomorrow morning and you know become a bomb and kill 75 people And it's got nothing to do with us. It's got it that is and and it's we can we call it politics It's good we're talking about In many cases the victimization of a religious minority that has no political power It's not politics by it's not like this these it's not the tea party You know really trying to get something. This is this is a this is someone waking up willing to die for the pleasure of killing men, women and children And it's to to no end apart from the imagine end that he's going to wind up in paradise and get everyone he loves in their After they die Do you think that it's possible To turn that around is there a way or do you think that the reason why you support United States occupying these countries is because they're so chaotic that you need to keep an eye on them You need to keep the area settled Actually don't I don't support Occupation anywhere actually I Never I supported our going into Afghanistan because we had to do it We had to had to strike a blow against al-Qaeda and did we have to yeah, no We had to oh, what is the main? Well because would you just you look at the consequences of our never having done it before that? we were there was this slow bleed of of attacks on us without any real reprisal for decades. I mean, so you know since you know that the early 80s and We were you know the hostages in Lebanon and there were there were you know the the marine barracks got got blown up and and the The the lesson drawn among the jihadists of the world was this is you know The West is a paper tiger tiger America's a paper tiger. They're just going to run away and we can keep taking it to them and that is a That's not the lesson we want gi-hattas to draw I think the lesson we want them to draw is that It is very dangerous to be a gi-hattas And you know if you if you are desperate to get to paradise and you're gonna tell all your friends and neighbors in your in your suicide video that You want to get to paradise Will help you get to paradise. I mean, I think we have to have a policy towards towards you hottest which is a policy of Hot war, but I don't think we should be occupying countries to do this. I think I think it should be largely covert well then how we gonna control the heroin How do we control the heroin then what do you don't occupy how are we gonna be able to put a lockdown on all that? I've can't eat sweet heroin I thought well we can just buy it if we want it That's going on Do you think that the United States like some secret factions the United States have some sort of an involvement in profiteering off of the drug use? I have no idea. I mean, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Yeah. No, I mean, it's totally it's possible. I it's not something I've thought about it just it seems like Most things are for sale. I mean certainly heroin is for sale is if we it's not and like what is the margin of You know for stealing it and fighting a war to steal it. I mean clearly whatever if if we had ulterior Prophets seeking motives in any of these wars They didn't turn out they didn't pan out. I mean these wars are so much more costly than anything else. We could have gotten from them but the I Think the But sort of less of who is my draw from these wars is that we there is a consequence to having boots on the ground And it's a it's a bad one which is there's this perception that we Based on our own desire for conflict and Conquest are at war with the Muslim world. There's a perception. There's a perception in the Muslim world some of it is is fraudulent and you know they don't really believe that some of it is is genuinely believed by many many millions of people that The West is just trying to conquer the Muslim world and Destroy this this the one true religion That's not a perception that we can just Keep humming for a century. We have to deflate that and so and and one way to deflate it is to Treat this all like a In something like a like a crime problem but a crime problem that is going to be Remedy with covert Covert acts of violence. So you know, I think I think we should assassinate geodest That's and and we shouldn't we shouldn't make a big thing about doing this. We shouldn't own it every time it happens It just should become clear In a hundred It's a jihadist. And we shouldn't make a big thing about doing this. We shouldn't own it every time it happens. It should become clear in 100 countries that if you're a jihadist who opens, opens sets up shop as the jihadists who's now going to install the global caliphate and kill infidels, your life just got very dangerous. And the end game for us and for a global civilization is to get moderate Muslims to do that job. The moderate Muslims have to realize that they need to win a civil war with their jihadists. As long as moderate Muslims and conservative Muslims who are not jihadists think that jihadism is not their problem or has no, or they're just scared of their extremists, there's going to be no one else to prosecute this war. And there's something intrinsically inflammatory about us doing this job, not only in the minds of jihadists, but in the minds of normal Muslims who would never think of waging jihad, but they just find it intolerable to see Western, you know, guys sitting in office parks in Vegas, flying drones over Pakistan, which are pretty precise and they're killed a lot of bad people, but they also kill some innocent bystanders. That is, you don't have to be someone who was going to be a jihadist to find that objectionable if you are a devout Muslim who just feels you. A person with conscience. No, but there's a solid religious solidarity that is working against us, which the only remedy for which I think is to have moderate Muslims wherever they can be found to rise up and own this thing. Which I mean, until moderate Muslims find al-Qaeda and the Taliban, every bit is an imical to their hopes for this world as we do, you know, it's an untenable situation. We can't keep doing this. I want to go back to what you said about the war being so expensive in the first place that it wouldn't be a war for selling drugs for profit. I'm not saying that it's entirely for involved or based on selling drugs for profit, but there's no denying that the heroin production has increased radical since NATO-op- All right. Excuse me, I have a cold days in Yemen, no, if you tell. NATO occupation, I mean, there's an article here, it's 40 times higher production of heroin since NATO occupied. But part of that could be, again, not something I know anything about, but there are other explanations for that. One is just that you have people who have no other livelihood but to grow crops and the most valuable crop they can grow is heroin. That's true. And so what are they gonna do? It's like they're just coming out of the Civil War, obviously isn't over, but they came out of a period of just wall to wall violence. And we dump billions and billions of dollars in there, we pave a few roads and now, if you're an Afghan, Afghany farmer, what are you gonna grow? It seems like that would be the right choice. To me, if you're, if you're, we've got the buyers on our side, that's the problem. Right, but isn't also the problem when they have United States Army troops guarding the poppy fields, which is video of it, Haralda Rivera, interviewing, I mean, it's clearly that there's some military involvement the United States military involved in the heroin production in Afghanistan. It's like it's pretty transparent. But the idea is that they're saying that the reason why they do it is because they need to help these people grow the crops so that they'll ride on the Taliban. Yeah, well, which is a perfectly reasonable explanation for me. So you just tell me that there are Marines guarding a poppy field, there are many interpretations of that, but one is just what you gave. They have to win hearts and minds. They have to figure out some way to get the non-radicalized people to rat out the very scary radicalized people who make come to kill them. And how are we gonna, the item number one in engineering that cooperation can't be, let's force all these people to destroy the most profitable crop they could grow because of our drug laws. That's an interesting way of looking at it. The unfortunate thing for me though is that there's a ton of evidence that the United States government has been involved in drugs smuggling. There was a CIA jet that had been to Guantanamo Bay twice that crashed with several tons of cocaine in Mexico. Pull it up, it's kind of hilarious. It's a, you see this jet and inside of it, it's just stacked with cocaine. I think obviously this is probably not the entire organization, but there's some factions that are profiting off of it. They have forever, there's a guy named Barry Seale who was involved in, back during the Pablo Escobar days. He was, according to him, he was selling drugs for the CIA. There's also what happened with Freeway Ricky and the whole Oliver North countries in Nicaragua situation. The United States was clearly involved in drug trafficking to promote a hidden war. This is the plane crashed with several tons of cocaine. Like okay, that's hilarious. And it's a jet that had been to Guantanamo Bay twice. I mean, I don't wanna go too far down to the conspiracy theory rabbit hole with you, but you have to take that into consideration that there's a lot of evidence that some fuckery is a foot and has been for a long time, whether it was in Southeast Asia, heroin in the Vietnam War or whether it's this right now. There's something, and when you say that it costs so much money anyway, but to who? It doesn't cost so much money to Hallibur and it doesn't cost so much money to all these companies that are profiting off of war. That's the idea is that war is very profitable for the people who get the government contracts and go over there and build airplane hangers and all these different things that they're doing over there. It's not, we're not talking about what's profitable or not profitable for the United States taxpayer. We're talking about the people that are actually controlling the game in the first place. Yeah, but that's the issue. Is there someone controlling the game and are there interests aligned enough so that they really have control over it? And that I think is in most cases, I'm not saying that people never conspire or that it's not possible to have a sufficient number of people in power who have selfish and short-sighted interests that can get them to do terrible things on the world stage. And that clearly could happen, at least in principle, but for the most part, there's just people's interests are not aligned all that well. There's not, how a burden is not that powerful so that it could decide to launch a war. And one way you can see this, or one thing I would get you to reflect on is you take someone like President Obama when he was Senator Obama, he was against the Iraq war. He was allegedly. Yeah, but he spoke on this board and he was a critic. He was certainly a critic. He's nothing. But if you based it on what he's told us since he's done the office and what turns out to be true. So I'm asking, I'm asking how you account for that transformation in him. So he's someone who was a critic of the former administration. If you had before he was elected, if you had asked him, what do you think about Bush? And what do you think about Cheney? And what do you think about Rumsfeld and what all the stuff they did for a problem? He would have a, and this all of this came, I'm not just speculating. He said many of these things, but he had a very clear critique based on liberal principles that almost any liberal who was enthusiastic about his election would recognize that the Iraq war was unnecessary. We went in there on false pretenses. This was a terrible idea. The consequences, now there's a mess that has to be cleaned up. But now he's become to the eyes of many liberals just a neo-con shill, someone who's more secretive and more agile in his prosecution of a covert war than Bush and Cheney ever were. And so how do you explain that transformation? Is he someone who was always that way and was just lying, but lying for some reason that doesn't make much political sense? Or was he, is there some nefarious process? Where some star chamber where the people who are really in power got to him and scared him? Like he's president of the United States, but he had a meeting with Halliburton and a bunch of powerful guys, some billionaires, who scared him straight and now he's just doing their bidding or you don't believe that's possible? Yeah, I don't think, I think that's possible. But or, and this is the, obviously the interpretation I favor, or are the facts of the world so scary and is governance so messy? And is it so fucking hard to get anything done that this process of apparent transformation just happens? So he got it in office, he's a senator who's not really privy to all the facts. Now he's president who every morning wakes up and is told the scariest intelligence we've got. What does that do to you? And how, how eager does that make you to make sure that a, a, a, a, a terrorist incident of an order of magnitude larger than September 11th doesn't happen on your watch? I mean, so imagine having the responsibility to protect whole cities from massive acts of terror, just how, just how, how squeamish are you gonna be about bugging people's cell phones? I think it's, it's very easy to see that through no evil hand behind the scenes, you could have somebody like Obama who was a genuine liberal, you know, he's not, he's not, as far left as as many people want him to be, but there's no reason to doubt that he objected to the Iraq war and, and he's basically a straight down the middle of the fairway liberal, who's now essentially functioning like a neo-con. I think, I think the details have to be terrifying. And I think it's, I think it's just, it's an immense responsibility. I don't think it's either or. I think it's very possible, excuse me, it's very possible that both things are going on. It's very possible that there are people that are absolutely profiting and want to get involved in wars for profit. And I think also the world is scary. And I think it's, I don't know, but I don't know. But I don't know. I don't know. I don't doubt that Halliburton sees an upside to a war because they make all the stuff. Right. And they provide the services. So yeah, it's part, the next war is part of their business plan. But the question is, how much power does anyone person have? For every billionaire like the coke brothers who, who's you know, twirling is mustache and doing the nefarious right wing thing, there are billionaires who do not align with them politically, who can do the left wing thing. Right. But that's just, that's a microcosm of human beings in general. There's evil people and there's nice people. That's just, that doesn't necessarily preclude the idea that someone not just profits off war, but engineers war for profit. It seems if you're talking about something like billions and billions of dollars and you can justify to yourself this inevitable anyway, because these people are cave people. They're going to fuck up and you got all these, look what they do to women, look what they do to their, their people, look what they do to each other, look what they do to fellow Muslims. You're also maybe not making the best you'd mandatory in choices because you're making choices based on profit. And the profit is absolutely enormous. I mean, it's, it's massive. And there's pretty clear evidence the United States basically lied to get into the Iraq war. I mean, I know that there was a lot of people that genuinely believe that there was something going on in Iraq and genuinely believe that Saddam Hussein was a threat. But there's also people that believe it was a whole lot of fuck, are you including Poland, Cohen Powell? Well, well, everyone believed when Colin Powell delivered that, that presentation at the UN, virtually everyone believed it was a few exceptions, virtually everyone believed that that was true. And no way it was not, it was uncontroversial that the, the premise that that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction was uncontroversial. And all the people who were against are going in, in there, were against it for reasons that did not entail doubting whether there were weapons of mass destruction. They, there were other reasons not to go in there. It's just, it was going to, it was a hornet's nest. It was going to, it was a quagmire. It was, it was, you know, what specifically the weapons of mass destruction that would motivate us going there and not going into North Korea. All right. So it's, well, because of the anti no money in North Korea. Well, no, there's that, but no, because he didn't, he didn't have nukes. He was trying to get nukes or we thought he was trying to get nukes. We could deal with a chemical weapons attack and he'd give everyone a gas mask and a hazmat suit and we can still fight a war that the, the, the, the, the nukes changed the game. And that's why, that's one reason why Pakistan is so terrifying. So you don't open yourself up to the possibility of conspiracy. No, I do. I just know that that this is an added, I don't know where it comes from, but never described a conspiracy. What can be explained by incompetence or the tragedy of wasted opportunity, the idea that just because a tragedy gets capitalized on doesn't mean that the people who capitalize on it cause the tragedy, that's a standard operation of procedure for warriors to find something wrong and say, look, this is what happened. We got attacked. We're going to NIRAC. Right. Right. Yeah. I see in, in, in every conspiracy, and again, I'm not doubting whether anyone ever conspires. It's just that there are so many constraints on people doing what they want, especially when they're nefarious things. The constraints, largely being everyone else's opposing wants, that it's, it's hard for people to bring these, these big plans off. But isn't that your argument for, is eavesdropping on people in the first place that they're planning big plans? Somebody said this. I forget who it was. I think somebody said it on the podcast. It's, it was a different scale of conspiracy. I mean, so, so you look at the 19 hijackers. Okay. It's just 19 guys with box cutters. Yeah, but it's a big organization. I mean, that's not just 19 guys. Those guys planted out. They had help. They learned how to fly. They pulled it off. Someone said this, it's not a new building. It's not, it's not, you know, half a million guys and tanks. Right. Because it's 19 guys and not, halleberen, not a multi billion dollar operation that the CEO, the former CEO just happens to be the vice president of the United States and gets multi billion dollar no bid contracts to go and rebuild shit we blow up. I mean, it's, it's pretty connect the dots. If you wanted to argue for a war for profit, that's about what is cut and dries it ever gets. Someone said on the podcast, I forget who it was. I don't know who it was. Maybe I read it online. Someone said, do you believe in 9-11? Ask people if they believe in conspiracies. Do you believe in 9-11? Like, what do you mean? Do you believe 9-11 was done as a conspiracy by the government? No, do you believe it happened? And everyone says yes. Well, then you believe in conspiracies. Because it was a conspiracy. Someone conspired to fly planes in the buildings and whether or not the United States government was involved or whether or not it was these 19 guys from Saudi Arabia, that was, they pulled that off. Conspiracies exist. But something like 35% of Americans believe that the US had some hand in that conspiracy. Is it really that high? That we let it happen. And 16% think that we engineered it. I hate those things though. So that we demoed the buildings. It's somewhere in the dead of night had to fill the twin towers with, with thermite and that we hit, you know, we hit the plunger at the right moment just after the planes went in or maybe they weren't even planes. Maybe they were holograms. And once you get deep into this, the 9-Eleven conspiracy, you get, you know, the CIA faking voices of all the passengers on the flight. See, it's explaining the answering machine messages of the relatives of the dead passengers by CIA voice faking technology. And it's just, it's just, it's completely insane. And, and the problem with it is it's totally unconstrained by any overall explanation or plausible hypothesis about what could have happened. What it is is you look at every anomaly, any event you could possibly describe is going to have a million, what would look like coincidences in it. And which, which if you, if you tried to engineer beforehand would seem like the odds against them were astronomical. But in the aftermath, something had to happen. So it's like the people sold stock in American Airlines that day, right? So how is it that you sold your stock in American Airlines, the very day before an American Airlines jet flew into a building, right? How do you know, that is, that's fishy, right? Well, the real problem is you find other people buy and sell those stocks every day. Yeah, exactly. So, but so there, there are uncountable number of things like that. But if you're only looking for anomalies and you're not constrained by any overall thesis, you can find them in any situation. And, but let me just be honest about what this picture of reality actually is. This is the most diabolical plot in human history that entailed thousands of conspiracists and conspirators. And, and they, none of them have, have cracked. No one has, no one woke up feeling so guilty that they had to tell their story in just to 60 minutes. And yet this whole thing was designed to leave George Bush reading my pet goat at the moment. It all kicked off. Yeah, it's just not, it's like, it's the marriage of perfectly competent diabolical intelligence with the most inept. I mean, so so all these people conspired perfectly and yet the Iraq war was, was launched as ineptly as it could possibly have been. Why certainly don't believe that the United States was involved in conspiring? I think there's some question that maybe some people might have known about it. The real issue comes when you find out about actual real false flags. Actually, real false flag events that the United States is engineered that they pulled off that they haven't pulled off that they were planning that they didn't go through. The real problem is that that's a genuine ideology. That's a genuine thought process. The idea of what we have to make this happen. This is what we're going to do. We're going to blow up a ship. We're going to blow up a jet airliner and blame it on the Cubans and the operations northwoods. Right. Well, but that's so, so if you wanted to run a false flag operation and get us into a war with Iraq under false pretenses. So we've got a no fly zone over Iraq for years that we've been policing with our F-16s. You just shoot down one of our planes and then you tell the world that Iraq, though we told them they couldn't shoot at us, shot down one of our planes. This is an active war. We're going in. That would have been totally justifiable. What you don't do is send mostly Saudis to come kill 3000 of the most connected people. Yeah, we're in agreement and destroy our economy. We're in agreement. I don't think that the United States engineered it. I know. Not in any way. No, no, no, no, wait. But for some people, some people do. And it's a many many people do. But you know what? 46% of Americans think the earth is less than 10,000 years old. And the problem with those poles are those are 100% idiots that answer the polls. Who fucking answers polls? I don't answer a poll. Nobody. I know answers polls. People call you up randomly in the middle of the day and ask you to answer a poll, most likely you're busy, most likely you're going to hang up the amount of people that actually in answer polls. I don't think they represent the real, you know, the real population of the United States. So when you say it's 13%, they're saying to the people that you polled. Right. But there are ways of correcting for that. So for instance, you could just poll college students. You know, you could literally be in a poly sci class and ask people who got into college and are attending clay. I mean, that wouldn't be that would be an elite sample. But you get weird, sure. You get weird opinions even among elite samples. Well, that number, the 46% of Americans are the earth is less than 10,000 years old. That's a real one. That's a Gallup poll. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's that alone throws polls like, oh, 13% think the United States engineer 9-11. Okay. That's nothing compared to the idea that the earth is 10,000 years old. The amount of evidence that the earth is more than 10,000 years old is stagger. And yet away higher percentage believe in that. Well, believe in that. Because it's a religious doctrine. And that's been spiritual. Aren't they religious? Isn't it isn't it? Isn't it believed in the government engineered 9-11 or isn't it a million different conspiracies? Don't they have sort of a religious aspect to them? The the pure belief, the confirmation bias, the ignoring anything contradictory. People want to have an answer for sure. Definitely. Whether it's pro or con. There's that real thing that people want to wrap something up tight with a bow. Either the government is full of evil criminals that are trying to kill your baby. Or it's all just a part of life. And the real issue is there's boogeymen out there. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. I think there is it hijacks some of the same features of the human mind or of certain human minds. Because many people are very uncomfortable without cognitive closure. They're very not knowing why something happened is destabilizing to people to different degrees. And whereas one person can just feel no emotional cost to living with the mystery of why something happened or freely admitting whether they have no idea. Or merely having a you know, a hunch. Other people crave certainty. And and there are other features to it. So people have an intuition that something huge couldn't have been kicked off by something trivial. You know, so if something huge happened, if this thing is 3,000 people dead and the biggest buildings coming down and and the world and chaos, that couldn't have been just 19 guys with box cutters. That had to be the cause had to be bigger. And that that I think is an intuition that some people have more than others. And it's a it's a faulty intuition. But it's some people have a certain schemas that through which they view human events, which make conspiracy thinking very attractive, very plausible. And you see, you'll notice that and there's been actually research done on this that if you if you're someone who believes one conspiracy theory, you're very likely to be someone who believes all of them. You're someone who's who's read the JFK books and who's read the the the the Roswell incident. I mean, you're you're you're you're talking about extraterrestrials and and you know, CIA misadventures in many places. It means there's a whole esoteric literature out there that that I'm not so familiar with. But I know that people who go down one rabbit hole tend to go down many of the others. Sure. And it's kind of a personal it's a personality type that I think you can become you know, I tried to say actually is is interesting. You you mentioned what I you asked me what I thought about the NSA thing and and to some degree my my perception of this this news event has been polluted by my relationship with Glenn Greenwald who you don't like that. No, no, but I actually started the it was interesting as I started out liking him not liking him in that I aligned with with all of his views or even many of his views. But we had a a brief personal exchange by email where he actually did me a favor which was which was great and actually links up with this conspiracy thing. So I have someone in my life who's who's who's very close to me who is a 911 conspiracy very close to you. Yeah. Yeah. Remember my dad or something. Remember my family who who is a who is a and a very bright guy who is a 911 conspiracy guy. And so I thought with him about this for now for years. So like every six months just it blows up and we'll write the you know that we'll have the two hour email exchange. And I've tried to debunk this and and one idea I had about how to debunk it is as I I noticed that he had a few liberal writers who he really admired and Glenn Greenwald was was the top of the list. And I knew that Glenn Greenwald couldn't be a 911 conspiracy guy. So I reached out to Glenn I never met Glenn. And I said I said we do me a favor and just tell me in a short little essay why you don't believe any of this stuff. Why when why is it that you seem to align with a lot of these concerns the overreach of power and you know NSA wiretapping and and why is it why someone in your position not at all attracted by this 911 truth nonsense. And he wrote he wrote the perfect email and I told him why I needed this. I mean I was basically an intervention for for a family member. He wrote the perfect email which was just crazy enough to give him perfect credibility. I mean he's like you know he was like you know grateful for the 911 truth people and and he was it was it was perfect email. And I imagine that I was going to send this into my my relative spraying and it was going to he was going to have the epiphany that I was expecting which was here's someone he trusts as an authority on all of these points. And this is why this guy who's got much more time to look at this than then my relative does. This is why he won't touch it with the 10 foot pull and it had it did not have that effect at all all he wanted to do was to get in touch with Glenn Greenwald show him all of his head to educate him show him all his stuff that he hadn't seen right. So anyway but I started in this place with Glenn feeling very positive toward him and then he he just basically in a in a in a very unethical way. Miss represented my views in a series of articles and when I call them on a privately he just doubled down and basically just said fuck you this is what I even if you don't think this is what you were saying this is what I think you were saying. Oh wow. And what was his argument what was his point like what was he trying to paint? What was the toll is llama phobia business he basically branded me a racist who who hates Muslims and there's there's an animus against against people. I'm not talking about ideas on this is just by you asking him to write something. No no this is this was unrelated. This is why I this is why the NSA thing this is why the NSA thing was sort of hit me in the in in the wrong part of my brain because when when Glenn was the was the quarterback for the for the Snowden revelations. Basically I saw a guy who's just blogging in his underpants and Brazil with his 10 dogs and his boyfriend who was handed the story which is in fact true. I mean he's not this great investigative journalist who found this he was based on his ideological bias and his track record with someone who Snowden liked and thought would be you know a very sympathetic year for the story and he just handed him the story. I mean so tomorrow night someone could email you the next big decades shaking story based on your interests and how they align with his and you that wouldn't make you the greatest investigative journalist. So Greenwall was someone who really was not functioning like a journalist and he certainly does not have the principles of honesty and fact checking and admitting when he was wrong got something wrong that most journalists have drummed into them. So I find him a very unreliable witness. Have you spoken him in person? Why we have a long stream of it. But email just yeah I fucking hate email I mean I love it but I hate it for clarifying something as important as this. Yeah no it's true but a lot and this is another way technology is screwing us up because where we are able to things run off the rails when you're right in a way that they wouldn't face to face. Yeah like a blog about someone you could write some horrible things whereas if you were sitting in front of that person talking to them and you said that well I don't think that no you've misinterpreted my position I think this and I respect your opinion you could have a nice exchange and said someone just can just spew out their nonsense and a blog with no in checking them. It gets really squirrely when you're allowed to do that unchecked with no social cues. And that's what he did but he makes it he considers it a virtue. He said this in the New York Times when he was just becoming famous for the Snowden story they asked him about his approach to journalism and he said that he approaches it as a litigator. He assumes people are lying and then he goes and checks and tries to prove that they're lying. So I mean interpersonally this is a highly dysfunctional and obnoxious way to be and so when I'm representing my ideas he's assuming I'm lying and he goes to try to prove that I'm lying and then he quote minds or he gets readers to quote mine my work where he can pull sentences out of context which see out of context I can see how someone would see as inflammatory thing to say about Islam. I mean I have not been it's impossible to catch me saying something extreme about Islam that I didn't mean to say everything I've ever said about Islam is is incredibly well thought out I know exactly what I think and it has absolutely no logical relationship to racism because I because I'm incredibly well thought out. I know exactly what I think and it has absolutely no logical relationship to racism because everything I say applies every bit as much to John Walker Lind or Adam Gaddon or any white guy who woke up in Marin or Orange County and decided to join the jihad. In fact it applies even more to them because they weren't indoctrinated from birth by any kind of Middle Eastern cultural upbringing. So the view green-walled as just the the least scrupulous and among the most consequential people who have been just vlogging this is Lamaphobia thing and it's been very ugly and so insofar as the NSA story has been his story. I've had to do a lot of parsing of what is what's said because his intuition is about what is important and factual. I just fundamentally don't trust. Because of his philosophy on how he operates. But that's not to say that the Edward Snowman story isn't a huge story. It's absolutely huge. How do you, I think it is too. So for you it's just a very bittersweet thing because you don't like that guy personally. But also I'm uncertain about where the line is between facts we genuinely want to know and a public service rendered by journalists and whistleblowers who leak those facts and treason that is really consequential that we should have laws against and prosecute people for. And I don't know where Snowden falls on that I mean I'm just agnostic as to what I mean 10 years from now are we going to think he was a hero or someone who did our country more harm than anyone in the last 100 years. I don't know the answer that question. I really think he's the guy who got the ball rolling. I think that's what it is. I think he let people know what was going on behind the scenes for quite a long time and I think that's good. It's lying. It's what you were talking about in your book. It's lying. The government lies and we caught him on a lie. Now we know. It's not a lie. Well it's not a lie if the NSA is if the job of the NSA is to spy on people. But everybody. I don't know where so the government lies. There's no question of bomb a lie. There's this larger question. Yeah there's this larger question about what do you want the NSA to do? What do you want our intelligence or organizations to do? That is I don't feel like I'm given a menu of things to check off. You and I may check different boxes in what we want them to do. Frankly I don't know where I draw the line on some of these questions because I'm just a conversation away from someone who has more information than me about top secret information from being convinced that oh yeah we really do want that information. Yeah yeah I don't want my daughter to grow up in a world where nukes are going off in our cities so yeah if you're telling me that that tapping that phone or reading all email if only retrospectively is a way to stop that and here's why. Here's why you think that. I could be sold on all of these I mean so there's nothing about my email that I feel like needs to be private if you keep raising the stakes on the side of arguing why it shouldn't be private. But isn't the argument always that the United States has shown a long history of deception? I mean how do you like when you put this into your box? What do you put false flags? Where do you put those? Yeah well no I mean that's the the consequence of having a government that lies on issues like that over and over and over and over again since the beginning of time. It's the most toxic thing right and but you're giving them opportunity to know that this is not that power but this is but so I talk about this briefly in my book about espionage being something that if you grant that undercover operations are sometimes necessary then what you're saying is there is some space in which otherwise good and ethical are going to need to lie. Now the way I think about that is I think that is necessary. I think it is someone it is a life that I don't want. I couldn't be I couldn't work for the NSA but it's an unfortunate fact in the world yeah yeah I couldn't so I couldn't be the guy who comes home to his wife and lies about what he did all day because that's part of the career. I don't want to be that person I view it as a kind of moral self-immolation where you just you have to take a hit for the team in this spectacular way in order to function in that space and but I think it's probably necessary and so but within that frame it's not actually deceptive. If the NSA says listen we're going to suck up a ton of data and we're going to abide by laws. We're not going to we're not going to imprison you for growing pot based on having sucked this data up but we're looking for jihadists. That's something I can sign on to and we may want to read the fine print there but I was never under the illusion that the NSA was doing anything other than that so it's not that's not a surprise to me. I don't think it's a surprise to anyone and so and keeping you know lying and keeping secrets are different things. We need people to keep secrets and you can honestly keep the secret. The president could say I can't tell you that that's top secret. Our national security depends on mine not telling you that right. That's an honest statement. If you know if I ask you how much money you have in your bank account you know tell me tell our listeners now you can say I don't want to say that's that's an honest statement. When you talked earlier about your friend the story about the woman who lied in front of her friend and immediately damaged the relationship. Why would you ever knowing that the government has planned and possibly executed false flags? Why would you ever give them benefit of the doubt? Well again this comes to that's I mean the larger question of human nature so like what do you think is going on in the world? Do you think that there are that most people most of the time are psychopaths or ruthlessly mercenary and out to just screw everyone or do you think those are the anomalies? And what do you think of government? Do you think government is so corrupting of otherwise good people that they're just going to just just going to run riot with their power all the time and everywhere? Or do you think basically it's a lot of good people inefficiently trying to get stuff done that we need done? And if you're on the I think the more realistic side of that of those questions I think I think you have to admit that it's for the most part they're people just like us in a vast bureaucracy trying to get stuff done and they're influenced I mean there's so many competing interests that the bad people don't have as much power as you fear they have and the good people don't have as much power as you want them to have and so so to conspire to just grab all the strings of the military and wage a war on false pretenses or you know convert our fighter jets so that this hijack plane can fly into the world trade center how many people in the air force had to conspire to decide to run war games elsewhere so that we wouldn't be able to respond I mean you're then you're what you're attributing to people are conscious motives to kill massive numbers of innocent people that I just I think just could not form in the minds of of most people most of the time well if that's the case then how did false flags ever get planned out how was the northwoods document ever signed by the joint chief's staff and vetoed by Kennedy when they were planning on arming Cuban friendlies and bombing Guantanamo bet where they were going to have a drone jetliner they're going to have a jet and blow it up and they were going to blame it on the Cubans they were going to kill Americans they were going to kill Americans in Guantanamo Bay how could that possibly fall into what you're saying well no that there are I mean so so we but we do this all that we kill Americans all the time right but like that well no like us pull the trigger in order to how could you possibly justify that is that's the only way to do it the only way to do it is to have a false flag event where we kill Americans and lie and blame it under the people I mean that goes against the very doctrine of the lying book that goes against the very idea that human interaction should be at all times honest especially the highest levels of government it should in fact be even more important no I'm not saying it's a good thing and I'm saying the consequence of finding out that one such event has occurred not just one there's been many no but the consequence of even one is this very conversation right that these very doubts in the minds of millions of people but when you assume when there's been several that it's probably a method of operating that that's how they do it if you find out about the Gulf of Tonkin you find out what Bush and Cheney were planning on Iran before they left office when you found or allegedly what do I know you know when you when you find out of the northwards document what do you mean where do you put all that that's that's clear that's people that are on our side killing our people in order to get us into a war where we kill other people and profit like crazy it seems pretty cut and dry and I think there might be I mean looking at the way you're looking at it I see what you're saying but not with all the evidence not with all the evidence that it's actually happened I see what you're saying if there wasn't any evidence if it was just 9-11 and everybody was using that as an example I agree with you I think it's probably most likely a series of coincidences and most likely we just had lack security and most likely 19 people plan this out and pulled it off however when you look at the Gulf of Tonkin when you look at the northwards incident when you look at you look at all these different things that we have planned it's not one it's several and it's several over the course of several different administrations the Bush administration I mean the the the Kennedy administration I mean during Kennedy's day they were doing this well what I would say is that in the case of 9-11 you have on the other side a a very obvious conspiracy that's taking credit for it that has taken credit for it you have this this phenomenon of al-Qaeda and global jihad which much of which is there is much of this violence is directed at the rest of the Muslim world and it's not just us but you have we have a clear enemy that thinks it's our enemy that is taking credit for these goals that I mean to call them an own goal when you have someone who's who's seemed to be the kicker and who's taking credit for being the kicker and it just seems like a it's a misapplication of the principle even if we were going to agree that that that we you know every few years draw our own blood for some perverse reason of trying to to to motivate ourselves to do something we wouldn't otherwise want to do well I would assume that if there's a series of events that have taken place that have absolutely either been planned or absolute I mean the northwards document is pretty straightforward it's there's really no denying it Gulf of Tonkin it basically reported in history classes today that that was a false flag event right so those are those are real forget about 9-11 let's throw that in yeah I mentioned Gulf of Tonkin yeah in the book and and and there are you know many other more easily understood big lies that should worry so for instance I mentioned pharmaceutical companies I mean pharmaceutical companies seem to clearly rig their data and this puts people in state of chronic doubt about whether you can trust anyone in a position of authority you know when you have people there's no one who knows more about whether drugs or efficacious than the people who are designing drugs right but that's not kind of disingenuous you dealing with an entirely different group of people that you're saying are also evil there's nothing to do with the government no I'm not saying it's evil I'm saying I'm saying that the principle that is well one is two principles one is just a willingness to lie that's right that is the thing that enables all of this but there's also just and I think this is this is the most the most important change we could make in our society is to notice the ways in which systems of incentives cause otherwise good people to behave like bad people and their endless numbers of examples of this but you don't have to be a bad person to behave in evil ways if you're part of a system you know the the the the entire tendency of which is to incline toward evil so if you are and if you just follow the incentives and so they're very simple kind of you know petri dish examples of this and then one example I use is to talk about what it's like to be thrown into a maximum security prison I mean imagine you get sent to you know false in prison and you're an innocent person you're not you're not a violent person you want and you're you have this this nightmare experience of now you're thrown in prison for a crime you didn't commit and all you want to do is get through that this experience you know you're 10 years say all you want to do is do your decade of of time in peace unmolested by all these other other people and you're terrified that you're going to be victimized by people the reality is that you are you're coming into a situation where the incentives are so perversely misaligned that even a good person like you who just wants to be a nice guy is going to have to align himself with psychery and a racist psychopaths in order to not be screwed over by everyone I mean so for instance you'd have to so so in most maximum security prisons they exist in a perpetual state of race war so it's you know the whites against the blacks against the Mexicans and certain Mexicans against other Mexicans but it's just like you have it's shattered into racial gangs and a white guy like you would have to join a white supremacist gang now you might not have a racist you might not have a racist bone in your body but the only way for you not to be fucked over by everyone is to align yourself with a gang but isn't what you're saying another reason not trust the government you're saying that the government's evil you're saying that good people do evil things because they get involved with evil psychopaths meaning the government no no no no no I'm saying false flags occur no I'm saying that we need to be aware of the way incentives can be perverse where where you your natural selfishness and your natural fear and your natural desire just to just to survive can be channeled in ways that make you as an otherwise good person collaborate to to to do terrible things and there's there there are many ways in which I mean it's a conflicts of interest or the classic examples you have you have CEOs who can run the global economy off a cliff because their incentives are totally perverse they have no they have there's no economic for them not to just leverage their company out of existence if they've you know if they can benefit from this this windfall you know pop of the stock and they have a golden parachute I mean this so there's the problem of moral hazard where it's like there's no if there's no consequence to being rapacious selfish you're going to get people being rapacious selfish to the detriment of everyone and so and so the point of making is that sort of two levels at which you can you can try to improve human life you can you can argue that each person needs to have a more more refined ethical code you know you have you have to be more honest I have to be more honest or you can have sit or in addition you can have systems where interests are aligned so that so that we match so that the the penalties for the the the the rewards for honesty are more obvious and and and I mean you have a system where where people I mean another classic example is like the job market where people everyone's padding their resumes because they know everyone else has their resumes so you're trying to get a job your desperate to get a job your family won't eat unless you get a job and you know that everyone else applying for this job has padded his resume has lied about his background so everyone else does false flag so Obama gets an office and does exactly the same thing no no I'm saying that that we need there's two levels at which we address these problems and one problem you're pointing to is is system level in this case government level misaligned misaligned incentives that have great consequence which which don't require evil people all the time to pull the strings you don't think they require evil people to do a false no no but in a false if you're saying we're gonna blow up a jet and fake and pretend that another country did it yeah that would require evil people to to hatch the idea and say do it and all fairness I think there was an empty jet I think they're okay no no I'm so there's a think of a prototypical situation where it it seems as bad as possible yes that would require I mean the reason why I don't believe the September 11th conspiracy theory is that would it would require too many evil people it just makes no sense I still don't understand how you rectify the idea of false flags like where do you put that well I so I mean there are many fall I don't know which which are true I mean I believe the Gulf of Tonkin Tonkin was a false flag and what about northwoods I don't know enough about it okay I would about the the juke paying attention to the the plan allegedly the Bush and Cheney were concocting to get us into Iran before he left office I don't know if that's true at all no no but so for instance a new book about the Kennedy assassination which which brings and I don't know if I don't think the guy is a conspiracy theorist at all here but I think he thinks Oswald did it but there's a new book which shows I don't know I mean I think it's I think it's very likely that the I mean the Warren Commission seemed I haven't read this book but from what I know the Warren Commission seems to have been a ridiculously inept effort to get to the truth and with many perverse obstacles to getting to the truth one being that that Warren didn't want to inconvenience Jacqueline Kennedadol so I mean she's she's grieving he didn't want to interview her he wouldn't let her be interviewed on the you know on the record he interviewed her himself I think and and just sort of summarized what she said so there's just kind of weird ways in which this thing was never about really getting to the bottom of what happened but the the point is that when you look at all the way so but like that is a that's a that's an all-to human made that you you can you can look at it some nefarious interpretation of that like you know he knew that this was a mob hit that was enabled by the CIA or whatever the story is and you know this is his way of of you know hiding the truth or he's just a guy who's embarrassed to ask this the grieving widow who was who is a friend of his about what it was like to see her husband's face get blown off you know so it's like there there there are there are alternate explanations for these things and yet the conspiracy side is always the nefarious mustache twirling perfect genius of evil interpretation and I think that it rarely is true certainly in a society where political power is not is concentrated as it is and you know in the under the third right I think there's probably a little bit of both in there I think there's definitely some inept qualities of the Warren Commission but there's also this search for a predetermined outcome that's why the the the whole reason why the magic bullet there was invented was because there was a bullet that hit a curb stone underneath the overpass they had a count for that that's why they accounted for one bullet doing all this damage to different people instead of you know making a more obvious conclusion there was more than one more than one shooter I mean that seems much more likely I mean if one person was shooting why would you just assume that Lee Harvey Oswald didn't have a cohort why would you just assume that I mean they wanted to wrap it up nice and tidy the same reason why Jack Ruby got to Lee Harvey Oswald in front of all those cops no security shoot some puts it to end you know he had all these obvious mob ties I mean it's so obvious it's so silly in fact to think that there wasn't something going on I think the truth like many things lie somewhere in the middle it's not an either or situation but I don't think Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone he might have been a part of it it's very possible he was a part of it but I don't think he acted alone but usually what's going on again I'm not discounting the fact that there there are situations in which evil people brilliantly bring off their evil or evil conspirators conspire but most of the time it's people rather like us afraid for their jobs covering their asses afraid of getting sued doing things which when incentives are aligned in such a way as to make it effortless for them to do them create a huge mess for everybody else and so you I mean when you look at what people do because they're kind of they're afraid to get sued you know just look at the just look at all of the stupid decisions people make in our society because they just want to they want to hide the problem inside there's a there's a book on them on what it's like to become a neurosurgeon called when the air hits your brain and it's a it's a pretty entertaining and somewhat harrowing look at just the training of a neurosurgeon and there was so he talks about what it was like to be a resident neurosurgeon and at one point there's a scene where a resident is a is performing his first prepping his first surgery which entails drilling into a person's skull and cutting them you know a large hole and prepping the the person's head for the the chief neurosurgeon to come in and perform surgery and what he did is he drove the drill in way too deep like you know it's just supposed to go it's just supposed to do skull but he just went into you know pure pink oatmeal of the person's brain and his only concern at that moment was not how the patient was doing it was to hide the evidence that he had screwed up now that isn't all too human and in the aggregate completely evil outcome and yet he he doesn't have to be a psychopath to be worried about covering his ass and that's our connection to natural human instance and that's if if you had a system in which he would be massively rewarded in some way for showing exposing that problem it's hard to see how you would design that but that would be a much better system you know if the incentives were aligned in a way that that that his guilty conscience would would win as opposed to his you know his effort to preserve his career so he could stay free so he wouldn't so he could stay free so you wouldn't get jailed or to yeah or just just no no longer have a career in medicine you know and that's but there are uncountable numbers of situations like that where massive suffering a cruise and it's not because it was an evil person intent upon causing that suffering I agree 100 percent I think there's an either or I think you got to be able to look at both sides there's an either or but there's a lot of evil fuckers out there doing some creepy shit no doubt at least one at least one percent of us are our psychopaths so three hours just flew by wow that was three hours that is that's a faster hours yeah I was really enjoyable so your book is lying you could get it at Sam Harris org is an on Amazon and just hitting bookstores you have a story book yeah audible yeah oh beautiful audible's one response is so perfect go to audible.com forward slash Joe and get it for free did they pay still the book gets it they must yeah yeah even if it's for free it's not for free to you I think it's free if you join audible yes okay beautiful thanks man appreciate it Sam Harris org on Twitter follow him and read some books and thank you very much for enjoying thank you always a pleasure all right thanks everybody for tuning into the podcast thanks to legal zoom dot com use the enter the code Rogan in the referral box and save yourself some money thanks also to Hulu plus go to Hulu plus forward slash Rogan and get a special offer we can try Hulu plus free for two weeks check it out and thanks also to on it.com o n n i t use a code name Rogan and save 10% off any and all supplements we will be back next week we got a lot of podcasts coming up ladies and gentlemen we got uh next week who do we got here we got Dave Asprey we got Maynard from tool we got Dan Carlin on Friday we got a lot of things happening folks a lot of good Sam Harris thank you brother appreciate it very much