Kim dot com. Thank you very much. Thank you very much for doing this. Um, how much privacy do we have as citizens of New Zealand or the United States? No much because the government is surveilling everybody. Yeah. How are they doing that? Um, they have messes of eight and stroke them that are designed to catch every phone call, video call, everything you do. What is the purpose of that? Why are they surveilling their own populations? Um, because they can create a profile of their citizens and then use a data to basically put the people in categories and influence them as rare. So it's not just surveillance, it's also a mind-eye thing in terms of elections or something. No. Okay. So you believe the government is tailoring its propaganda to the population based on profiles that they've assembled like Facebook does for advertising. Yeah. So if you want for example support for war, they can use this system to convince people. No. Interesting. How do you, how do you get out of it? How do you find privacy in a panopticon like this? Don't be connected to the internet. It's only Bay. Yeah. Don't be, but if you're not connected to the internet, then you can't communicate with people except in your living room. It's true, but it's a high price to pay if you're on dime. You have to know that everything you do is being watched and listened to. Why is there no way out? Why is there no phone or laptop or tablet that allows me to communicate with you without being spied on? Because the US government has a lot of fingers in technology. So every website that you visit, every tool that you use, every hardware that you use is controlled by the US government bots. Yeah. So this is not a new phenomenon. You were indicted, I think, in 2011, 2012, a long time ago. Is that what year was it? In 2012. So 14 years ago, what you were doing, you're basically allowing people to upload large files privately on the internet. I think that's what you were doing. And that was so threatening that the US government tried to put you in prison. The world was really threatening. I gave money to the colleagues and students. So the US government saw me as a person of interest because of that. And everything that followed is because of my support for the truth. For Julian Assange. And what Julian came out with a video, Collette really murdered. Maybe you remember that. I was touched by it and gave a lot of money to weekly. And then what happened after you did that? I was such a copy of an infringement. So what my users uploaded to my website, they said I'm responsible for that. But wouldn't Facebook be responsible for every criminal who uses a meta product? Wouldn't Google be responsible for any criminal uses their search engine? Why? I mean, this is a new, I've never heard of this principle before. Yeah. The big differences, they did not give money to read the books. So what did they charge you with and what was the penalty? They touched me with a re-co-ex. So they not only say I'm a criminal because I allowed people to use my websites for infringement. They said I planted. But other people stupid. And what were the penalties for this? Or they want to put me in jail for 100, 86 years. I'm sorry to laugh. 186 years for copyright infringement. Oh, that's true. I think that if you support to a lot of sounds. Well, I do support you, latest on. So I hope that's not coming for me. So whatever happened to the charges, all they want to extradite me from New Zealand to the United States. Are they still trying to do that? Yeah. Even after my stroke, they're still trying to do that. Are you worried that they'll be able to? Oh, they would want to. I'm, I've no doubt. But I don't know if they can. Because I'm not the same person anymore after my stroke. So if they really want to go ahead, they are for a big challenge. What would happen if you were to use your money to build a phone that was truly private, that the US government could not listen to? I did something like that when I was still the creator of Jamaica. So I had an encrypted communication tool with it. But now for surrounding makeup, it's an all along, uh, trust mercy. But why hasn't anyone done that? I mean, it seems like the one thing we could use to regain our freedom is a communications, a simple communications device that's actually private. And the gas to count. So if you put out an encrypted device, then the government with just central letter saying you have to give us a big door or go to jail. You know, this is a little impossible in the US. The government funds just central letter to say, give me a big door. And what if you say no? They put you in jail. So it is illegal in the United States to communicate privately. As a leader, yeah, you know, they say you have freedom of speech, but you don't. And you know, it's a joke. Does any country have freedom of speech? You have a certain degrees of freedom of speech, but it's not like it used to be. You know, where your privacy is protected under the UN charter, we are all protected. You know, the US just doesn't care. And because the US, we know this from efforts, Snowden, it's fine on everybody. Everyone has this, you know, we're often assured that Christians are safe in the Holy Land. Is that true? Well, the descendants of the very first Christians, these are families who have worshipped in the land of Jesus for centuries from millennia are now facing enormous pressure to flee their own homes. War and anti-Christian terrorism are driving them out and untold numbers of innocent people are left feeling lost and without hope. This is why we are truly genuinely proud to support the vulnerable people project. VPP is one of the very few organizations in the world consistently helping vulnerable Christians throughout the Holy Land, not hurting them, not lying to them, not trying to ethnically cleanse them, but helping them for real. Because of the generosity of our audience, VPP raised enough support to host a Bible summer camp for the children of Tabe. We saw pictures from that camp. It's an amazing site and we're really proud to be part of it. This work makes a real difference in the lives of good people, but it's not possible to have support from people like you. A gift of just $33 provides a day of protection and support for vulnerable Christians in the West Bank. A monthly gift of $83 helps sustain that protection all month long. We hope you will visit SaveWestBankChristians.com and stand with Christians in the Holy Land, the place where Christianity began, the land that Jesus walked, that's SaveWestBankChristians.com. Thanks. I'm not sure most Americans understand any of this are any communications apps, signal, WhatsApp, I message, or any of them actually secure. Not even signal. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. Singing listen to us. How is signal the worst? Because everyone is using it and the US government is laughing because they have a big door. People with, I happen to know, with real secrets, you signal and there are convents that no one can hear or read them on signal, but they're wrong. You're sure of that. The source signal is not secure. There's nothing I would recommend say other than not using any communication tools. Really? So if you wanted to, I don't know, organize resistance to tyranny, you couldn't. No, you can't. Have you given up? No, it's true. You can't because all the tools are being watched. How will AI change this picture? AI is a very dangerous because it's very good access to the US database for this kind of data mining. So the AI will know everything about everybody. Huh, and there's no way to stop that? Don't have a, you don't have internet. It's the only way. Why is the US planning on building so many data centers? It's already building a huge data centers because it takes a collect about 10 petabyte of data ID. So it's a lot. Yeah, all communications everything. So that why is the United States building so many more data centers than China is, do you know? You can't say that because you're being told that, you know, it's kind of not far behind the US when it comes to AI. You're only being told that it's propaganda. You know, Obama made it to pro-Bagan guys US citizens. So you can't believe anything they say. Are American media outlets part of that effort to propaganda is the public? Yeah, of course. You know, whoever controls them, controls the public. So any access to the media today is controlled. So in the US, there's been a rise of independent media. Some of them have big platforms reach a lot of people and they're well having conversations like this. They're against the program. How long can that last do you think? And so it's okay that there's independent media and talk that you are one or two. So it's very good to have you or you know, but there will be a crackdown sooner or later on everybody that is they're not controlled. Yeah. And what can people do to fight back against that crackdown? No, much. You see the power of the government is very strong. So there's not much you can do about this. You don't seem very hopeful. Are you? Is there a reality? What's going to do? Is there that rules? Are there any free countries or what is the freeest country do you think right now where people can say what they think with the most latitude? I think it's very good. Yeah, it's a land because that they have direct democracy, not a representative democracy. So the people decide is people power. I bring that in to a new Zealand. This election. So with freedom party, we will have a direct democracy very little here. Do you think that direct democracy will spread to other countries? I think it's only way because politicians are not on its people. They only look for how to make a lot of money here. You know, so it that democracy is the answer. Do you think that the war in Iran will change America's place in the world? What does the world look like in 10 years? So the US is the struggling who remain number one. You know, the uni polar system that the US had for many decades. They are fighting for it. But they do ask so much that they'll go down. There's nothing that can prevent that. So I think in the next few years, we will see a lot of negative things in the world. It's a bit constant for that. What kind of negative things? So the rest is highly dependent on the US not going under. You know, the war in Ukraine will be lost. The war in Iran will be lost. USA will go into a big depression because of the debt. I think financially the world is heading into turmoil. Yeah. How is the war in Ukraine resolved? What does that look like? On it looks like now on the better field, you know, so Russia will bring against Ukraine. And I don't think that would be its sentiment. Do you believe that NATO will continue to attack Russia? I think that attacks on Russia will continue for many years. I don't see the US and the Europe giving up. So I think what Russia is still prepared for is a big war. A bigger war with the directly within the United States and Europe. It was human beyond. Eating right is pretty important, but it's hard if you live here about half of the American diet is ultra processed foods and that hurts you. Fake food harms your body, your mind, and especially your liver. So people think that feeling sluggish and foggy and bloated is just what it is to be older. But that's not true. Eating crap makes you feel that way. While our friends at dose have a solution, it's called dose for your liver. This doctor approved plant-based liver supplement is clinically proven to promote liver function and lower liver enzyme levels. That means you're less bloated, less tired. You feel more like yourself. All you need to do is take a daily two-ounce shot, taste like orange juice, an easy shot of liquid. It's not the vax. People we know use dose for your liver and they have seen rapid results in their blood work and they feel much, much better. The difference is very obvious. Lots of brands claim to support liver health, but do so before their products have gone through testing. This has been tested. Everything checks all the boxes. Visit dosedaily.co slash tucker. Use the code tucker for 35% off. That's dose daily.co slash tucker code tucker 35% off. You're going to love it. Ever get the feeling that your phone is listening to you? You mentioned something in a conversation and a few hours later you get an ad for that very thing. Most people assume their phone is spying on their conversations and it may be, but most of the time the truth is even worse than that. All of the apparently free services you've enjoyed, you've actually paid for it, but not with money. You've paid for these. It's your privacy. Five billion consumers are in our identity graph. Five billion. How many people are in our seven billion? Two billion ago. Every search, every message, every purchase, every location becomes part of a digital dossier that is bought and sold and analyzed by companies you have never heard of. You know nothing about them. They know everything about you and we can prove that. By the end of this series, you will be upset because you will understand how the surveillance economy works and what you can do to protect your privacy. The world is watching you exclusively on Tucker Carlson.com. You think that this will evolve or devolve into a direct conflict between NATO and Russia where Russia is hitting Europe, you're a preceding Russia. Yeah. I think so. And who wins? Russia, of course. Because Europe has no armies. You know, NATO has told us less tiger. Why would the Western powers? Why would NATO want a war with Russia? I've never understood that. The alternative is that the US loses and the US loses, it will go down. You know, the US has invested a lot in the US. So all the debt is owned by debtors. Europe is a big debtor to the United States. So if the US stock market, so example, go down, all the European companies that are listed in the US are also going down. So we are talking about a loss of maybe trillion. So you know, it's not something that the best can do. They want to prevent the US from going under. I think I understand that and I'd like to see the US not go under also, but I think they're accelerating the destruction of the United States. This is having the opposite effect. If you wanted to wreck the US and bring the empire to its knees in the most humiliating, painful, expensive way, this is what you would do. Yeah, but the debt has no risk levels that are unsustainable. So it's just a matter of time. You know, to run the US government cost 20 billion a day. It's impossible. It's impossible. That's right. What is the end of the Iran war? What does that look like? Iran will win because the US has no weapons and no army to invade. You know, you wonder well, all the military money wins because the US has the biggest budget for the military, yet they can't invade. So I think Iran will win. And then what happens to the United States? Does the US get out of the Middle East? Yeah. Yeah. What happens to American politics? Like what direction does it go? Do you think from your perspective? I think the only way to save the America is for the people to work directly, they're not as true politicians. The only way I think to save America is a direct democracy. Do you think electronic voting machines are honest and reflect the will of the people, the votes that I don't trust them. I don't trust them because they are able to be maintained and manipulated. Yeah. You say that as fact. Do you know for certain that electronic voting machines can be manipulated? Yeah, they can. So why does the US still have them? Mm. Making for the right time to use them. I think. Yeah. So that's kind of grim. Do you see a risk of a nuclear exchange in Ukraine? That is because if they who as or star when you know what is left, it is 39 trillion of debt can never be paid back. So it may take the rest of the word down with it. And so how do you get to nuclear weapons from there? Who uses nuclear weapons? Do you think? I think the US. First against Iran and then against the word. Yeah. Primarily Russia and China, but you know, I saw this coming. This is the reason why I am in New Zealand because it's in the middle of nowhere. It is the middle of nowhere. When did you see this coming? I don't know. I don't know. Could be many years a cookie tomorrow. I don't know. But you saw this years ago. You believe this was going to happen? Yeah. Yeah. I did. I broke my family to safety. But ever I safe. Are you safe? I don't know. Maybe if I'm an ex-regretive to the US, I will die in the nuclear holocaust. I think. Oh, so you're certain that's coming. Yeah. Do you think it's likely that Israel uses nuclear weapons? Possibly. Why does Israel have nuclear weapons in the first place? Because they spy on the US for the technology and then they started their own nuclear program. Everybody in the world knows that they have nuclear weapons. Yet they go to all against you. Rock, against you. Rock, trying to prevent them from having nuclear weapons. You know, the first country that should give up nuclear weapons is Israel. I don't think they're going to. No. Of course not. Can you explain? You said at the outset that you were indicted and now they're trying to extricate you because you supported Julian Assange. Yeah. Julian Assange famously printed American secret documents and videos on WikiLeaks on the internet. But the US government seemed very focused on killing him. Why was he such a threat? Because was selling the truth and got in the way of the plans of the US deep state, you know, so anything that he has in terms of support was his intent. Yeah. Why do you think Donald Trump after spending 10 years saying he wouldn't start a regime change war with Iran did in February start a regime change war with Iran? Donald Trump is a big liar. So anything he says he's asked to become less than I wouldn't believe ever he says he's the biggest liar in the world. What do you think his goal is? What's his agenda? Why is he doing this? Oh, I think he wants to be. But what do you think his goal is? What's his agenda? Why is he doing this? Oh, I think he wants to become more than the president of the United States. He wants to make be kissively. You know, I think a nuclear war with him is very likely because of his narcissism and his electric death laws. But starting a nuclear war would eliminate everybody. I mean, there would be no history after that. But he is eight years old. So he is looking for the exit. And you think nuclear war is the exit? Yeah. Is there anything that can be done to stop that? Not much. If you vote, it may be a revolution into the United States. You know, not if who will like Trump be president. Do you think the deep state agrees with Trump on the question of using nuclear weapons? So you need to understand one thing. The deep state has the big budget for keeping Russia and China is surveyed. So if they have no longer the enemy of Russia and China, the U.S. deep state loses 40% of the budget. So they need to keep Russia and China the eternal enemy to make money. Yes. So really a nuclear war is not in anybody's interest. No, of course. No, of course. Do you think that Europe or you're from? You're obviously German. Does Europe have a future as European? If they make peace with Russia, yes. If they cut a ties with the U.S., if the U.S. keeps them as a vested state, they have no chance to survive. Yeah. Do you believe Putin is secure in his job? And Putin has over 80% of the pro-relating in Russia. So I think he's pretty safe. Yeah, he's pretty safe. And last question. How have you been able to keep from being extradited when New Zealand is a small country without a meaningful military? The United States wants to extradite you. How have you been able to convince the authorities in Auckland not to send you to the United States? Not convinced the authorities is this process. You know, I'm fighting a suggestion wherever I can. So my lawyers are fighting it and using the process to fight it, but God, that's all I can do. Yeah. Well, rooting for you. And for the world, Kim dot com. Thank you. I know you don't do a lot of interviews and so I'm grateful you did this one. And thanks. No problem. Take care. Great to see you. Thank you.