Right. Round two, you dirty freaks, you stream.tv. Four slash jowl. All right, we're back. So Crash, you've been doing this. You've been in this tank business longer than, did that fuck that up? No, I didn't. You've been in this tank business longer than I've known you. You, when did you get started making these fucking things? It's about 15 years at 99. And what brought you in to that? Well, yeah, I think it was with me. I used to have a, I used to have nightclubs and I was in the music industry and I, you know, narcotics. I was in a drug and stuff. I'd like to do that for, you know, but the time was in the 80s and stuff and there's a music industry. We just have nightclubs. They said to manage men and then I wanted to do an audio later on back in the 70s where Stevie Ray Vaughan stuff like that, blues clubs in the DC. And then we went on like in the 80s and had like, you know, culture club, the rhythmics and I work with Count Base. And then later on I went into audio. It's Caesars and I worked in the showroom in there and I went to the Liberace and it was on and on. It's in a different design or whatever, you know, shows from, so then I, we used to tour in a little bit and then these gigs and then I got a band going there and we used to open up for one of the bands I was touring with and then we said, right. So I got interested in like, oh, now we're to make some, be in this, make it do in music. And I got these studios and had 60 of those and Hollywood and then finally I was done. You know, I had enough of these people. I was struggling out on heroin and you know, I used to think, right. So I've had an, I'm not a functional though. I'm not a stealer. I don't steal. I'm a functioning guy back then and I don't steal and I work and I do jobs but I used to get, I used to like to really get high. You know, as I was part of what we did. Right. So I was finally done with that. And I kicked the dope and whatever. And went on out there to Vegas from Hollywood. Left my buildings and I built a recording, I got a ranch out there. 10 mile south of town, build a studio in there. I was like, guys, come out. We're gonna do some recording out there. This ranch I got there. And I'm in the back there. I just built it. I had my head now. There was like an old water thing from what the horses were getting water from or whatever it was. I had my head in there and I was working on my voice and when I pulled my head out, all of a sudden I know I'm supposed to build these deprivation chambers. I don't even know what is a deprivation chamber. So you had, you had like this idea. James, can you take this down off to just go with the screen so we could just see those photos around before. I get distracted sometimes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So you just out of nowhere had this idea to. It wasn't even an idea. It wasn't an idea because I didn't even know what it was. So just hit you. And it wasn't like a voice, a light or nothing. It was just all of a sudden, I had my head in that thing and I was like, and when I pulled my head out, I knew I'm supposed to build deprivation chambers and get ever people to do it. I don't know what is a deprivation chamber or nothing. I just build a recording studio. I got no interest. I'm already doing what I want to do. I don't need to change a life or I've quit doing what it was that was holding me up. So I was on my path already, but it hit me so hard. And at that moment, I was relieved of all my previous, you know, like I had a, you know, you think back, it's like, oh, I used to have this. I used to have that. I had built empires and then collapse them over the years. You know, I worked, worked, worked really hard. And then because of too much fun, wrecked it every time. So I had been through, and at that point in my life, I was thinking, shh, bummer, you know, I kept thinking about now I'm starting over again and whatever. And at the moment when I pulled my head out of there, there's no longer affected me at all. None of my past was no one. So you leaned into this thing that they used to hold water, hold water for animals, horses probably. And you look in there and you pull your head out and all of a sudden you have this mandate. You have to build sensory deprivation tanks. So you essentially got a message from God. I don't believe in God. Listen, pal, he was talking to you. I thought he'd leave him. If it wasn't God, who was it? Was it all? I don't believe in anything. I don't know what it was. I'm confused. It does indicate though some sort of superior, what think about the change of events that happen now? You create that thing. You know, you improve upon the existing dynamic, the existing design rather in a substantial way. You become obsessed with it. You and I get hooked up when make videos about it. We start putting it out. You're doing a podcast now. More people are finding out about it. More people are opening these. I get every time I go to the town. Like it seems, if it's town that has a sensory deprivation tank, I get these offers to come stop by and check them out and people say, hey, we started doing it because we heard about it on the podcast. It's a great way to make a living. We love floating. We love the benefits of it. We just want to thank you so much. That happens all the time. You're in the movie, man. You're in the movie. It's because what happened happened. And what's going to happen is yet to be. Because what's coming up still is much larger than what's happened so far with tanks, with these chambers. Right. You think they're going to be everywhere? I don't think so. I'm pretty well sure of it at this point. Because I have a realistic vision of the situation. And I'm convinced at this point that indeed it is going to work. And I don't know how it all is going to turn out, of course. But I think that we're having a chance now. And that's why this situation is so important to me. This disinfection and this electrical and all these features that have to do with health and safety. And this can become a safe, healthy, and just like restaurants, just like anything else that involves cleanliness. This is very important. It's a public service. And then for you, what's important is that it protects the benefits of this service where all of the negative aspects of it are eliminated with foresight. Correct. You're thinking about it in advance. And I think that's super important. And I really commend you on that. And you also have these really fascinating ideas about how to go about that. I mean, your systems of cleanliness and all the ozone, the filters and the sensitivity of the filters, it's all incredible stuff, incredibly detailed stuff. Yeah, we've spent a lot of time keeping getting better. But just now finishing up with a whole and other bunch of stuff too, that it's one thing after the next thing, see when I first started this, I was using a part from this or that or whatever, there was no parts for anything that you were trying to make. And I really try to figure out how to improvise. Whereas now, though, all of every single component that we use is made for us. We have very specific providers of all of this stuff that we've refined over the years. These containers, everything. It's all very specific because there's an unbelievable amount of problem. What's that term, bespoke? The custom made, is that what bespoke is? I believe that is. We've learned placate in the last one. No, no, I won't learn a bespoke in the last one. Yeah, I'm pretty sport, that's what it means. Made to order. Made to order. So essentially, these parts and components did not exist until you came along with design these new devices for chambers. And then figured out how to get them all to work together. Yeah. It's been, you know, to get us to go on, to get it off, all the electrical. I mean, it's been fun, you know? I mean, it's getting like to the point now to work. We're glad that we finally are on the other side of all this stuff. And that it's a valid system, that the system now demands acknowledgement. We put it in there and they can't say, hey, you can't do this here. That's not true. We could put one of our devices anywhere. And the authorities will allow it because it's done to code. That's why when these places, they're trying to get through these trouble, they're looking for an exemption or a, was there the word they got? Variants. These different things they try to get. Also, it's not a swimming pool. So you don't have to have any code or whatever. These things aren't cool. Right. Things wouldn't have code. Right. Yeah. And because this isn't a pool, doesn't mean it shouldn't have code. That just means it should have a set of codes that are specifically designed for this environment, which is what this stuff is here. This CCS standard here that we have. You see, it's all that stuff there. And you read through this. And this is the reality of the direction that the industry is going in. The authorities are aware. And then they're not stupid. They understand what liability is. They can't say, hey, go ahead. It's OK. We don't care. They can't turn a blind eye on this anymore, because it's been brought to their attention now. Well, it's also been brought to their attention that there's a lot going on right now where people are being investigated for things like the doctor-aw stuff. We've got all this weight loss shit that's out there. And all this self-help industry, like things along the lines of isolation tanks, it could be incredibly damaging if these things become as popular as you and I think they will be. And the filtration systems aren't good. And people have nightmare stories. Exactly. It's getting five. It won't survive. That's what happens when they get out by it. The aids came out. These things were not capable of dealing with an aids. Even these parasites, like the cryptospiridium, that will take 10 days in chlorine to deactivate. Jardia. That's a day in chlorine. And then bromine and these are not effective methods to deal with this. Well, that's something that people had considered for these tanks, chlorine. And it's actually bad for your skin to sit in it like that. It's not healthy for you. Like the skin, like when you go into a chlorinated pool and you go into like a public pool, especially that's heavily chlorinated, it hurts your eyes. You're breathing at the system. It is you're breathing it. And when it's breaking down in an action with these other materials, these methanes, and like I say, it's creating a polytheroid of toxic byproducts that need to be eradicated. You can't just keep, that's where you go to these places. They say, hey, how can you switch in that water out of there? And they go, oh, this guy on that thing with Hamilton's like, oh, every four months. And you're going, so today, you're going to take, he says it's expensive. Don't want to do it expensive. Today, it's going to take $800 of your money and throw it down a drain. But yesterday, it was just fine to charge somebody, come in here and stew around and that stuff. And I mean, it isn't right. I mean, there should be a regulatory agency that demands certain level of cleanliness. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, I mean, it's important. Well, it's important too that there's ways that people can avoid the negative aspects entirely. Figure that out, do it, and don't have fast that. Don't put people at risk. But as I said before, as we were talking about before, this is one of the things that I wanted to get into, what about like a commercial version of it, a non-commercial version, a home version of it, a version where you know that it's just going to be you using it, you know that you're not going to do anything stupid. You're going to take a shower before you go in. You're not going to urinate in it. It's only yours. Like you wouldn't need all that other extra jazz if it was only yours, correct? Well, what we would want to do is make sure that whatever we build is built to code. We don't want to put stuff into circulation that's not code worthy. Like if scientists can happen to somebody, liability issues. Like if they if we cheaped out on something and made it and then they you know, OK, but listen, hold on a second, you're saying cheaped out, but I don't necessarily think it's cheaping out. It's only cheaping out if you don't know what's going to into that water. If you know what's going into that water because it's only yours, it's not cheaping out at all. It's like do you need to overburden your system? Do you need to make it so it's unbelievably stringent and removes all the path. Just no, no, no one's going in there, but you if it's just you, don't you think that that would be, I mean, not only that be totally acceptable, it would be ethical. So as you tell the people what to do. Well, I could agree with that. You know, the issue is with us though is that people, they're they're going to take that that system that we said is for your home and they're going to put it into a commercial space. Right. But once that these laws and all of these standards are put into place, then certainly then we might be interested in saying OK, now here's how it could be done that would be less effective say than the commercial version. But first we would have first what we're very diligent about is to establish these guidelines in the beginning. Not just say, oh, well, some of our stuff does this or that. It's like all of it does. It's certified. It's it's perfect as it is now, but the rest of it is like, OK, we could do that, but it wouldn't be, you know, what it is that we've taken so much time and effort to to get right. Now we know all the other components, the less expensive ones, let's say, right. And we could do that. Right. But what I'm saying is the only reason why you need all those expensive components because you're dealing with more than one human being, right? If it's me, that's the one human being. I'm I'm completely OK with taking super clean actions on it. Yeah, it wouldn't not be like, I liked to have the best. Yeah, I know. But for someone who lives, you know, in a modest way and can't afford spend the massive amount, is there a way like I know the business new thing that they're coming out in 10. Yeah, what do you think of that? Well, it's a shower curtain on an aluminum frame, you know, which is, you know, I don't know how they're going to keep that stuff from hardening up. There's a lot of things I don't know about. You know, I don't want to like a salt in the water. Yeah, right. And now that I don't know how they're going to keep that somewhere without getting a hard, I don't know how it's not going to dissipate out of there. You know, I haven't really studied into it, but I'm aware of certain limitations that occur just in general when you're dealing with this material. Right. And do you think that perhaps some of these other designs are made from people that do not have a long term history, a long time history in this sort of a business? Like they don't understand. Exactly. What's involved? What the, like, I remember the thing about the dude who worked for Samadhi, he had encountered all the bullshit before. He knew about when engines seized up. He knew the salt content was too high. It would fuck with the spot engines. He replaced, he knew, he knew in advance what it was probably when we talked on the phone, what the issues were. Yes. And he would come on and fix them. So you think a lot of these folks, they're just sort of getting into tanks now. And then they go, hey, I got an idea, but they're not foreseeing the potential hazards or issues that would come from these things. Yes. So that good, a good explanation that that's this, so I don't think that they care. The ones that I'm aware of, some of these guys, I don't know, because I try not to get involved with these people because we're on our own page. We are trying to get it. We're not, we're not trying, we're doing it. We are moving forward in a direction. I understand, but I mean, you're aware of these little companies that are coming up. And the good thing is that it's making people aware of tanks, like Kickstarter. You know, somebody sent me a Kickstarter for that Zen Tank thing. And I looked at it and I was like, I don't know if I can retweet this. I don't know enough about it. I don't know if it's good, I don't know if it's bad. I don't know if it's a good idea. I made it on that Google, on your computer. When you have the Yahoo search motor or whatever it is there, and I saw it on the Yahoo. It said, oh, Zen Tent or whatever. It's interesting. So it's the public has a somewhat of an interest in it. Like I say, the E news is doing some series on actors and how they get into peak performance or whatever it is like this and that. And they want to include us in that frame of this type of activities that- Using technology deprivation. Yeah. How many celebrities do you send for the Denver Vation Tanks? There are a lot now. There's more and more. We have them coming in more now. Really? Yeah, there's some that are very. It's pretty cool too. And there are those good people as well. The ones that come in that are famous or whatever, they're never like a big, it's me or anything like that. They come in low. You wreck. You know what? That's what I come in, dude. Elton John sunglasses, big fucking feather hats. It's kind of coming big about the whole story of the world. Yeah, you know. I don't have the occasion where you gators. But the people then that are a trap. So what I'm saying though is it's becoming more and more of a mainstream. It's becoming more and more popular and people becoming more and more aware of it. And I know a lot of fighters use it. Diego says that's really big on it. Jeremy Stevens, who we talked about earlier, he loves it. He was a lot of your friends. Did he win that fighters that came in? It was a very close fight, but he did not win. But it was very close. It was very good. It was an excellent fight. It was really close. I believe it was a split decision. And at the end, we were going, man, who knows. But I think the right guy won. I think Cubs wants him won the fight, but it was like I said, it was super, super close. They both put it all in. Oh, it was great. It was wild fight to watch. These guys are so skilled. That's been about kick with a guy kicks him in the chin. I watched you walk out on a little clip. And you're walking out on, this is a long time ago. And as you're walking, you don't even stop walking. And you jump around and kick the guy. I think you kick him in the chest or something. And he goes out immediately. I mean, it was like it wasn't even, you didn't even stop walking. And then that guy from what is that, this is a law and order show. The bald guy, this like the captain or whatever he is, he was telling the story about you and him. They're going through New York and there's these hooed looms, right? He goes, I got four or five or something. So Joe says, what are you talking into a microphone crash? Oh, sorry about that. Joe says to him, I forgot, do you know the guy is the bald law and order guy? He's like Dan Flork? Yeah, he said, you guys were, and Joe looks over and he says, can you take one of these guys? And he goes, okay, I was like, Joe jumped up and not the man. This never happened. And New York, I didn't knock anybody out. This is a completely fabricated story. You were in New York, listen to me because you're talking about me. I'm trying to explain. It did not happen. It did not happen. Never happened. See, this is the story he told me. He was, he was my middle of a pain pills. Are you sure it's the right guy? I don't know if it's the right guy. But you just never had a problem like that. I did not be ever. Never. Never kicked a guy down. No. The other ones ran off. I haven't been in any sort of a physical altercation since I was in high school. Really? Yeah. I forget in a situation with some guy getting a lippy mouth. You got to put him up. There was a guy on Fear Factor that I had a grab. Once I grabbed him, shut up and I just grabbed him. Held onto him, grabbed his neck, shut it in. He heard him. I just, he was too dangerous. He had hit some people before he had thrown his wife down on a television show and he had attacked a counselor on another television show. And they had warned us before he came on the show that he was like, he was very, he was a contestant and he was a pretty bad guy. He was a celebrity, one of those reality celebrities. He had been on a reality show with his wife. This is the new one. It was an old Fear Factor. And had reality shows back then? Oh yeah, man. Sure. The Survivor Man started in 2001 or Survivor did rather. 2001 and this guy was on the amazing race, which I think was like 2004 or three or something like that. Yeah. I mean, they've had those for a long time. You grabbed him. I think I thought he was going to hit me. kept getting in my face. I pushed him away. Got my face again. I was like, I'm not going to let the problem with someone hitting you is it's really hard to see they're going to hit you if they sucker punch you. But at the time you react, you've already been hit. It's the reaction times that people have are way slower than action times. Action times are way faster. So someone decides to hit you and you don't see a common. It could be very dangerous. And when someone keeps invading your space and they're not listening, they're violent, they're angry, they're spitting your face or screaming. If you just let a guy hit you, you know, the first punch is one of the most important aspects of any sort of an altercation. You get hit, you get hurt, you get damaged and then someone can fuck you up. Yeah. You got to be really careful. Yeah. So when someone, these violating all the laws of engagement and he's also, he's showing himself to be very, very dumb about physical altercation because he keeps coming forward. I push him away from me and he keeps coming forward again like something's going to happen if you keep doing this and you're not thinking about it. You're not thinking about what the repercussions are. You don't even know how to fight and yet you're still, you're already not that. You're not even sure. You're not even sure. You're not talking towards him. Well, I look at that himself. But not just that. I'm looking at his physical frame. I'm like, he's just, he's frail. There's nothing there that's like dangerous. There's no explosive movement. He's spitting, he's yelling. He's red in the face. He's all emotional. He's got to run out of gas in five seconds if I grab him. I'm just thinking all these things like, but I don't want him to hit me. That's the only one time though. That's the only one time on television. I mean, I've gotten in arguments with people before, but I'm a nice person, man. For the most part, I can avoid most bullshit, but I didn't kick anybody in New York. That's what I think he said. He said I think there's the other ones ran off. You asked him if you could handle one of them. He said yes. I don't know what to say. I don't know what to say. I don't know what you remember. I don't know who was on Ambien. I don't know who is on third. I don't know. I neither to be honest with you, but yeah. I wouldn't do that. The thought about though is that a lot of these people I think that once you stand up, they take the scatter off. Sometimes the choke on the back. That'll usually stop. You know, you should always avoid a ritual altercation if you can do it. Any physical altercation, if you can avoid it, please do. You're always better off. People, cooler heads prevail. People relax. They calm down and get over a situation that could have resulted in a murder. I mean, that happens all the time where it's just like people escalate and they get to this point and they make irrational decisions and they're super violent and then they go and do something really dumb. It happens all the time. People, they get caught up in their emotions. They get caught up in their anger. They get caught up in their primal chimpanzee rage and they just fuck up and they do something terrible. That's why how people who love each other wind up killing each other. I mean, where, how could that even be rational? How could you ever kill someone that you used to love? It all boils down to some of the same issues that we were talking about earlier. People don't have releases. They don't have a release for their aggression. They don't have a release for their frustration. They don't have a release for the energy that their body continues to make. They have all this food they're taking in their body. Their body's getting fat because they're not exercising it. So there's all these imbalances and everybody's uncomfortable and people are agitated. They're agitated and easily irritated and is all about personal maintenance and it's all an issue of personal maintenance, whether it's by taking yoga classes or what you and I like to do by getting into the tank or what some folks like to do. They just like to go for an evening jog. I know a lot of people that say that they go for a jog. Like Jamie's a big jogger. You go for a run and it clears your mind. When it's over, you just things that seem so important in 20 minutes ago that don't seem to important anymore. An hour ago you were sweating all these different things and now you're like, eh, any greater perspective, everything's going to be okay. I was just caught up in a wave of momentum, of emotions and anxiety and oftentimes you can alleviate a big chunk of those just with physical exercise. They're like they say that physical exercise is as effective as antidepressants when it comes to making people feel better. Yes, the physical exercise for a lot of folks is the recipe. It's a good timing. It's a comedy writer and he comes in and he says that what's the name? I don't know his name. He's a funny writer guy. Yeah, he's a funny writer guy. He goes for a walk though. He doesn't even know run. He says he runs. He doesn't even like to run, but when he goes out and he runs, it creates a mental framework that he uses to write with. So he'll go out and just go for a run to create the mental mind frame that he's going to work off of his material with. Not to get the physical benefits. Right. I thought, whoa, that's an interesting cause I don't know if I'm writing my bike. Some stuff comes into my head that I would, oh, wow. I didn't think about that. Right. So I guess when you're in this, you know, exercising mode too, your physical stuff is taking care of. Well, sure. You're also pumping your body filled with blood. You're accelerating all your processes. You're getting all your hormones going. You're getting all your endorphins going. Your body's pumping. You're flushing out your system. Everything's moving. You're sweating. So you're sweating toxins out of your system. Allegedly. People talk about that because usually they don't know what the fuck they're talking about. I'm getting rid of all the toxins. Are you really, are you just sweating? I know what's happening here. So I'm not really sure what to say that. But that's a lot of it. It's, you know, it's exercise. I think that allows the mind to release a little bit or at least come down. Perhaps when it's the physical situation is requiring more of you than in your mind is like freed up from creating problems to about. It's the battery thing we were talking about earlier too. It's your body stores up all this energy and you don't have a release. Some folks never have an any sort of an explosive release like months, weeks, you know, days. There's nothing. It never happens. They have no, no release. So their body is just like, wow. You know, it's designed for all these different things that it doesn't get used for. It's designed so that you can do manual labor. It's designed so that you could hunt for food so that you could gather and farm. It's designed to be sturdy when required to be. And when you don't require to be, it gets uncomfortable. You know, and that's, that's the issue that a lot of people face in this weird modern world that we've created. We don't, we don't give the body what it really truly needs. That's at Homo Stasius. They're specifically a natural state or something like that. And I think that one of the fascinating things about the tank is that it allows a very unusual type of relaxation. It also is an incredible way to absorb magnesium into your body. Like magnesium, which is an important mineral, it gets absorbed through your body through those salts. It's like Epson salts is one of the best ways to get into your body. You feel better. When you lie in that thing, you feeling vigorated. I lie in that thing for a couple of hours. I feel like I just slept like a really good eight hour sleep. Like, oh, my body is so good. It's such a good thing. So good. The chambers are so good. That's what, you know, the people that they, what's interesting is that people like it. When they come in and they do it, they go, oh, you know, that was very low percentage of, you know, nothing we ever ask or anything. But most people say, wow, wow, you know, it's such a positive learning. And the downside, you know, I don't even know what it is. I don't think there's a downside, but I have had people come to me that that were in a poorly set up tank. Like this one guy came to me and goes, Hey, I tried to do it, but I was sweating. I was like, well, you're in a badly set up tank. You're not supposed to sweat. You're almost supposed to feel slightly cool when you get in. Somehow. Just slightly cool. And if you're sweating at all, it's just the temperature of the water is too high. And that can happen. It's happened to me before I've had my temperature set wrong or for whatever reason it gets warmer outside. I emailed you about that recently. Yeah, I said, sleeve the door open for a while. Let some of the heat out. You know, this is the number down one notch. You just left it. I left it. Do you want us to take it? Oh, it's too. Yeah, it doesn't matter. I can do that. Yeah, yeah. If it's set up correctly, it's an amazing thing. And it should be something that everyone at least at one point in your life recognizes or experiences because I think that it's an alien environment that doesn't exist anywhere else in the world. If you could take a pill that could give you the experience that you get when you're full blown in the tank, you know how that feeling that you get when you're fully relaxed, when you've completely let go, like an hour in or something like that, where everything is just so chill. And your mind is in this like incredible place. And you're, you know, essentially just breathing and floating. When you hit that moment, man, if you could get a pill that could put people in that state, it would be like ecstasy. People would be like trading in the black market. They'd be like, this is amazing. Dude, the feeling that gives you like the world goes away. Dude, you don't feel your body. The world goes away and you're alone with your mind in an empty room. You'd be like, whoa, people would freak out. Oh, yeah. It's a fail to it. That's the craziest drug ever. Yeah, man. It's freaky bro. It's so illegal though if you caught with it, you're dead. It's completely black child forever. You can't see anything. Yeah. And while it's just, it is like a drug in its effects, but it's completely natural, completely safe, completely. I mean, I guess you could get addicted to it because I think a person could get pretty much addicted to anything, right? You know, if it's worth doing, it's worth overdoing. But people say that about jerking off and they get blisters in their dick. Yeah, the locusts coming. Yeah, you don't worry about the locusts then. And then you got to worry about, you know, people get that way with gambling. People get addicted to a lot of things that aren't physically addictive as far as like the cellular level. But you get addicted to those rushes that you get. You get addicted to- Emotionally, yeah. People get addicted to fighting with their spouse. So a lot of people that just can't help but they have these seesaw battles within their relationships where they get mad, yell at each other and then they recover and they love each other so much better. Because of the fact they've gone through this almost- a neurochemical stuff. Yeah. We get upset and then we get a hit from that. Well, interesting. We get bored. You know, we're designed to go wild through the jungle, bang at each other like monkeys. No, we don't do that anymore. So we get bored. So the way we keep it exciting is start fights. You're the rare. Get upset, make up with each other. Yeah, I just think what I love about the tank is. for fights. It's true. You're the rare. Get upset, make up with each other. Just make it out. Yeah, that's it. I just think what I love about the tank is it gives you the chance to sort of step back and see stuff like that. Gives you a chance to step back and see your whole life and to be alone with your mind. Be alone with your mind to just really get a good look at what the fuck's going on. It's such a good place to go too. Yeah. It should be. Then because it's like the regular world is just loaded with stuff now. It's like a constant in order to just like unplug, not answer the phone or not not have anything going on at all. It's so very so rare. Complex to get yourself somewhere where you almost have to like leave and go on a vacation or something. But in there you could just you could just get in there and close the door and then take yourself out of whatever it was that you know was where you wanted to leave from. You know and it come back later. A better prepared to deal with the situation that it might have been. Yeah. I agree and I think it's so interesting to me that this slipped through the cracks for decades that somehow or another people forgot about this. And it was one of those things that was incredibly fringe when I came upon it. I went to a place called Soothing Solutions that's still open in Burbank. And they had those some body tanks and they do a great job taking care of them. They have a shower right there. They have a real good setup and the lady that ran it was super nice. But she was like it wasn't the verge of going under like there wasn't that many people that were using those tanks. It was just it was pretty rare. It wasn't like the super popular thing. And I remember the first time I did it there. I was like this is fucking bananas. How is this not something that everybody's talking about everywhere you go? And I question her about it. I question other people about it. And I would ask people if you heard about it. And I was stunned by how few people in the psychedelic community didn't do it. We were going to sell thousands of them. Dennis McKenna's never done it. I'm getting this is such an outrageous. You know, you're going to think everybody when I first did it and I started doing it and going this is something that it's Graham Hancock could never done it. I know it. Are you supposed to come to my house and do it. I was going to send them to you to do it. Next time he's in America. I'm fucking I'm dragging him to one of those things. It's like how can you go around? You travel all over the jungle. Do I was get come it's right here. Sit down. He's tapped into himself really good. He's amazing. He's intuitive like that. He's a great, great guy too. Just a beautiful human being. Yeah. Somebody that really has a lot of lot in him. Fascinating, honest, inquisitive, willing to take chances in that even if he's incorrect occasionally with some of these ideas, the ones that he's been correct about. He's pretty mind blowing some of the implications of some of the things that he's discovered. What things we're talking about this on the on the car right up here that go backly tepy situation where they've discovered this incredible stone ruins from 14,000 years ago. This is something that they just didn't even know existed before. They didn't know there was a culture 14,000 years ago that was capable of building something like this. Because of the fact that it was covered up 14,000 years ago, they're pretty sure that it was built at least that long ago. Perhaps even longer. Perhaps even longer. It was covered up on purpose. It was covered up on purpose. They said, I think. They explained how the arc, and this is all mainstream archaeology folks. This isn't some weird friendship. This is pretty much completely agreed upon by all these different scientists. At some point around 12,000 years ago, they covered all of these stone structures. It's an enormous stone structure complex of these concentric circles. These weird three-dimensional carvings that are into these stone columns are huge. We're very intricate. Very difficult to do, especially back then when they thought that people were essentially just hunters and gatherers, which is, you know, they didn't think that people had built cities back then. So 14,000 years ago, someone or 12,000-plus years ago, someone had had the ability to do this that we were unaware of until this discovery. And this discovery wasn't even made until like the, I think the 90s, 80s or 90s. Someone found one of these stones and they started uncovering it. And it's this date of only uncovered like 5%. Why isn't that a focus? Well, it is. It's just slowly, but only 5% uncovered, but it's a focus of us. Why isn't society like informed about us? Because Kim Kardashian's ass is huge and lots of people think it's fake. That's it. Her dog has got a, he's got his paws, his paws. Something's wrong. Something wrong with the dog. The shoe shoe dog. Well, it's just mainstream television, mainstream media is a lot of his, you know, it's a business and it's based on the base humans. The amount of numbers, look, I've talked to a lot of people that work for paparazzis, that work for like TMZ, the work for these people, they're just regular people that are a part of this system that they get some money out of. And they get some money out of the system exists because people are curious as to what Britney Spears is up to. You know, how Kanye West is going to deal with Jimmy Kim and making fun of them. People just get super obsessed by this stuff and there's a business in feeding that obsession. So all these people that don't take themselves away from the television and don't get into an isolation tank and don't take a yoga and don't consciously choose to not inundate their mind with silly nonsense. Instead, if they just took a broader path, took a wider view, took a more sensible approach to their life, you know, I think we would see less and less of that stuff. You know, it exists because there's a void because there's a reason for it because it's interesting to people. It could be a fad. Maybe if people continue to, you know, get smarter and go on the course that we looked at earlier in the podcast, the court, not the court of Eddie's father, but of leave it to be there. We look at leave it to be there and then look at things that we see on television today and the sophistication level of the media that we produce, the artwork that we produce is pretty intense. The growth amount is pretty intense. So I think that that's the evidence that people are becoming more sophisticated overall. There's still going to be plenty of idiots. There's always will be. There's always going to be people that resist. There's always going to be people that are like involved in religious cults. There's going to be people that are ideologues, that have these insane ideologies. There's always going to be that. But I think that overall, things are getting more sophisticated. People are becoming more aware. People are becoming more smart. Don't you think? I'm hoping for that and I believe that that's probably correct. And the tanks part of that in some way. What? A tank can help a person. I mean, everybody. Like I say, they put them in these schools, help these kids. You know, they define themselves. You know, that's very important for people to have that opportunity and that option to take and turn out how they want to be based on what it is that they think that how they want to be. You know what I mean? Do it because of your own reasons. Yeah. And know what those reasons are. And that's one of the things about meditation, whether it's TM or whether it's yoga, whether it's going into a tank. When you're alone with your thoughts, you get an idea of what your thoughts actually are. If you live your life just acting constantly on the momentum of other people's expectations, of you wanting to be liked by these other people, you can run into a trap. And you set up a life that you didn't really want. You're fucked. You're trapped in this situation where you have a mortgage. You've got credit card bills, you've got student loans, you have to pay, you have a bunch of shit going on, you have to continue to feed. And all that, and especially if you have a family and you have to feed them, oh my goodness, then you're fully locked in. You can't take any chances whatsoever. And oftentimes people make the mistake of getting stuck. And it is just a tactical mistake, just like it would be a mistake if you got stuck on a video game. Just like it would be a mistake if you followed a map incorrectly and you got stuck in the woods. And your life is certainly some sort of a journey. It's certainly some sort of a journey. And we have to all be aware that when we're making journeys, we're not going to always make the right steps. And sometimes you have to back up and try again. And if you're in a position where you can't back up and try again, you've trapped yourself. And the system will set out honey pots for people to get trapped in. The system will set out the ideas of retirement, the ideas of the golden years providing you benefits, providing you a healthy work environment. Why? Well, because they want people to work for them. They don't want people to realize their own dreams and escape. But those are fucking pain. And yeah, so you got to hire more people and train them and they want to set it up so that you stick around. Stick around some sort of an unsatisfying world. It's up to you to see that video game problem, to see that issue as it comes up on the map. No, and I think this is the right turn to see all the problems that could potentially lay in front of you and calculate your future. And then also look around all the people that didn't do it and look at the misery that they're in and learn that you don't want to be like them. And then look at the people that have kind of taken chances and navigated their way. What do they do differently than you? What objectivity do they have that maybe you lack? What insight into their own mistakes? Are they willing to delve into that you're not, that you step back and you go, you know, I just don't want to look at myself that closely. But the person who's able to look at themselves the closest is going to get the more rational results. Well, put, you know, because you're your own architect, you know what I mean? You turn out how you sort of. I want to be like, she'll kill them. You know, she's not going to happen. Well, you know, people wanted to be like, yeah, it's really the odds are slim. Yeah. You can't imagine if you could, imagine they found out that the secret is real that you could just become whatever you want. So if you thought hard enough about being a giant, you would just start growing. If you thought hard enough about being a woman, you would just turn into a woman. Like people like, look at you, like, is something going on crash? You just like, well, I've been thinking a lot about living my life as a woman. So I just started to become a woman and you can just do it from a cellular level. Unconsciously. Totally conscious. What's going on here with this? Well, that's ridiculous. I'm talking about it completely consciously. Isn't that the idea behind like the secret? Did you get like, when that whole, the secret thing was going on and what the bleep do we know and people started really getting into the idea of manifesting your own reality with your imagination? Did you get a lot more people coming into the tank centers? Like a great place to do that. I think that was probably like kind of in the way people maybe started to that group, what's it called? Group consciousness or something? Collected consciousness? Yeah. Yeah. I don't really like that. And I don't like that, you know, modo stuff about the water having a personality or whatever it is. Zepol shit. I have a dark field microscope. And I studied, you know, a bit about water. I yell at it or I'm nice to it and I can't tell the difference. You know, I'm trying to, yeah, you know, you're rotten. And it doesn't seem to affect the water under my microscope, but he does the freezing. I don't know how he did it. What is it called? The message in the water? Well, it's Yamamoto. He's a scientist that suggests that the water is a, like, we're water sort of, I think, is the premises that if you're nice to water, water's nice. And this, if you're nice to people, they're nice. I think it's something. It's called hidden messages in water and it's all pretty fascinating, but a lot of people think it's total bullshit. Scientists think that. Yeah, but those are the ones you got to listen to, man, because all these other people they're seeing ghosts and shit. You know, the problem is the scientists are the one they're analyzing shit and looking for actual results, whereas the people that are like really in a spirituality and channelers, they're looking to find a very specific result. They're not looking to just measure these things. Do you know what's fun? You ever done that thing with the muscle testing and they push on your arm and they put the little medallion on you, the test, the woman, and her, whatever. And they say, oh, you know, this is a Tesla technology or now it's, so, okay, they put the little wristband, little, whatever it is. So I could never understand how that works. Doesn't make any sense to me, right? Right. So one dad's guy shows up and he says, okay, let me try this thing. So I have a desk behind me with a towel on it. So the next is a proximity thing. You got to be within 10 feet of this thing or something or something or something, in fact. So I say, okay, okay. What is this thing again? It's like a medallion or a thing like that. Like, nanny or a ship? Yeah, they say something about Tesla technology and they put your arm up and they push down on your arm to see. People love, that's all bullshit. Those are carne tricks. I couldn't understand how it was, so I took the thing. Now I said, okay, here, watch this. Take the table behind me. I'm going to have it in my hand or not. Put it behind my back and either put it up on the table underneath the towel or I had it in my hand. And when I came back then, all the tests were off. The guy had not a clue how to manipulate the test. So he didn't know if you had it on you. So then he started doing all his carne tricks and it didn't, he couldn't commit to them because it didn't work. It didn't work. Well, I had a doctor. I had a doctor. He was trying to produce. Try it with me. He did it with my co-host in the UFC and he was believing in it. He had one on shit. He was telling me, you got to try this. This is amazing. And I was like, what is it? And the guy goes, well, let me explain it to you. It's all about polarity. You know, it's not just using all these polarity, magnetism, all about fucking voodoo. Tesla. He's telling me all this stuff. And then he said, this thing, when you put on your wrist, going to make it stronger. And I go, really? And he goes, yeah. So he goes, all right. I want you to do this. And he's like, put, maybe put my arm out right there. He goes, okay, now resist me. And I resisted him. And then he's like, all right, you're not supposed to be able to resist that. I was like, well, look man, you're making a mistake. You got bad leverage. And if you're pushing that, you're trying to push down my arms. You're not big enough. I can hold my arms out there like that. Just do your lift up. Yeah, I lift weights. This shit ain't going to work. And then he goes, all right, now I want you to put this on. You know, like, tell me if you feel like it's stronger. I go, I'm not even stronger. You're not going to get me stronger from a fucking little rubber band around my wrist. This is ridiculous. I go, you're standing in a different position. I go, you're doing it differently. I go, you were trying to get closer to me before. And now you're doing it further away from me, which, you know, you have less leverage. That's it. This is stupid. I was like, this is dumb as fuck, man. Parlor Trek. Do you got mad at me, man? He was really upset at me. He's face started getting red. I go, listen, man, there's no scientific basis for any of this shit. He goes, whoa, $100 an athlete, which can't be wrong. Turns out they were wrong. Turns out they sued and turns out there's a class action lawsuit and all those fucking people got their money back. It means like a big deal. Yeah. It's a parlor trek. Total horseshit. But I talk to fucking athletes that swore in work. They do that. They're all believed it. That's why I like to say, well, the chamber though is like they do all those hoaxy or this. They tried to acupressure and they do these shows on TV and they try to, you know, discredit of these natural. Well, you can't discredit the chamber. They have never been able to come up with a big deal. Well, they wouldn't want to. First of all, it's so natural and so positive. And you look at it so ingenious in its design. Ten effect. Ten effect. The Epsom salt. So effect does something it helps you do something with yourself. And I mean, what else is there that does that hardly? And it's super relaxing. It helps me down. It helps me down. We're relaxing. And we can all use to relax. Fuck, I know I can't goddamn it. Listen to me. I could fucking use to relax. That's the people are coming together at a big hurry. I've been hurried to relax. Yeah. They're in a hurry up relaxer. I don't have an hour. Yeah. Let's get in there quick. We give them two hours for 40 bucks. That's amazing, by the way. You have the best fucking rates, man. Nobody has rates like that. Everybody else is like, I've heard 50 bucks an hour. I've heard people saying, well, you know, there's no money in this. There's no profit in it. So we have to charge this much just to keep the doors open. But what you've always done is, I mean, I can't tell you how many people have gone to the fold lab and go, dude, it was so cheap. I was like, yeah. Yeah. And comparing like in my town, it's 150 bucks for an hour. Like I've heard that. I've heard 150 bucks for an hour. What's the most expensive you've ever heard? I'm going to charge. I know about 20 and stuff. I don't know. I don't know. It just, it fums me out because it's not cool to charge people like that, to try to, you know, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, all you know, you can charge more, well, so what? I don't have to. I don't know. Well, if you have an initial investment and you build this and X amount of tanks and then you have a place where it makes sense like as far as like the amount of rent and then you just have them filled all day long, it can be profitable. I mean, you're not going to be Rockefeller. No. You're not trying to do that. You're not just trying to spread this shit. Trying to accommodate the people in general, not a specific group of people. Like I remember when I said the clubs, I always have the jello shooters for dollar, I have a dollar brew, beer, always a dollar draft. Always. And then I have dollars. All my synops is a dollar. You know, because the people that the money is a thing for, you're dealing with regular, you want to have what is your objective? Right. Are you trying to make, is this your money thing or trying to provide a service and, and create a way to, like the people that come up. to you, like I never hear anybody. I have never once heard anybody go to your thing and go, you know what crash was rude, the place sucked, the tanks were expensive. No one's ever said that. They always say, oh, crash is so cool. The place is so nice. I love it there. It's great. Like no one has any negativity. Well, that's, that's like Ian. So handsome. Look at him over there. Beautiful bastard. There's a ringing. They come out of the girls there. Oh, it's good move. That's the Ian should be like oiled up and shirtless. You track dudes and girls. You have people coming in from all around to use those tanks. Did he hear news as tank? Yeah. Do you mean to the tank that Ian uses? Oh, hey, that's another thing. We have your old chamber on a giveaway. We updated that thing too. Okay. It's all black now. We made the intro, we changed the door out. Now it's a, it's a black door and it's, it's inlaid and we've taken we've fixed it all up and said, oh, that's awesome. So we're going to do something with it. Let's do that. Yeah. Let's tell me what we need to do and we'll, we'll give it away. Let's do something. Because I gave away my last tank. My Samani tank, I, I had a random drawing online. People sent me their emails and I just went, I spun. I like did the thing with my laptop and I'm like, clip. Okay, this guy. And then I just sent it to that guy. Just total random decided to send it to this one guy in San Diego and he got my tank. Well, this is not, this is a paper saw. We tuned it all up. It's a not-regious vehicle, man. It's a cool rig and it's a, you know, it's your old thing. So is it a, how much is the saw cost? It's funny about that too. So you're thinking about the Epson salt magnesium sulfate. Whereas P grade, right? Yes. It depends on where you get it at. Even though it's labeled the same way, USP is a pharmaceutical grade. There's a quality is different. Like, you know, you know, so anyway, you can get it at the home. I mean, at the bed bathroom or 99 cents store for 50 cents a pound. Right. Yet it's, you know, it's not the highest grade. So you got to get it from, you, you hooked me up with some chemical company. Yeah. So that's why I get it with, right? Yeah. And it's like 75, 80 cents a pound or something there, which is, you know, but so you figure as like 1000 pounds is 800 bucks, you know, but that chamber though is in, is in premotion. We have it all fixed up in that one day. We'll figure out what we're going to do because, you know, we're going to be talking more about this, this venue in Westwood. Yeah. So you're going to open up a place in Westwood. When is it going to be open for the public? That's a good question. We've been working on it for a while now because at the, uh, a few, uh, a few, uh, details with people that we needed to, uh, get behind us. How many tanks do you have right now in Venice? Two. That's it. Wow. And take place in Westwood will have 10. 10. Oh. So two in Venice are booked up like deep in the August, right? Yes. And would be if you probably had 20 of them, you know, we turn, there's a lot of calls and we don't make an effort to, uh, utilize, uh, any, you know, like, there's been some shows on the TV shows wanting to come in. We haven't even been yet. We don't have any time. Right. Oh, they want to come and film there or something. Well, Vice film there. That was cool in Hamilton Morris. I remember he contacted me after his over. He said it was one of the most life changing things he's ever done. He had a pot edible and got into your tank and just like changes world. What changed our world too? That really, uh, was it, was it was an extraordinary opportunity for us then to, uh, to, uh, have the chance to, to show some people what this was about. He, he informed a lot of people, you know, uh, you know, you and him and other people that, you know, the most of this is you and I don't know who else is really going to know. Well, that was his first joint. Yeah, his first, uh, real run in the tank, but he's, he, his whole thing that pharmacopia show that he does, really was fascinating. He got a lot of really fascinating. The episode is really cool, um, well produced episodes where they covered a lot of different kinds of psychedelics. A lot of different kinds of subjects, but this, this subject, this, um, this whole thing where people are getting curious about altered states of consciousness is increasing and growing. And even more so this idea that you could do it in something like the tank where it's totally natural and safe and healthy, you know, to worry about it. And so I think, uh, I think it's all part of, um, this new sort of expanding of our ideas that we're seeing in today's society. But expanding of what, what is, you know, what do you have in your life? What's in your world? You know, what are you adding to your body? What are you adding to your day? How are you expanding your, your consciousness, your point of view? These are all new things too. New, uh, new, uh, considerations. These are points to consider that in the past really haven't been left up to the individual. Yeah. So I think it's a long, long with the tide, you know, but now you can, you could grab a hold of yourself and say, listen, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna think about this the way I think about it and then make the decisions to, you know, have, uh, be, you're not, not a victim anymore. You know, as a victim, oh, they're this, they're that, ah, you know, they are what they are. But you now, with the ability to recognize, you're, you know, that you are capable and that you are, uh, potentially, uh, just getting started. I mean, we're all young, uh, if we want to be, if you want to be able to work in progress. And you know, the more you keep improving yourself, the more you enjoy this process of life. So we're talking about like people, like trying Pilates, people love trying to do shit, you know, I get into archery recently. It's fun. It's like something exciting about learning something, you know, you don't know that much about it and you can see your progress. You know, maybe, you know, take up a martial art or a skill, yeah. Something you can start doing something. So, I mean, I don't know anything. I mean, uh, the, uh, you know, it's good to have a balance. Yeah. You know, it is. It's super, super important to have a balance and also to find things in your life that stimulate you. The more things that I do that excite me and stimulate me, the more things that I do where I'm learning new stuff. You know, it just, I get into things and those things that I get into wind up and reaching my life. The enthusiasm that I get from pursuing some new subject that I'm interested in. Learning is cool when you're learning what you want to learn about. Which is why I wanted to talk to you about these crazy screens that you're trying to hook up these tanks with. This is the thing that Crash was going off about forever. Was these screens that would suspend above the tank and emit the lowest amount of light possible so that you only saw the image. You didn't see the actual screen itself or the border itself. You just saw the image in front of you and in that sensory deprivation state where the only input that was coming in was what you were catching off the screen and what you were hearing from the program that your mind would be way more easily, way more able to absorb the information. It's a trip. We, after five, uh, tries military providers to get this thing finally doing what it's supposed to do. It says, anyway, this has been difficult to get it to be contained at image in that area that it has to be in with for it. So that, that is very, because you know, you're laying down looking at it. One of the first things that we figured out was because you're on your back and then he goes up there. So we tell you, and you go like this, and you go, whoop. And as soon as the screen changes around your convinced that you're standing on your feet and looking forward on your feet at the screen. Really. Oh, this is one of the first things. And then there's some other stuff there that, you know, either. So when you're lying on your back and you're watching the video, you think you're standing off. After you take the video that you make them, there is no video for this really. It's just like mostly your brain. You don't want to see a gone with the wind or, you know, right. Your, your whole mind, it just, patterns or movements or whatever. We've been working with different stuff as much as we can with the time. We don't have enough time, but when we come back, we have a, uh, we have a strategy then to start to produce these programs involved in, uh, this system. But the, uh, the initial, uh, what's occurring there with that is, uh, then, you know, that's, uh, that's the future. You see, well, we explain it though. There's a screen that's hovering over your face. Uh-huh. And you're laying on your back. And how wide is it? It's the one we have now is 19 inches because the, uh, material required to build it. They can't get it any bit now though. There's 32 inch screen material. I can get it to make the, uh, to make it 32 inches across. But is there a size that it's no longer good because you have to go back borders? No, good. It's a black border. It's all black. Um, the whole thing is a screen, right. The image will move around within the screen. So you have it all black. We're working on something, you know, like those tiles in the bottom. So if you're in a dome now and you're laying them back on your dome and those tiles are underneath you so that the bottom is, uh, it's waterproof, of course. But you use the lights on the bottom, a projector or whatever. You know, on the bottom, you know, dome, you're laying on your back and the dome then is all filled in with the screens and the bottom. So now you're laying in this thing and you're flying it through space in a dome. The upside everywhere you look and then it flips you over. But wait a minute, wait a minute. Wait, wait a minute. Wait, wait a minute. You can't see through the water. Yeah, it's clear as a bell. So, but wouldn't that ruin the whole idea of sensory deprivation? Oh, no, it's a whole nother thing. Light underneath you. You're just, you're flying. But you can't turn behind you and look behind you. If it's screen everywhere, you're enclosed in it. This is the view. I don't really want to. Okay, but if you're lying, I'm confused. Sorry. Yeah. But you keep interrupting. No, no, no. If you're lying on your back and you're looking up, what difference does it make? What's behind you? You're not going to see that. You want to know that it's not, it's something. Because then you're flying, you're suspended. You look around, you're in the air. I mean, underneath you is cool too. If you can have the whole thing and come this in you. In order to get wind up looking up. But you can't, when you're lying back like that, you don't know what you see. You don't know what you see. No, you would be, it would make you think that you're on your stomach looking up at what's, you know, I mean, looking down that what's actually up. You don't, your mind is twisted when it twists. You have no reference. Right. So when you move you in there, you are under the impression that's the position you're in. Well, sometimes I don't know where I'm at when I'm in the tank, when I sort of snap out of it. I don't even know where my feet are facing. Yeah. The bottom ever falling out or anything like that, where you take off any which way or no. Oh, yeah, you feel like you're flying through space. So you know, that kind of stuff is like freaky, but you can't tell people about it. Because they're going, all right. Yeah, you can. Well, you do. I think they froze me out because I used to talk too much about stuff. Who froze? Yeah, who's they? I don't know who they are. The fucking government man. No, every 51. Those guys don't have nothing to do with me. I'm more of a, you say, but they're controlling you with cantrills. Yeah. The spraying in the sky is narrow bots up there. They're stripping down the nano stuff. No, that's a weird stuff. All right. We won't go there. Don't go there. Yeah. But the sort of thing has to do with audio mostly. The audio is what's the, yes, and the audio actually made you had some demonstrations where it made the water move. Oh, the water is moving. It's a somatic frequencies. We figured out how to then create the patterns of sounds. We're made out of frequency based materials. Maybe you, bro. I'm made out of twisted. Yeah. Sexy peel. As a all the file. We're made out of frequencies like what you mean. Frequency based materials. Everything is. It's moving and you like strings. Every the idea of everything moving in a different vibration. Matter is comprised of materials then that are, you know, unique. Your liver is a different than your kidney. You know, the frequency of the, the liver are the material that the kidneys made out of is to be different. So the cells then that would be used for these purposes with, if you could see what they tell you is that the replication of the cell is created to appreciate version. In other words, as you, that's easy, right? Exactly. Exactly. Well, what if instead of a depreciated version of the previous one, what if you did better? If you created a cell that was better, why, why wouldn't you if you already understood how to do that? Well, this is going to be a tool. We have this, the sensors now. It's just talking about the brain thing. The Germans are getting me with a cap through what's the neuron thing with a cap that has electrodes on it like a swimming cap. Well, it's not. I mean, cap? No, it's got electrodes on it. It's a cap that goes on your head. Okay. They haven't built it for me yet, but I've discovered. electrodes on it like a swimming cap. Well, it's not I think cap. No, it's got electrodes on it. It's a camp that goes on your head. Okay, they haven't built it for me yet, but I've discussed it with them and they understand that they can do it based on some stuff. Okay. They've done it a bathtub somewhere. But the the sensors then you see as they're connected to you, you input information, see that's the other thing with the sensory of what's going out and what's going into you. And then monitoring what occurs based on this input. This is what that thing's all about. But you know, I don't want to get too deep in it because it's kind of like in the future right now. And then so your ideas to combine sound with images to essentially tune your body to a different frequency and that could potentially change the way your body produces cells. Absolutely. That's a interesting analogy of the situation. But indeed, there's a lot of evidence to you know, a lot of evidence about meditation and the mind and the effect on the mind, the physical effect on the brain and that what is meditation? It's tuning into a certain type of frequency, a certain certain type of mindset, turning into a certain mentality, tuning into a certain energy that the mind is focused on. And that that actually has a profound effect on the very brain itself. That's pretty interesting stuff. A super interesting that makes something like what you're saying actually viable. Oh yeah. No, we have a group of people that are willing to give us the money for that. You know, that's we have the the resources now to complete that. You know, in some sort of period of time, once we focus back to it, we've been trying to get this other stuff done. So then we could get back to this stuff. But that technology that we have built and patented as well is extraordinary. And that that takes this thing to another level. I mean, this is what it is. And that's why it's so important as well. These vehicles that we're producing now, not only will they be used for this, you know, stuff that we've been talking about here in regards to relaxation and so forth else. It will eventually in the future be used also for, you know, other health benefits and learning and a whole array of various positive features that this process of benefits of it absolutely influence the human and to be used in conjunction with a lot of other things in your life. Proper diet, exercise, meditation, all these things. Absolutely. That is this there is no, there's all this silver bullet that is it's a con, like you have to get it should be everything is important food, your intake, their mind, your your rest or whatever it is. It's all like that. If you can get yourself, you know, balanced out and we have a lot of room for growth, you know, like I said, we're just getting started as a, I think that the species itself, humans that we are, are just starting to understand a little bit about what we are. We don't know where we came from. It's a very good point. Yeah, yeah, we are starting to understand and we discussed it in the previous podcast about just just the couple generations between us, the people that lived in the 1940s during World War I, the World War II, rather the dropping in the first atomic bomb. And then people before that, in the 1800s, it's just a few generations. You're just dealing with a few 70 year jobs. How this retina works. You've seen this in the back of the head. It's in the dark or the eyes. They changed around the information somehow. And it comes out there and then you think it's out there when it's somehow back in here being interpreted. Well, what we're talking about earlier with meditation, there's a study. If you, if you Google how meditation changes your brain, neuroscientists explains, there was a group of Harvard neuroscientists led by this woman, Sarah Lazar, who's a PhD and they, they were interested in mindfulness meditation and they've reported that the brain structures, they monitored brain structures change after only eight weeks of meditation practice, eight weeks of meditation practice and your brain starts branching out in a different way. It starts truly expanding your consciousness. You think of expanding your consciousness being some sort of an airy, fairy thing. Well, no, it's measurable. Like it's expanding your mind itself. What is more important than this? I don't think it was any more important. I mean, it is the, it's the premier opportunity to do something for yourself. And if you can expand your mind, believe me, all these people that are trying this, if they try to take an attack, it would be oh, so much more effective. It's, it's, it's, it takes so much. It's like, you know, can you, you know, can you get across the country riding a bike? You certainly can. Can you get a cross faster if you ride a plane? Fuck. Yeah. Okay. And this is the difference. It's like you can get there on a bike. You certainly can. Good luck. Good luck. It's called techno shamanism. You know, in a long way. Technology to create like this. These monks there out there trying to get these stated levels. Yeah. These are 20 years in a side of a mountain meditating, or you can go jump in a chamber and get yourself sorted out and, you know, much faster. Well, yeah. I mean, I would like to see what those Kundalini master see when they hit that highest level, because I do believe that they can achieve psychedelic states. Well, they're doing that. They're doing that. Couldn't any people? Well, I don't know. They are. But some of those monks up there in these monasteries or wherever they're at, they use these frequencies that they produce with their, their throats and stuff that affect them as I'm out. Well, Duncan Trucele knows how to do that. He'll, he can do those chance, those crazy Buddhist chance. He has a memorized. It's very freaky when he starts doing it. Does it take your man to somewhere? Does he go in his mind? Yeah. He also the freeing aspect of chanting and just the harmonizing and saying all those things, you just sort of like get into this state. Awesome. And it puts you into this, this vibe. Duncan benefited tremendously from the tank though. Duncan has been my friend for a long time and one time weighing the past, he had a bad breakup called me up from a hotel. He was at some hotel. He's like, dude, you know, my girlfriend just kicked me out. We had this horrible breakup. But just went awful. And I'm, I'm like, he was living with her. He's like, I'm literally homeless. And I said, Hey, come live with me. I got an extra bedroom. So Duncan came and lived with me and was going into the tank that you designed. And he would go in the tank every day. He lived with me for like, a few months. I don't know how many, maybe four or five. I don't remember totally until he got back on his feet again. But he sorted everything out in that tank. And he would tell me about it. He was like, dude, he goes, I just can't wait to get back in that tank again. Every day I just getting that tank and I'm figuring it out more and more. He's figuring it out. He's not reading what they said or is it goes in there and his figures it out. I've never met a guy who got his shit in order quicker back quicker than from a devastating breakup than Duncan did was willing to go in there and do the work required to get done with that. He also realized what had gone wrong, like really quickly, instead of like wallowing in his own self pity or trying to distort reality to sort of, just sort of be more easily digestible. You know, like it was all her. She's crazy. Yeah, he sort of, he saw the whole thing. It's a twist on it. He didn't put any twist on it. He saw his part in it as well as the other one. And then from then he went on to become a successful comedian. I mean, it's crazy. It's just like a slow build from there. He caught caught that momentum, but it was a lot of it was based on doing going that in that tank, having those experiences on a daily basis. It's a fantastic system for people to then, you know, access themselves. Yeah. I mean, and that, you know, the rest of it is, you know, it's a, it's a crap shoot. You really never know what you're going to run into in there. But you do always have that opportunity to look at yourself. And, you know, and sometimes I don't even do that. Sometimes I just relax. Sometimes there are times where like, you know, I'll come home and maybe I come home from a show and everyone's a sleep. And I said, yeah, I just need to go in there and chill for a bit. And I'm just going there and just chill. Like, I'm done. I'm tired. I did work. I did shows. I did a podcast. I did some writing. I maybe even worked out already too. I don't have nothing to think about. I just want to chill. And so I go in there. I just the check out loading man. Less the, the, the lightning of the load, the releasing of all those muscles. And I get out of there. And I feel so good. I feel so like calm and chill. So important, man. It should be everywhere. They should have them. Every gym should have them. Community center should have them. School should have them. University should have them. It should be just as important as having a basketball court. You got a basketball court. But you don't have a tank. The fuck you guys, are you teaching people shit? You know, you need to get a goddamn tank room, son. Well, we're going to, I think that we're going to do that what we can do to make that all happen. You know, these schools and stuff that these kids are at once again, you know, if things go the way that we, we hope they go, we're all about, uh, providing these vehicles for, uh, schools and, you know, old people or veterans or these veterans get a lot of benefit out of this too. They get that PSD, whatever it is. He's he's tea. Yeah, they post traumatic stress disorder. They, they say that the chamber is, is the one thing that helps them up. You know, they, they're all getting the, you know, the medication and so forth. But other than that, they don't really have an option, you know, and so this is a thing that would be very appropriate to offer these, these, uh, servicemen and women that come back in, uh, have, uh, troubles dealing with, uh, the framework of their situation when they get back here. Absolutely. Opportunity to go in there and investigate the, uh, you know, because it's already done. You can't go in there and erase whatever it was that's bothering you, but you could go in there and come to terms with whatever it was realizing it is. It's done. It is what it was. Just like any other problem that people go back to, I mean, at some point, it's up to you to release yourself from that obligation to get upset or feel bad about something that didn't go right in the past, you know, and that's a huge point because people define themselves by the past. Instead of thinking about who they are now, instead of they, they still look back at a mistake they made and don't just get past that mistake, grow and learn, but dwell on it. Think it defines them. It's the worst thing. I met some guys in bandies. It's a singer. I've only met him twice two different times years later. Both times he started telling me about the story about what happened to him when he was in this, anything in this poor guy has gone on all these years. And he's still focused on the worst situation that you ever had to live through. Yeah. And he's so attached to it. Well, some guys get one breakup and they're done. Some guys one breakup in their 20s will tank them for a decade. I've met guys like that that, yeah, you know, I came out here with Sally and you know, she fucking fell in love with her trainer and dude, Sally still move on. What is that? 10 fucking years ago. Well, you know, change my life, bro, but I tell you, so at this point, I can't trust women anymore. Oh, you stupid fuck. You know, what if he got mugged by one person who done trust in people? If you get exactly. I mean, one person was a murderer. Let's not trust anybody. Yeah. Yeah. I heard about Ted Bundy. I'm not trusting people anymore. Okay, great. I'm not sleeping tonight. We yeah, I mean, there's definitely pit falls in life. You're going to run into them. We all are. No, you can learn and grow if you survive. You pick yourself up, you dust the dust off and then you start going. Yeah, I don't let this stuff. Don't let it beat you down. It's also directly proportionate to the amount of hardships that people face in life. Their ability to face hardships. You know, and there's a lot of folks that live life on a cushy cloud of marshmallows and bullshit. And then one day, something goes wrong. And I mean, that's why spoiled kids are so sad. Like a spoiled young boy is one of the saddest things ever. A young boy that becomes a man and can't take care of himself and his dad has to keep on rescuing him. His dad has to keep on bailing him out of situations and giving him money. I've meant guys like that. And that is a crippling affliction when they don't have the character themselves to be able to get by in life. They constantly need someone to help them and bail them out. Even as a grown man, I've met guys in their forties that still need help from their parents. I'm like, what the fuck, man? You're never going to get it right because somewhere along the line, they didn't face enough of the adversity to realize that there's sometimes you just got to get up and get shit done. There's sometimes we have to fucking pull yourself up and you have to push forward even if you want to stay in bed. And if you don't do that, you just keep calling on your daddy and your daddy keeps rescuing you, you never develop those tools. You never develop that ability to recognize what you're doing wrong with your life. Because you're soft, you got a cushion, you got a safety net, a safety net for your safety net. I have this friend and she has this, this friend that she's been friends with for decades and this poor fuck, his family super, super, super wealthy, like unbelievable wealthy billions of dollars. And he had, not only did he had, he had a trust fund and a backup trust fund. So he blew through the trust fund and then he blew through the backup trust fund real estate investments and just disastrous business ventures, no character, no discipline, no ability to stick it out. But incredible amount of resources. He had millions and millions of dollars just pissed it all away. Didn't understand it completely depressed. And one day he sat door, he said, you know, because she has children as well and she has sons. He said, door, he goes, whatever you do, do not give your kids money. Don't give them a fucking penny. You go, especially your boys, don't give them a penny. That ruined me. Don't give money. I was like, wow, that's deep shit to be a man like in your late 40s looking back at your life. This disaster wreckage that you put forth with the millions you've blown. Now he has like a retail job. It's parents fucking abandon them. I mean, you look at that and you go, whoa, this is wild shit, man. The guy is still struggling from the way he was developed from the tools that were instilled in him at childhood and in, you know, in adolescence and having that safety net just provided him with a way to stay in bed, kept him weak. Never developed character. Yeah. Or the, uh, have an opportunity. Every time things go wrong, every time things feel terrible, you have an opportunity to learn from whatever makes you feel terrible and never allow it to happen again. Exactly. Yeah. Thank you. That's forward. Don't don't do it again. Yeah. You know, learn from your mistakes. We all make them. That's where meditation comes in, recognizing that and solidifying it in your head. And I believe meditation, the tank, which is a more magnifying form of meditation. I think it's more intense. And I think that you can, you could really get something out of that. If with those sort of ideas in your mind about constant consistent improvement and that's only the only thing that you'll allow from yourself is to maintain a certain standard, then consistently try to improve and do that. Do that. And you'll be happy a person. That's an amazing concept there to become a part of to where you're involved in your, the construction of your own character. Yes, through your own efforts and your own evaluation. And then to to make the right steps and make the right decisions that to become even stronger as you go. Yeah, engineering your life. It can be done. You know, it's not impossible. You can, I mean, you can do it to a certain extent, certain extent, you can do it. The world could be a better place crash. Right. It's becoming a better place. It's becoming a better place. But everybody's part air is to do is to hopefully make it a little bit better. You know, if we could all get on that, just do that together, try to make things a little bit better. Just a little bit better. It would really have a monsters effect. I agree. And I want to thank you. I want to thank you for coming on the podcast and talking about the stuff. And I really want to thank you for being this guy who's out there innovating in this, you know, almost forgotten business. Because for me, knowing you has been very important, it's helped me a lot and knowing your tanks and being aware of that, you know, there's a guy out there that's pushing it so far and it's created this incredible portal. I think of it. I mean, I know what it is. It's a tank filled with water. I know there's a heater attached. And I know there's filters. And I know, but for me, it's a portal. I get in that fucking thing. And I transform. I travel. I go to places. Yeah. It doesn't move. Mental vehicle takes you somewhere. Yeah, it does. It opens up passages in your mind that take you to some pretty extraordinary places. So thank you, my brother. Thank you, Joe. You've, you know, then monumental in my life. And I want to thank you, you know, from the bottom of my heart that well, we found each other, man. That's what that's how that's supposed to work. You know, you know, we, we both let people understand what the benefits of these things are. And we both benefit from them as well. And our generous with those ideas and spread those ideas to other people, just let them know, man, I'm not making this up. You can, you can really get better. Yeah, your life can fuck it. And the people who you, if you're perfect right now, who are you, who you you strange fuck, but I really believe everyone, everyone, everyone can benefit from that everyone. So if you guys want to go, the float lab is booked up Brock solid deep into August. But the, the Brentwood one, who knows one, it'll be open. Hopefully Westwood, excuse me, you got Brentwood. Westwood, what's the difference? Where's Westwood? You see a light? Okay, where's Brentwood? Brentwood is, I always confused those just realized, which one's more posh? Which one is where, um, Brentwood? Brentwood is where OJ killed the allegedly had real posh. It's very posh. That's why it's quite shocking. I've not allowed that, that neck of the way they don't let you in. No, I can't. I'll talk to somebody. Anyway, um, so we'll, we'll let you know when Westwood opens up, we'll let you know on the podcast. Meanwhile, you can follow crash on Twitter. It's the float lab is the website for, uh, for the float lab itself. And you guys have an Instagram too. Then we do the, uh, Facebook float lab technologies float lab technologies on Facebook. Please like that and follow and all that good stuff. And we're going to have that chamber to do something with your sooner than your future. Cool. My old chamber will figure out some sort of a contest and give that bit your way. We'll be the second time of giving away a chamber. I'm very excited about that. All right, ladies and gentlemen, we'll be back tomorrow with the full charge. Matt full trial and will be in the house. And, uh, that's it. All right. So then much love, big kiss.