Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day What's happening chaos I love everything yeah the world's crazy center of the store I think I think the world's back at war today again like officially right I don't think that agreement with Iran lasted at all I think there was bombings today in Lebanon and I think there's bombings today in American bases I try to not pay attention to it I really do I try to distract myself with the science stuff and space I was watching this documentary yesterday on how they make chips like how they make like semiconductor chips dude this fucking machine that they use I'm gonna send you this Jamie cuz it's bananas it's like one of most complex machines in the world and this this machine they use to make semiconductors make chips and they were explaining the process of making these chips how fucking nuts it is man the the amount of atoms that are stacked on and like the way they do it to make these like super complex high-end chips there's people out there Tony that are doing things way different than us okay what we're talking about suck and dick people shitting themselves and what's going on in other parts of the world is people are doing science fiction like they're they're actually doing science fiction here it is give me a second I like to save things here it is the world's most important machine yes you find it yeah but just go to the there's some animation where they show how they make these things like it was right where you were at yeah okay oh okay so they're just showing some of the the different aspects of how these things are made let go back to where that guy had the laser beam that's perfect actually where that guy had the laser beam so this is him explaining this so one lee this back it up a little bit and give me some volume let's get back it up a little bit please you're gonna introduce it to you with a thought experiment imagine you are shrunk down to the sides of an end and you're given a laser that's strong enough to melt through metal like butter next a tiny droplet of molten tin roughly the size of a white blood cell is shut out in front of you around 250 kilometers per hour and your task is to hit this nut once nut twice but three times in a row in 20 microseconds with your little laser well that is exactly what this machine does it hits one tiny tin droplet three times in a row eating each one up to over 220 thousand Kelvin that's roughly 40 times hotter than the surface of the sun and it doesn't just hit one droplet it hits 50 thousand droplets every single second how often the a misa laser shot we don't miss them what you do 150 thousand laser shots a second then you don't miss one exactly the same machine also contains mirrors that might just be the smoothest objects in the universe if you skill one up to the size of the earth then the largest bump would be no thicker than a playing card what that is able to overlay one layer of a chip perfectly on top of another and never be off by more than five atoms and this is all happening while parts of the machine whip around at accelerations of over 20 geez for 30 years almost everyone thought that actually building this machine was impossible and yet it exists there is only one company in the world that can make it so why does this company and what is this impossible machine they've built this video is that's a wow yeah what are they doing with that all computers like computer chips that are getting better and better and better all these AI chips this is how they make up one interesting thing I can just add I know when they make those they make a big sheet of chips you know like there'll be like 30 or 50 oh them they'll test each one and the ones that are the best but test like one out of 100 ones that are like closest to 100 become like the I nine chip and if it's like eighty five out of 100 it becomes like the nice seven chip oh they all come off the same sheet it's like the best ones become the best chips they sell them for the most money no kidding interesting so we're there was that issue with that Samsung chip factory and it was about they weren't getting the results that they wanted so it's probably they were getting more the shitty chips yeah they're not enough of the perfect chips they want really high-end chips and it's the real you could talk we have a fan in your sweet yeah I mean imagine if everybody died and it was just us in this room and there was like three late well be more than that we'd have to have more people otherwise I'm gonna fuck up the gene pool we're all gonna look like the English Royals we need we probably need a few thousand people if few thousand people like regular people like you and I that don't know shit about how these things work yeah how much time would we need if we repopulated the earth with what we know basically you start now like a fucking like a half-assed prepper you know like someone was on an episode of lost you know like a one of those plane crash people trying to figure out how to survive out there you're fucked oh yeah you're not inventing that how one's gonna take infinity and how many people have to pave the way this is the thing for every one of these people that makes an invention like this you're making this on the back of thousands and thousands and thousands of fucking super geniuses that have figured out each and every step of the way that can lead you to thinking is this possible that we could do this next you know they all build on each other so you need all these guys and hopefully they don't get any pussy otherwise they're gonna get distracted you know I bet if one of them gets a hot wife like one of their patents kicks and they start making bank and then also it shows up for working for Rory the next you know he's got a hot wife ever like oh my god yeah civilization just went back yeah two hundred years we're gonna lose Tim yeah Tim's Tim's taking a half a roll coding eighteen hours a day trying to figure out to get us to Mars actually that's a bad point because Elon clearly gets pussy and doesn't seem to be affecting him at all I think Elon's different he's definitely different yeah I mean some people are different different it's fascinating how many people want to find flaws in what he's doing instead of just looking at this like wow this is an extraordinary time to be alive but it's because of this narrative that people have one of them the big one is this USA is killing people narrative that people have died because of USA then a bunch of people have given examples of how them cutting the funding has led to the end of certain people's lives like whether they're in hospitals that didn't have any funding and there's a lot of that that you could point to say right if they had the money they would have the funding and they would have that equipment in place or maybe they wouldn't have but here's the other thing that's not discounting the fact that a lot of that money is fraud yeah a lot of it like it's not a little amount and the idea that you should let it go on because it's gonna save lives and there's a bunch of people that are stealing money okay I see that argument but why are we sending the money in the first place like what's did we do something to them do we owe them money no okay we're just being nice are you sure we're just being nice is there anybody profiting a boss off of us being nice because usually just being nice for no reason and just giving tax money away for no reason I don't think they do that I don't think that's real I used to think that was real I used to think that charity was real and now I look at I go oh no no no no no no this is a giant scam that's wrapped up in virtue it's wrapped up in a nice cozy blanket of being kind and compassionate and virtuous and doing good things for people all around the world I think a lot of people getting involved in those things because that's what they think we're gonna do good things around the world good people I really believe that and then they find out how it really works and then they get stuck in that system and then they're making their way up their you know air quotes corporate ladder to the point where some of them are making a million dollars a year and you know like what is this yeah what is this this is a business this isn't really charity most of the money is going to your employees you're overhead and you're why is it's a big building like what are you doing right how come you not just funneling the money to these people exactly would it like the LA fire aid yeah great example Spencer Pratt told me how many what number did he say of non-profits got that money it's over a hundred million dollars gets raised I don't know the exact total all of it goes to these different nonprofits I think he said 200 different nonprofits got the money yeah so and then what happens to that well they just paid their employees they pay overhead they pay their rent on fucking nice office on wherever they live fuck man it's so disheartening because you've so that's what all that stuff is and it's also if you listen to wait when Mike Benz has been on my podcast a few times and explains USA it people think of it as aid you think of it as oh we're helping the world which is great right but it's not that it's the agency for international development and it involves funding rap bands overseas that are the subversive rap bands that are supposed to excite people to take over the government there's like a bunch of like weird shit funds rebels it funds newspapers and what was he talking about like there was a lot of it like funding rap music like this is crazy people have long said that rap music even though listen you love hip hop I know you just got back from Kanye West I'm a huge hip hop fan we got to talk about that it's we definitely do I love hip hop but there's some people that believe that gangsta rap in particular when it came about in the 1980s was a part of the push to popularize it and produce it was a part of the government some faction the government some faction some intelligence agencies wanting to create more crime wanting to fill more private prisons wanting to erode the fabric of society so they could push for more laws to keep you safer this is like the one of the most ten-foil of ten-foil hack conspiracies but people are pointing out that right now it's like one of the rare times where no rap music is on the charts yeah and they're saying well how does this coincide with USA was USA like actively promoting rap music was that one of the reasons why rap music was so possible pop-up popular is that real that can't be real maybe back in the day it seems like that would be more manipulative I don't see I believe that until I heard mumble rap unlike this makes this is not real this is trying to make people stupid yeah there's there's something about this you know and obviously some artists are better at it than some of them are fun the way they do it but I'm saying there's a giant chunk of them that are inaudible you don't know what them like who's who's into this oh I'm almost all of them are inaudible like what what's going on there imagine if that that was it it was like people heard nods and like this guy's too smart we got to dumb it down a little right we got to promote some people they could barely talk yeah we got to promote some people that are on cough syrup apparently yeah that's what have you ever done that cost it cough syrup no they seem to love it yeah a lot of dudes you're into that that cough syrup man they they swear by it it's crazy it's got to be fun it's got to be enjoyable is it coding is that what they're doing I think so have you done it Jamie but we talked about this before but I remember back in the 90s I got a hold of some Nyquil the real Nyquil like I guess they changed the formula for Nyquil and I had you know whatever the flu or something and I took some Nyquil and I was laying in bed I was like this is wonderful yeah it was wonderful like though just the warmth the softness of the pillows and the warmth of the bed with the covers of me like oh this is wonderful and I remember thinking oh this is dangerous yeah like this is a dangerous feeling because if your life we shit and you found that like that's better than anything else that's happening in your life yeah and you can get it at CVS crazy who is in the old Nyquil before they switched it I avoid that stuff like the plague I'm afraid of medicine so this stuff probably was like sitting in my house if I took it so it might even been older than 97 or 98 whenever this was an oh sick but I'll never forget it because I never get like getting scared like I could love this like I could just drink this during the day and just like sit on my back porch if I have the day off yeah just get obliterated with Nyquil and just enjoy the universe I told you about that time I took a half of the pain pill that the dentist gave me for my wisdom tooth I was like oh fuck this is life-changing it says the earliest Nyquil formula include effigerin which is a decongestin Doxy am docs doxilamine Sousinate which is an anisamine acetaminophen Dxtro meth methorfan coughs a present and about 25% alcohol I was getting drunk too Wow What changed in the mid 2000s after the combat methamphetamine at there it is They've removed pseudo effigerin so is that the stuff so it wasn't coding but is there and I think there is Nyquil with coding though right what I had was pretty good I don't think it was as simple yeah you had the stuff they can make math out of or whatever yeah okay we'll put it in perplexity and perplexity says in the mid-tooth yeah Nyquil brand sold in US do not contain coding and there's never been a standard vix Nyquil with coding and it's active ingredient line up typical Nyquil form so coding so does any cough syrup have coding in it lean as they add it or is it just prescription cough syrup that was the whole thing about it maybe I am fucking up my memory and maybe it wasn't Nyquil because whatever it was it seemed like I got fucked up off Nyquil be it to drink like the whole bottle you get Nyquil like just get fucked up I definitely didn't drink the whole bottle I know I took a dose like a strong dose I didn't mean to use you getting fucked up off 25% off on a little bit of a maybe a little bit of a sidemap see the thing is it's so long ago I can't remember I say Nyquil because it's like saying Q-tips you know or Kleenex just because it's tissues or ear swabs I don't know if it was Nyquil but it was cough syrup whatever the fuck it was and I felt wonderful and I remember thinking like this could be a real problem like that one day in back because I'm always scared of stuff like that I'm always scared to get I knew too many people when I was growing up they got hooked on stuff and it just derailed their life so lying about I was like oh you can't do this again no more of this right I like it yeah yeah I got a knee surgery once they gave me morphine they made morphine in a drip and they say that you can only hit that button so many times it stops giving to you yeah but every time you feel pain you can just hit the button because I was on like a perpetual motion machine yeah so my life's going and I'm just bang bang bang bang we yeah this episode is brought to you by zipper croeter we all like to find ways to save ourselves some time like ordering out for dinner or meal prepping so you don't have to cook during the week if you're a business owner looking to hire a great time saving hack is zipper croeter it's news feature lets you meet the most interested qualified candidates first try it out free at zipper croeter dot com slash rogan and it doesn't just let you meet candidates faster you can hear why they're interested in their own words save time and meet great candidates sooner with zipper croeter four at a five employers who post on zipper croeter get a quality candidate within the first day try it for free at zipper croeter dot com slash rogan that zipper croeter dot com slash rogan meet your match on zipper croeter the closest I come to that because I've never had like a serious surgery or anything but I go to this up they have a dental office here in Austin called the Austin dental spa so their whole thing is like a luxurious dental experience and they will hook you up the laughing gas and they let you like if they're like they're like you want a little more and I'm like okay yeah and that's like the closest I get to it is once every six months or so I go there and dude I'm always excited about this fucking experience it is so awesome give a couple of bits after doing laughing gas no but give me any idea no but during the thing it makes me weirdly honest you ever seen in kill bill when he shoots her in the knee with the honest gun because he was a chemist for like a living it's like a secret job so he comes up with this truth serum and I've noticed that it makes me like weirdly very honest so one time when I was in the dental office the guy's doing whatever and I'm like and I'm jacked on laughing gas because it's not really you're not really like cracking up you're just like in heaven and you're like it's kind of smiling ear to ear and I remember going like how long did you go to school for dental school he's like whatever the answer is like eight years and like did you ever think about going longer and becoming a real doctor and I realized like kind of in the moment even though I was fucked up like that sounds mean but I think they're totally used to it I think they know that laughing gas makes people fucking I'm but they're not used to that dude that's so mean that's what I'm saying is it's like a dangerous real doctor a dangerous truth serum some people want to be done yeah we need him too yeah you know crazy gig yeah it's a weird one I know he much I was bad breath they smell oh and just weird things lodged in teeth for God only knows how long when I got my root canal one of the reason why I had to get it is because I had a cap on my tooth or a filler whatever it is what's it called fill out no the one they just fill your tooth up why why can't I'm fillings why do I say filler whatever yeah it was an old school one you know I was like white plastic and when I was a kid I used to have them they were like fucking lead these give you lead fillings which is crazy like kids had lead in their mouth and it was hurting it was bothering me so what it happened was I had cracked the tooth and it had gotten infected underneath the filling so it takes the filling out and drills into it and the smell that came out of my mouth it was it was pus all this pus came out and this fucking horrific smell I was like oh my god is that coming out of my mouth yeah he's like how's that's normal it's okay just an infection under here we're gonna treat it you're gonna be fine yeah piece of elk from seven years ago does a long time this is a long time ago is before I was hunting I think but it was uh I you know people die from that stuff which is really crazy like if you don't take care of your teeth and you get that kind of infection those kind of infections can become septic yeah well it's nuts sometimes I'll do a thing where I'll water floss after I brush my teeth just to see what would have been left in there if I just did what normal humans do because I'm a bunch of shit that I pressure water flossers that I fucking love complete game changer for life and it's insane what will jet out of there we've got stuck deep in between the teeth and everything and you know I think you're I would for the most part I do it before I brush but everyone so I'll be like I wonder if there's anything left in there you know yeah you have to floss yeah you're gonna get a bunch of shit stuck in there but and even then sometimes I'll regular floss and then brush my teeth and just out of curiosity go I wonder if there's anything left in there and I'll do a one silver with a water flosser and you see like think think think three little things come out it's like that would have marinated in between my teeth or in the back of my gum line or whatever yeah that's not good but according to my dentist he thinks it's all sugar he thinks if you go back and you look at like when people started developing serious cavities it's you know the people have always had abscesses and broken teeth there's always been like dental problems that haunted people because back in the day man they just pull the tooth out and then who knows what kind of infection you still have in there and they don't treat it in the 1700s if you broke your tooth and got an infection you could be fucking dead you know you could die from that shit but he was saying that the the amount of cavities like steeply increased when people started putting sugar and everything and then kids are drinking sugary sodas and eating sugary candy and that stuff gets stuck in your teeth he's like I think that's the cause of it yeah and probably high fructose corn syrup is probably just as bad or if not worse than actual sugar that's not good for your body that's for sure your body doesn't like it someone explained to me what's the difference in the absorption of high fructose corn syrup versus a natural cane sugar I completely forget how they explained it but they were they were basically saying that there's some issues with how the body breaks it down wait when you drink a soda just think about that where in nature do you get 20 grams of sugar just in liquid form and you just pump it down glug glug glug glug glug glug glug oh refreshing crazy my buddy that I went to school with just flew in from Hawaii which is where he's lived for like 20 years he's like he's like wilderness guy climbs trees and cuts down his own pineapples and coconuts and stuff all the time he's he's got a great life and he he checked a bag this trip just a few days ago and he brought it to the mothership because that's where we met up and he surprised me with this checked bag that was like that had the moldings built in and everything and had four coconuts and two white Hawaiian pineapples I think they're called which like run like $65 each or something in the US like it's impossible to get and according to him I don't know uh he's a real hippie dippy type is that the dude that you brought to the mothership yeah yeah yeah yeah you're friend from high school yep which is crazy yeah he's the he's the man he's just a real dude that's crazy when you know people for that long yeah yeah and so this dude is just living in Hawaii living your best life and I mean holy shit these fucking pineapples he's like dude you're going to love this pineapple pineapple pineapple he just kept going on about it I'm like all right okay sure enough holy fucking shit man it's nature can deliver you a sugar dose because he was saying that white Hawaiian pineapples have higher sugar but much lower acidity than what we're used to so it makes a whole different and since obviously it's natural sugar in this and that it just makes a whole different type of fucking fruit it's crazy sounds good wild how we have to go other places to unbelievable shit well of course why yeah Hawaii really should be its own country yeah I listen I love Hawaii I'm glad they're protected by the United States people are cool as fuck it should be its own country it's five hours by plane yeah come on man white pineapples primarily known as sugar loaf or white jade pineapples highly prized rare variety grown in Hawaii unlike standard yellow they feature creamy white flesh particularly practically no acidity yeah and a complex completely edible core it was great and fucking he climbs a goddamn tree like a little fucking monkey boy normal little white dude how did he bond up in Hawaii he's a real free spirit he always was I think he just went out there visited and stayed he's the kind of guy it just gets a one-way ticket places and fingers it out as he goes he's in Youngstown right now that shows you how adventurous and crazy he's like I'm gonna spend a week and a half there I'm like a week and a half in Youngstown why is he doing that visit family and friends you sound is there a good hotel to stay out and y'all and I even had to look this up recently because I'm like I'm not staying at the crazy hotel that I stayed at last time I was there so I'm like best hotel in Youngstown and the funniest thing is the actual closest option was in Pennsylvania like 50 minutes away true I mean there's one like double tree downtown but it's an in area of absolute chaos I mean just death wish do you ever go back there and go I can't believe I grew up here always 100% of the time I got a feeling for it immediately when I went to LA and I didn't hear police sirens anymore like as often at least you know what I mean the stuff when I like LA with LA crime that's what I always thought my god this is gonna be crazy I've heard these two-pox songs like this is gonna be nuts and it was USA so peaceful yeah exactly so peaceful in Youngstown at least when I was growing up there you could hear a police siren or an ambulance siren almost at any point of the day god my buddy sent me a recently to another one buddy that has the stats on it of us being the murder capital I think it was 90 91 and 96 per capita not the biggest population but per capita it was the most dangerous place you could be when I was in those most developmental years when kids shouldn't be having his head next to the window yeah there it is I got that shirt wow four-time defending champion murder capital of America wow yep in O 102 that puts me as a sophomore in junior in high school and you 95 97 I'm 11 12 and you've been raised by your mom yeah on the north on the craziest fucking area of the whole goddamn thing the most dilapidated part of the north side of Youngstown yeah I can't believe it that's why like every part of my fucking story I'm like this is so god damn weird so weird it is when you think about it right when you really stop and think about it it's been real 60 years ago this Ohio City was named crime town USA yeah crime town I believe my bombings yep oh this is the mob days yeah so used to be a mob run town right totally they were called bomb town yeah it was a youngstown tune up is a car bomb look at this 75 bombings 11 killings in a decade and no one seems to care they were so nuts in Youngstown that somebody tried to kill the actual prosecutor the actual DA well isn't that normal will they always try to do that well it's kind of the stupidest craziest thing you could do because then the entire FBI comes down on you it's a little short-sighted to go we're gonna kill the main cop of this city and not think that anything's going to happen from that well we beat the game you beat the main cop I'm trying to be an intelligent businessman and also a mob leader imagine like playing things out in advance and but also you're a mob leader there was a lot of that going on and I got to see quite a bit of it like there were let's put it this way mall developers in Youngstown and things like that and I got to see firsthand very young that they were communicating with politicians at lunch time and stuff because I was working at this little Italian restaurant at the time right out of high school and and having they were having these quiet meetups and a quiet in the corner of a quiet Italian restaurant and you would see these huge mogles you know I won't name any names but big business people in Youngstown meeting with the local this and that in congressman I got to meet that congressman in that congressman because they're there meeting with these super duper rich people and I'm like wonder what the correlation is there bro back then when there was no cell phones yeah and you know they had a bug people they have that a literally bug businesses to get information like they were all doing something oh yeah you couldn't be involved in any big-time business if you weren't down with the teamsters if you were in down with a longshoremen yeah yeah we gotta we gotta work this out Bobby we're businessman that's how you did to business give a little money Yeah, you gotta work this out Bobby. We're businessman. That's how you did to business. Give a little money to their campaign, not a little, but a bit, and then you can get your stuff passed and make life easier down the road. Dude, I had friends that had no show jobs. Wow. Yeah. I had a friend that had a no show job in New York at the Javits Center. You know, the Javits Center is like a big convention center. He had a union no show job. Wow. So he was a mob guy. Yeah. And they just gave him money. He's getting free check on the Sopranos. They had those no. Well, this real show construction jobs are sitting there with their portable fans. Yeah, no, that's real, dude. That is a real thing. There's, they get a certain amount of jobs. Like they would make agreements. Like they union would make an agreement. You get a certain amount of these jobs. It's like, you know, it's crazy. It's really a hundred jobs, but we won 130. Youngstown was a haven for organized crime, related corruption was ingrained into the fabric of its society. A 2000 publication, New Republic listed a chief of police, the outgoing prosecutor, the sheriff, the county engineer, members of the local police force, a city law director, several defense attorneys, politicians, judges, and a former assistant US attorney as controlled by the mob. So if they have that, if they found that for sure, imagine how many others there are. Right. That's everybody. That's everybody. The prosecutor, the sheriff, the county engineer, the police force, city law director, defense attorneys, imagine not being down with the mob. Like do you want to stay alive? Like do you want to work in this business? Right. And this is a city. I think we looked it up the other day actually. I think it only has 25,000 white people. So knowing that black people tend to not be in the Italian mob, just going off of 25,000. And that's current. I don't know what it was back in the day. But the point is it's not a big city. It's not. I think 50,000. 60,000 half or less white. So there's doubt me. Yeah. There's a little Tony watching, pro wrestling. Oh yeah. Pro wrestling. And even then, I was obsessed with good fellows and a Bronx tale and a Godfather. Cause it's like, it's just what your taught is humanity. Like that's life. Yeah. So getting out of that and going to LA and thinking it was going to be all, that's going to be crazy. Gangs and stuff. And it's just quiet. Granted, I started in Burbank, which is a fucking television studio essentially. But when I moved to New Jersey and I didn't have any money, when I first moved to New York, I couldn't afford to live in New York City. Or I didn't even have a apartment. I stayed with my grandparents. Cause my grandfather lived in New Jersey in Newark. And he bought a house there. And I think it was like the 1940s. And they did a thing called block busting. Do you know what block busting is? They would go to door to door and they would say, black people are moving to the neighborhood. You got to sell now and everybody sold. It used to be entirely Italian neighborhood. And he was like, I like black people. Get the fuck out of here. And he kept his house. But it was like one of very few families that stayed. And then, black people moved out. And then they started getting different people's Spanish speaking people, like Dominicans and a bunch of them. And that's how it was when I stayed with them. So this is like 991? Yeah, I was three years in the comedy. So it's probably 91. And while I was living with them, the next door neighbor's house got broken into by the cops. The DEA smashed down his door, threw down an Audi parked in a driveway and selling crack. Like right next door to my grandpa. The whole neighborhood was just nuts dude. Like he would get really nervous when I would leave. Like I would leave to go play pool somewhere. And he would be careful. I'd be like, who's fucking sketchy? Yeah. But it didn't used to be. Like when he first moved there, it was just an all Italian neighborhood. Yeah. Real estate people, even back. I'm like, what a dirty thing to do. Scare people into moving. That's probably the first project of USAID. That's probably the first. Yeah. Yeah. They've probably got real estate people to destroy neighborhoods. There's something to it. I don't know the correlation of Italian neighborhoods being taken over, not taken over, but whatever, by black people. Like mob-run cities like Youngstown, like Chicago, like Detroit. It's an interesting anomaly. I wonder if there's any correlation between the things. Well, you know, most of the Italians that came in the early 20th century were very poor. They were all coming over here for labor or jobs and things along those lines. And when they started doing better, they started moving out and moving into the suburbs and moving into more gentrified areas. It's always one of the new immigrants that are going to come and take over this area that was like formerly a low-income Italian neighborhood or a low-income Irish neighborhood. It's the same thing. There's cycles. It's like there's cycles in fighting, too. In the early 20th century, there's a lot of Jewish fighters, like Slappy, Maxie, Rose and Blumie never heard of him. Very good Jewish fighters because they were poor and they were the new immigrants. And this is like before World War II. And then even afterwards, there was some. But then you get Italians. You get a lot of Italians. You get Rocky Marciano, Rocky Grotciano. There's a lot of like Jake Lamada. There's a lot of these Italian bad motherfuckers because they were poor. And then what happened then you got a lot of Puerto Ricans, a lot of, you know, it's always like who's the new immigrants? And who are the most hungry come from the most poverty-ridden areas like Roberto Duran came from a terrible part of Panama, like not terrible, but I mean like very poor, very violent. And it was one of the badest motherfuckers. Boom, boom man. See, he was right down the street. Yep. Yeah. I mean, Youngstown's known for boxing. Yeah. Kelly Pavlick. Kelly Pavlick, who's been on the podcast. He's awesome. He was a beast dude. Oh man. That fight with him, Jermaine Taylor. Holy sht. Sometimes I still re-watch the end of that. How did he survive? Give me a burst of energy. I mean, how did he make it through? That was a crazy kind. I mean, he'd got dropped. He looks like the fight was over. And then when he's got him in the corner and he rocks him, and he'd go no way. He's coming back. This is crazy. This is the Juwacha, the fights this weekend. John Boot Dennis. And I forget the dude who was fighting. No, I was at that concert. I missed it. Boot's is very good. And for the most party beat is asked. But the third round, he got rocked. The third round was incredible. Because the kitty was fighting. Who's the gentleman that he was fighting? James. Zias. Yeah. Young kid. He got dropped in the second round, pretty bad. Boot's is very good. He's one of the best boxers alive. And then the third round, the kid came back and rocked Boot's. And it was just a war. Just the third round was incredible. Boot's wound up stopping him. I think he stopped him in the seventh or the eighth round. He just dropped him one last time. And the corner called it. It was enough. He was getting his ass kicked. But he was very, very valiant. It was a really good fight. Like Boot's is better than him. Like clearly, he's on another level. But this kid showed just tremendous heart. But it's like that third round was just coming back from getting dropped in the second. Like those kind of moments where guys getting fucked up, like the gate sheet to purify. Perfect example. Yeah. That's when it's really a fight. A real fight. Because to a purio was on him in that second round. Oh, man. We were so close. They were in. They were in. They, oh, you could feel it. Where I was, man. And obviously we're always close to the cage on those things. But when Gabriel was landing those body shots, it was right against our side of the fence. And I'm literally like, oh, I mean, holy fucking shit, man. And I've seen a lot of people get ripped at the body before. But there's something about his close range strength in near that clinch that close up fucking range of elia that is scary. He's so good, dude. He's so good. And he's so precise. He just tried to like, I always repeat this because the trail sun and said it was perfect. If you try to win by knockout and fail, you won't win a decision. And sometimes you just run out of gas. Because like you're not supposed to fight like that. If you think that the fight's going to go five rounds, like Elia had him hurt and he's like, I can take him out. But Justin's so durable, man. He's so durable. And that left hook to the body, the sound of it, man. It's just whip. It's so perfect. He throws perfect punches. His punches are just, even Justin said it in the post-fight interview, like when he's fresh, his skills are unmatched. Like that's a crazy thing to say to a guy who just beat up and made stop. He stopped him in the fourth round. Yeah. That's crazy to say, like his skills are unmatched, but they really are. Oh, every point of that, at every point of that, anybody I think that knows anything about those two fighters is going until this is stopped. Anybody can win this. Like even when his face was blown up and his eyes looked black and closed until that air horn rings, I'm like anything. One punch and we've seen him even with Gachi, you saw it with Holloway. Was it him? Who would he square up within the middle? Yes, Holloway, yes. Yes. I'm going to hit him with that final punch. One chin, one with one second left. It can all be over. Yeah, that was a little different in that. Holloway caught him with a jump spinning back kick to the face in the very last seconds of the first round and broke the bone of his nose. We talked about it on the podcast. And I was like, that changed that fight. Because before that, Gachi was pressing him and looked very competitive. And it looked like maybe Gachi had a slight advantage. But that's because Max, Max very clever. Very clever fighter. Like he's always switching stances and moving. And you know, really hadn't showed that's been back kick a lot. That hadn't been a feature in a lot of his fights. He did it a few times, but for him to land it that way, backing up, jumped to the face. I mean, it was perfect. It was perfect. And his nose was fucked. And if you're fighting with a broken bone on your face, every time you're getting hit, you're getting just blasted. The pain is insane. And then he was a step behind Max, Max's teeing off on him. He landed some good shots though. Even though it was a good fight. I mean, Max was definitely ahead in the fifth round, but it was a good fight. And then during that wild exchange, she shouldn't ever done that. Yeah, he was already fading whereas Max was still very fresh. Fucking crazy fight, man. Yeah, that was a crazy fight. I think Toperia's nose was broken and round two, I think it was pretty early on. And hard to say. Yeah. But Justin did clip him with a bunch of those uppercuts. So Justin does this thing where he like color ties you and then throws an uppercut in tight and he's really good at it. He's really good at like turning you a little and then throwing an uppercut in these exchanges. He color ties in uppercuts. He caught him a few times. And you just get one of those on the fucking nose, on the old Schnazole. This thing's so brittle. Yeah. It's such a, if you feel your nose, just feel it. Have you ever seen marobs nose? The X-ray of marobs nose? No. You never seen it? I sent it to you right, Jamie? Jamie will find it. It's crazy. Look at it, it looks like. Oh my God. Look at that. Oh, fuck. Bro, that thing is destroyed. I mean, it's destroyed. He's getting zero air out of that. He's got the best cardio on planet Earth and he's getting zero air out of his nose. Wow. But he won't get it fixed. Because if he gets it fixed, he can't fight for like a year and he just wants to keep on trucking. Yeah. That dude's a freak. I found this friend, I would say, dude, you got a lot of money. You're a world champion. Let's fix the nose. Let's fix it. Let's take a year off, come back and fuck these motherfuckers up. Because if that guy's got a fixed nose, he's got 10% more cardio. Are you crazy? Yeah. That's a 10% more cardio. That's an extra weapon. I would get it fixed. But the problem is if he gets it fixed and then like if he fights a guy like Halloween, he gets jump and it's spinning back to the nose in the first round and the shotter is again, then he's kind of fucked. Because if they have to fix it again, then they might have to start taking pieces of your rib out and reconstructing your nose and grafting bone and doing weird shit. And then sometimes that shit doesn't take and sometimes it gets infected. And then you have a bone infection on your face and what do they do that? Then they have to remove your nose. Is that what they have to do? Fuck God. Scary shit man, very much so. He's fucking dudes, man. That is a crazy job to risk your life, risk your health, risk your bones. You're making a living by trying to damage another person who's trying to damage you. Not. But it's also why it's the most exciting shit in the world to watch. Exactly. So exciting. Yeah. And it's a lot of, you know, seemed in comparison to MMA because there's less weapons, less options and your padding. Yeah. You don't get the chokeouts, the crazy chokeouts. There was a crazy choke out this weekend. His name is Ruzaboyev. And he fought, God, I always say his last name. He fought this Russian cat and got him, Russian or Ukrainian, I forgot. But he got him in a rear naked choke and put him to sleep. And it was one of those ones where the guy looks dead. He's like lying there. I mean, it was a fucking nasty choke, man. And yeah, and it's looking. Oh, yeah. I saw that. It was dark dude. It's another meme out this week, along with the W.A.M. Pooler of Point Day. That's his name. Bro's nuts. The memes on these things are nuts nowadays. The internet is undefeated. Oh, it's crazy. They're so good at memes. There's so many people out there working jobs that they hate that are smart and funny. Yep. We were talking about it the other day, but you've kind of caught up with any of those W.M.B.A. What's their name? The girl that's pointing at her. Sophie Cunningham. Yeah. Yeah. I've been paying, keep with that thing in the middle. Put those. Ashtrane in the middle. I've been paying attention very little. But one of the things that I did watch is all the vowels. Like these bitches throw each other to the ground. And they poke each other in the eyes. Like they do this. They literally jab each other in the eyes. It's crazy. Like they they foul and also they travel so much. Oh, it's crazy. They take like four or five steps and then no one calls them. Oh, yeah. Double, durable. Is there a trend now to not call traveling? Yes, without a doubt in the actual NBA. It's a thing too. There's a hard to get into this without going away and to do like the weeds. But the NBA has a technically different rule than college and like high school and everyone else where they're called a gather step. And they definitely would call it in high school. But they work all day manipulating it with a referee, watching them saying like you can do that, but you can't do that. You can do this, but you can't do that. And so like they've got it to a place where everything they're doing looks like traveling and dribble dribbles. But guys will break it down in slow mode. And you're like, well, technically it's not. Because weird. I always thought if you took a step, you had a balance of ball. Yeah. That's how it should be. You're allowed to. Doesn't it seem like that should be how it is? When you see guys taking four steps, you're like, what's going on? What do you want to see exciting basketball or not? Yeah. I do. All right. Well, then let the referee call the game. How they call it. But I think there's something exciting about you having to bounce that ball because you won't be able to score as much. Right? Correct. Well, if you have to bounce it every two steps, whatever it is. I wish I loved the NBA like I did when I was a kid and fucking Barkley and Jordan and Ewing and all these people were physical. It is just a whole different game now. It's so back then. Was it traveling? Like when the library bird days? Hell yeah. Unless Jordan talked to the ref and said, yo, you're wrong. Let me do what I want. Well, Jordan had the cheat code where he would leap from the fucking free throw line. That is so when I've watched videos without it, it doesn't even look real. He was such an amazing athlete. He was so good and so possessed by his desire to win. He would do things that you would just go, how does a person fly? Yeah. Dude, imagine if he was like one of those jumpers, those long distance jumpers, he probably been in the same jump because he's going from the free throw line in the air. That's crazy. Everything he did was crazy. The way he did things, the way he practiced, everything. Yeah. And did he not make his college team? Oh, that's a high school team. Wasn't there like one year? When he was a freshman, he didn't make the Varsity team. That's what I'm saying. Yeah, it's most freshman, don't. Perfect. May have changed basketball history forever. Most freshmen, though, that does make sense because they're not even developed yet. Yeah, that's your plan. I know kids in Texas, they keep their kids back a year. Wow. They want their kid to be bigger. I want Lily to be the biggest freshman. I want him to be a 15 year old freshman. We're pushing for right before his 15th birthday. Like, hey, 15 is a sophomore. Billy's a fucking cheater. Why he's saying back at Billy? Yeah. That I doesn't bother me nearly as much in a sport, like football, where I see what you're doing, like you're preparing a kid for a professional future, perhaps, especially in Texas. They're very into it, don't air. But if it's if wrestling is like, hey, hey, there's fucking no money in this. And that kid's 16 and he's in the ninth grade. Yeah. Yeah. It's nuts. How is the, how old is the oldest that a kid can be in compete in high school sports? Jimmy, please put that into our sponsor perplexity. Let's find out. I wonder if it varies by sport. Definitely by sport, by state. Mm. Interesting. Do they all have a cap at 18? Or do they allow you to compete at 19? Yeah, there's going to be a, before I even hit enter, I know it's going to say something about like, you're graduating class, can't be out. Maybe more than like two years or something like that. Because you got held back or you got an injury or something like that. Boy, I remember from my days of being like 17 and 18, the difference between 17 and 19 was huge. Oh, yeah. It's a big difference. Fuck yeah. By the time we're 19, you're basically man strength. You know, 17, I was like a boy still. Yeah. You know, like, it was flimsy. 17, those like a flimsy kid by a time I was 19. It was, it's a different animal. You've got two more years of training into testosterone in you. If you're a wrestler, that's got to be a huge advantage. Every advanced, everything in wrestling is a huge advantage. Starting one year earlier is crazy. Huge advantage. Yeah. 19 based off of certain. Oh, bro. That's so rude. Making 19 year olds wrestle against like possibly 15 year olds is crazy. Right. So if you are like in a certain weight class, that's not strong. Like I wasn't a good wrestler. I was a pretty good wrestler, but I started, I was in the varsity team at my high school. And like one year, I didn't even cut weight. Or one weight class I didn't cut. I was, there was a guy that was below me at like 126 or 128. And he was better than me. And so the next available weight class is 134, which is, that's what I normally weighed when I was 15. So I just wrestled at 134. That's lovely. Yeah. Well, I could have been in there with a 19 year old fucking animal who weighs a buck 60 and dries himself out briefly to hit 134. And there was guys like that man. You would see them at like the States and you go, what the fuck? Yeah. And they were going to camps. So they were wrestling 365 days a year all year long. Oh yeah. I just started. I didn't know anything. Same. I started as a freshman in high school and got fucked up. I didn't even start as a freshman. I started as a sophomore. I started as a sophomore because some kid kicked my ass in the locker room. Some kid grabbed me to headlock and threw me to the ground and didn't punch me. He could have punched me, decided not to, but I was so humiliated. I was like, oh my God, I need to learn how to wrestle. And then I also wrestled in the park like in the grass with my friend Stephen. And I thought I'd be able, I was a good athlete. I was doing karate. I was like, he can't take me down instantly. I was like, oh no, this is terrible. Yeah, it's a whole different piece. It's also like how tired you get. I remember thinking, I used to think that I had worked out before that because I had taken karate classes and done some type of one know. I thought I'd worked out. You don't even know what working out is until you go through a wrestling practice. You like this. We're running stairs, what? What? We're carrying guys around the wrestling room. You pick up your partner, your training partner. You have to fireman carry them around the fucking room. Oh, Jesus Christ, didn't you do it? Push ups and sit ups to eat puke. And then you're doing live drills. Fuck. Nonstop. Dude, animals. Yeah, we would rotate. There's all those different weight classes and just for shits and giggles, one of the drills was escape from the next guy. All right, be whistle blows escape. You're on bottom. You have to get out the next guy. So sometimes I had a 103 weight class. I would have Hugh Frost, who was I think 235, 245, 250. Yeah, it's a wrestling. Oh, yeah, it's for one drill. It's a fucking joke. It's a pancake. And he would probably, he was probably showing mercy at the time, obviously, but not really because he doesn't want to, he doesn't want to let this little fucking shithead 103 out from under him. So he's putting enough pressure to keep everybody there. Not to mention the 165 freak of nature made of muscle and the 185. It was just a drill, but that reality hits hard. That's how you see the difference between 15 and 17 and all that. And someone who actually really knows how to wrestle, just wrestle or strength. Like I always tell people, if you want to look at MMA, like what is the most important skill, the foundation is wrestling, the foundation. If you wanted your kid to be a bad ass fighter, you're like my kid really loves fighting. He thinks he wants to do it, but I want to prepare him right, which I do. Teach him how to wrestle. Get that kid into a really good wrestling program. Because if you have advanced wrestling, you look at how it shuts down so many fighters. Like look at what Hamzot did to Dorekha's dupacy. Hamzot, he just ragged all of them. His wrestling is at such a high level. And Trekka, who was a world champion, couldn't do shit to stop it. He just dragged him to the ground. He taught me one or two. Got him at a crucifix like three times. Murab against him. No, Mally. I mean, exactly. Exactly. We're watching a guy that does a no-look right hand, knock out punch into a salute, no look at his opponent. Right? Get, I mean, it's just impossible. It appears impossible. And every could be a fight. The thing I always think about first when I think about could be fighting is him being on top and having his feet under the other dude's feet, which is just, that's it. It's the final level. When you can't even begin the process of posturing out in any way you are nothing. You are a tissue in an octagon with a man. And he's wailing on your face. He's wailing on your face and he has your legs triangleed underneath his legs. It's always funny when you have see or when casual UFC fans don't understand those little things like that. That aren't even part of the fight. They're looking up here waiting to see if the punches are going to rain down. But the positioning of his feet is what I'm always looking at and how scary it can be here. He was not even doing it right now. He's not on top of people. He is right here. That leg being his own is half-courtier. It's all the weight. It's nothing we can do. There's just nowhere to go. And all that weight on those hips, people don't realize. Like I noticed immediately if I ever see somebody that's kind of on top and their knees are on the ground. Like if you look his right knee isn't on the ground. It looks like it might be. And it really keeps slamming those left hands in a Johnson's head. I mean, he got hit with like 15, 20 unanswered, full force left hand blows. Just holding his arms so he can't move. Bro, he's horrible. He's horrible. It's so good. Kabib was so good. And he would do this to world class fighters, man. And by the way, Johnson clipped him in that fight too. It was one of the few times in his career where he got clipped. Yeah, man. I'm not looking really frustrated. Who's the one that looks super frustrated in that? Barboza? I'm jasking. I don't remember who it was. Barboza was one of them. But I mean, a lot of guys are fuck Kabib look frustrated because there's not a damn thing they could do. Barboza was like early in the first round he had that thousand yards dare. It was like fuck. I have to go through three rounds of this where they just give up on the idea that they could even win. Like all you're doing is trying to survive. Yeah. He was a monster dude. Like that, his leg being trapped is nuts. And look how he's scooting with it. And he's just slamming punches and then he get up. He's just chasing you. Oh yeah, I gotta get the gun right back down. I thought, but if you get up, he's gonna fucking chase you and drag you to the ground. Yeah. So you blew all that energy to get up. The moment you try to punch, or throw a kick, he's on you. You're on your back again, punch to the face, punch to the face. It wrestling's giant. It is the biggest skill. Yeah. And you have to know how to do everything else too. Nowadays, because all these kids that like you see in the contender series, these young guys coming up, man, they're all so fucking talented. You tried to wheel kick them. And really more than anything, I feel like wrestling, being out wrestled and being just trapped on the ground is so psychologically demoralizing. You've been training for a UFC fight and the crowd is out there and the lights are on you and you see the logos on the mat, because you're facing it. Back that up a little bit. Let me show you something here too. What's interesting here before that, before the clinch. So after he throws the wheel kick, like Barbos is trying to win, right? This is the third round. He's trying to win. And he throws this, but look, no, go before that. When he throws the kick, here it is. So he throws the kick and misses. He's so tired now that when could be more, for him, he clenches. Look, he instigated the clinch. Instead of pushing away, instead of circling to his left, he clenched because he's so tired dude. He's so tired. And this dude just, look at that face. He just drags him down to the ground again. It just helps. Two on one on that arm underneath them. I mean, just being thrown in, he doesn't know what to do with his legs. He actually just put his foot above, because it's so confusing. All that weight on you, you don't know where to even begin. To start getting up. Well, the first thing he's got to do is get that left leg free and he's not gonna. That was the purpose for the crawling thing. He's a monster. He was a monster. And retired undefeated. Yeah. And there's something to being on that mat, not being able to move, knowing that the clock is ticking. And this is not how you pictured this going. Not only that, this is with the current rules, where I think there should be no stand-ups. I think the only time that you be a stand-up is when there's a foul. Yeah, I can completely agree with you. I hate it when they stand people up. Even if it's boring, I get it's boring, but the guy can't get up. And this guy's holding him down. So he's winning. Yes. He's winning. See, I know he's not doing enough. What does that mean? He's biting his time. You've got to let a guy have strategy. Like, my Muhammad Ali did rope a dope against George Foreman. Imagine if the referee's like, you've got to punch back. If you don't punch back, no, he's got a strategy. Strategy is led George Foreman burnt himself out, and then eventually tee off on him. And that's what he did. Yeah. It stinks that referees can let the crowd get in their head. Well, it's the organization wants action to the fans want action. A lot of people disagree with me. And I understand their point. I understand their point, especially if you're a casual, a good guy, get him up, man, come play. You don't want to fight, you want to hug. Boom. Right. So what? So what? This is the sport. And if that guy who's on top, who's biting his time and recovering, then decides, OK, now's the time. Let me start dropping some bombs. Because I've recovered. Good. Well, he held the position, and he recovered his energy. And now he's winning. Like, let him fucking fight. Let him fight. Get out of there. Get out of there. Yep. There shouldn't be stand-ups. And I get it. The referee gets that cheer from the crowd. You know? If that's rewarding. Sometimes when they stand fights up, I get excited. Yeah. I go, yeah. I go, yeah. Here we go. But striker has a chance. But my position is still the same. I don't think this is stand-up. I'm. And sometimes when they stand fights up, I get excited. Yeah. I go, yeah. Yeah. Here we go. That's a striker has a chance. But my position is still the same. I don't think there's just stand them up. I'm worse than that. I think they should start each round where they lost the last round. Oh, I love that. Yeah, it's great. So every round, why do you get to stand up? Why do you get that advantage? The striker gets of standing up when you didn't earn it. Right. Get back down there. Yeah. Get back down there. Crucifix. Glad you have to start the round off in a crucifix. Yeah. That's how the end-round ended. They look at the big screen. Get a freeze frame of the position. Refree sets you in the exact position. And says ready fight. Yeah. Yeah. I love that. Yeah, fuck off. Yeah. It's what the sport is supposed to be. And sometimes it's going to be boring. Yeah. But that's real, though. At least it's real. Because there's been a lot of fights where the guy got taken down on the first round, starts out the second round and blast the guy and knocks him out. And it's like, OK, it's exciting to watch. But he didn't earn that position. He just got that position because the other guy survived the first round. And so it's like, it's one fight. It's not five fights. Right. So I think it should be one continuous fight with a one minute break in each round. Yeah. That'd be like if the teen losing automatically got the kick off after halftime or something like that. Yeah. And look, guaranteed if I was running the UFC, it'd probably go bankrupt. I'm not the right guy. I don't know what the fuck I'm talking about. I'd be a terrible promoter. I'd be too honest about stuff. And I'd want to give people fights that maybe they weren't the most exciting fighters, but they were above the other person in the rankings. I think the ranking should be the whole reason why you make fights. Sammy Zayn won the Universal WWE Championship over this weekend and the big pay per view. I have no idea who that is, but I'm happy for him. Shocked Cody Rhodes, who was like a guaranteed win. What happened? Rolled him up real quick. Do you think maybe that was fixed? Well, it's very entertaining. Very entertaining. I'm sure it was. I just don't understand how you go back and forth. Oh, it's the best. I know you love it. Well, sometimes that's what I said about this White House card, by the way, is like there's nothing that could have happened that they could have written if it was written that would have made it more exciting. Right. It felt real the whole time and the fights that happened before made it feel like anything could happen in that main event. Like it just felt raw and real, but also storyline. Which then when UFC is at its best like that, it's like the WWE. That's what's interesting. Of course, it's not as, you know, as far as I'm expecting it. Exactly. But it is, it was a special moment. You know, regardless of how you feel politically and I understand it, if you hate the Republicans and you hate the whole idea, I get it. But just as a person who loves the sport, it was a very unusual experience, very unusual. And just, I think people have to just look at some things that way. You know, some people have a really hard time separating themselves politically because they're going, oh no, that the White House puts on this thing. There's all this bad press because of the war. There's bad press because of this and that. And they put on this thing at the White House and it's sort of like, magga washes, everything. You know what I mean? Yeah. Makes everybody like them again. It gives them positive press. Which undeniable, undeniable game positive press. I mean, the amount of people that have seen it is nuts. You know, I think just on Paramount, it's something like 30 something million now. And, you know, they were telling me that they thought it was probably 150 million people had watched it in some form. Which was, you know, TikTok clips, Instagram, YouTube. That is a nutty number, man. And I think Dana and Hunter, they were thinking you could get to like a billion people see it. Which is just nuts. Yeah. In some form, you know, highlight reels, clips. I mean, just the gaychie fight alone, just the highlight reels. How many people watch those on Instagram and TikTok and totally? The awareness of the event of the moment was so huge. It was like nothing else. Like it didn't feel like any other event we had ever, I was nervous before it started. Yeah. I never get nervous for you. I get excited. But I was like legitimately nervous. I was like, I was feeling like, this is crazy. Like we're on the White House lawn. Not the flyover is when it really hit. Yeah. Well, when they had all those jets together and they're so close to each other, like a manager of one of those fucking clips and other wing and spirals right into the lips. Yeah. Yeah. Crazy. What a spectacle. Yeah. They would have definitely cancelled the fights because they can't hit the White House correspondence dinner because of that assassination attack. Damn it. Oh, you had a bunch of bangers on that. I heard. Yeah. So annoying. I was more excited for that than like anything. How did they just cancel it? Why didn't they reschedule it? Maybe they're going to wait until the ballrooms finished. Because that's the argument for the ballroom that they could have it at a place like that, where it's completely secured. Yeah. Kermas, you're things the whole thing's fake. Oh, no, no, fake assassination attempts? Yeah. Oh, that guy got in there. Yeah. I have like, well, I think some people are just incompetent. There's incompetence. There's bad security. There's people that don't do their job. Also, there's also people that you didn't expect to be a problem and were a problem. And you're in a hotel. Also, the guy made it to the first level of the first scanning of security. It's not like he made it into the thing. But he did shoot somebody, right? I think he shot one of the Secret Service agents in his bulletproof best. Yeah. Is that true, Jamie? I think so. See, there were so many stories online. It's so hard to know what was true and what was not. But I think that guy was a teacher, like a substitute teacher. It's, it's all nuts. And it's like, man, you didn't think this out. It's got to look for July 24th. Okay. The corresponding center. Yep. Wow. It's on this. I might want to polish up some of that bits. Yeah. It's gonna be some new stuff. Go back tags over there. Let's have current events. Where are they going to have it? Oh, sorry. If they have it at the same spot, that's not smart. New event held July 24th. Is that the Pentagon? They might wait. They might wait to release that. Yeah, it's not saying, oh, uh, I'll walk it off. Excuse me. Waldorf, I'll store you. Oh, okay. Well, I guarantee you a little Titan that bitch up a little bit. Oh, yeah. I know he was excited to do the jokes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. No, he was, he was very pumped. Yeah. They were bangers. I ran him because the thing happened, I happened to be performing at the Kennedy Center the neck that weekend, the next weekend. So I ran the jokes and I realized that I had Adam Ray as a special guest that was on before me. He brought me on stage. So I go, you know what? Even I wrote jokes for the president of the United States to make fun of the press and everybody at the White House Correspondents Dinner, but I just realized Adam, so you're Adam, you want to come out and read these in Trump's voice? And so he was seeing the jokes for the first time. It's a lady. And we had so much fun. I didn't know he does a Trump, which doesn't surprise me. And his impressions are insane. He can do anything. Yeah, he can do anything. He didn't even, he did, he was dabbling in a Biden the week that I hit him up to do Trump Biden, which I think is a fucking guy. I think it's like 40 million or seven, some crazy amount. And again, just like the UFC got only nose after clips, but it was a monumental comedy fucking moment having Shane as Trump right before the election is Biden right before the election right after their first debate where Biden was clearly fucking zonged and sleepy and it just couldn't compete at all. And so I hit up Adam via text. I'm like, do you have a Biden? He's like, I cover it for five seconds and in my stand up. I'm like, uh, you free on Monday to fly to Austin and do Biden if I can get Shane as Trump. And I remember telling Shane, I was like, this is going to be an interesting ask. Uh, but I, you know, I'm just like, hey, Adam's got a Biden in Shane's like, I have something to do on Monday. I'm canceling it. I'm doing Trump. He immediately saw the brilliance. It was just such a hot topic at the time. And my God, it was fucking crazy. There's clips that I see of that episode and I never rewatch Kill Tony's or anything. I'll see clip sometimes. And I literally go, oh my God, holy fucking shit. There's one part where Trump goes, how many more re-tards are you going to bring out? He's been like too handy, cat people on this show. All right. How many more re-tards you have come as I'm pooling a name out of the bucket in real time? I go, anything can happen. Mr. President, let's see. It's what the next guy's like. he comes on. He has these weird deforming with arms. Oh God. And you see Shane as Trump and the crowds dying because they see him first and you see Shane as Trump looking. Oh, fuck. It's just one of his facial reactions to things are like his greatest secret fucking hilarious weapon. And when he's Trump, it's even amplified. It's like, in my opinion, 10 or 20 percent funnier than even Shane is. I mean, I'm sure he did mid to this and know it because Trump is just such an interesting polarizing character and his take on him is so fucking funny. It's psychotic. His impression is so good. It's the greatest Trump impression of all time. Because it's like the jokes are so good. Oh, by far. He's so good. What's funny, J. I don't know how far it is. Yeah, so happy. I think you're back it up a little bit. I'll touch another upon appearance by Drew Nickens. This is the best. All right. Donnie, how many more retarded guys do you have back? Anything going to happen? This crowd is hungry for more retarded guys. Frankly, I don't think we've seen enough retarded guys. How about a retarded racist? Would you like to say that? This next person could be one. I pulled it out of the bucket. It is the Kill Tony debut. I do believe of Jacob Barr. Everybody, Jacob Barr. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. Okay. Oh, here's what you want for. Okay, hold on. We're going to reset this, Jacob. What's funny is Adam knows better than anybody that you're not supposed to say anything after the bucket pull comes up. So me grabbing the mic out of his hand and putting it down is even another layer of hilarious to all of us. It's like Biden's misbehaving. I don't know. Did you see Shane's face when he notices his hands? I didn't even listen to anything. Look. And then he's our Jackie Gleason. Oh, yeah, without a doubt. This is plus plus man. He's the great one. He's smart generation. When people don't realize, I mean, obviously, is that he is that funny all the fucking time. All the time. We're hanging out in the green room. Every bar, every restaurant, every green room, every, every stairway, fucking anywhere, everything. He, I always compare it to Mike Tyson and his prime. He just hits harder and different doing the smallest little things, even if it's a face, if somebody says something and he just like reacts to it, it's crazy. It's also always fun. Yeah. He's a fun guy. Like he wants to have fun. Like even when he's cracking jokes, it's fun. Well, it's, he was very reluctant to do the roast. You know, he was a little reluctant to even host that. Like, I don't know if I want to do those things. Yeah. Yeah. But, well, everything is, you know, everything could be something. He crushed so hard. It caused a real ruckus, him and I end capping that thing, you know what I mean. Yeah. It was supposed to be a, you know, this roast of black excellence and me and Shane are just fucking having the time of our lives. Who said it was a roast of black excellence? He was just saying that because it was Kevin Hart. Yeah. That's like, that was like explicitly stated or anything. Right. I mean, because imagine if you said we're going to have a roast of white excellence. Right. Exactly. No, I know. It's crazy. Oh, yeah. It's weird. You can't say, oh, yeah. It does weird. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's a whole thing with that. I mean, you can't talk about this, but talk about that. Well, it's just weird what we accept, which doesn't bother me at all. like came the last guys when he fought in the UFC. He stepped brown pride tied a two-dollness chest. Cool. And his family came over from Mexico. They literally walked here. Yeah. White pride. Nah, it's so popular. Right. White pride on your chest, you know, fucking Sean Strickland just decided to get white pride. And he posted a big show on Instagram with him as a world champion with white pride on his chest next to King Velasquez as a world champion with brown pride on his chest. And people would lose their fucking minds. Yes. And again, not saying that Sean would ever put white pride on his chest. He would. No, he would. He would follow him on Twitter. He would. He's a wild boy. He didn't even get a cover. He did. He showed up at the UFC even though he was banned. He showed up in the arrest of him. Yeah. They kicked about. He's the world champion. He was a UFC event at the White House at the time before Justin won. He was the only American world champion. And then like you can't come. Yeah. Because you talk too much shit about Israel. He's a wild boy. But that's wild that your criticism about Israel is what keeps you from going to the White House as a world champion in a world title fights at the White House. Yeah. You want to celebrate the American male world champion? I think he said some other stuff too though. The some Epstein stuff there. Yeah. He's a wild boy. Yeah. I think he's I told him when he retires from fighting, he 100% should do a podcast. And he was like, you know, I've seen these guys doing these streamers and like, I could you don't have to do that. You don't have to do it that way. He's like, I couldn't do that to sit there every day and talk to people for hours. I'd lose my fucking mind. I'm like, right. You don't have to do that. Just your opinions on things. So he's an awesome podcast guest. You know, my geek had totally, totally do that. Just talk about stuff. And also Sean, when he lets the the whole stick down and just gives you his opinions on things, it's very smart. God, yeah. He's stupid at all. And he would get better at it. You know, as he did it more, he easily could do a podcast. Yeah, he's entertaining his fuck. I just can't believe that kicked him out of the White House. That is they kicked him out of the ellipse that area. There's, I think there's video of it. See if we find the video of it. Sorry guys. Like they got like fucking sift six cops will approve vest. Yeah, I think there was like 85,000 people there. So it's funny that they're like that one. It's just, it wasn't supposed to be there. He's banned. It was not invited or whatever. But even if you're not invited, shouldn't you be able to go to the fan area? If you're the world champion, if you want to be that wild with no security and there's video of him from the first night, from the night, the way in with a found out that he was there. It's amazing because he was wearing a hoodie the entire time. And someone told him he's got to take off the hoodie and he's like, I can't listen. It's going to be a problem. As soon as he takes off the hoodie, I'll bring it to that. That's fucking strong trucking. And they just surrounded by bros. Whole area. Just getting hugged to death. He asked some dude, some dude asked him to leg kick them. So Sean leg kick some kid. Crazy. We're champion. Fucking kick it some kid. What is this world coming to? There's some. There's him. Is there audio? This is crazy. I like that we have some entertaining American. Oh, he's the most entertaining. That Josh Hocquet. Hocquet. Hocquet. Yeah. My God. That was what was hilarious. People were so upset that he said Michelle Obama's man at the White House. It's like, that's what he's doing. He's doing it on a purpose. He's literally wearing an American flag bandana. He comes out to a Hulk Hogan song. He's wearing sunglasses. Yeah, it's not appropriate. You're right. Right. But he said the exact same thing when I interviewed him somewhere else. He said, I'm pretty sure he said, Michelle Obama's a man like last time I interviewed him. That's what I heard. It's not the his first rodeo at the show. He says that's how he ends his interviews. Oh, Larry, he's trying to get people to talk about him. Yep. You know, it's the whole thing is so crazy. But all of it would be nothing if you couldn't fight. Exactly. That's where it's real exciting is the pre-fight stuff. I mean, the post-fight interview pretty polarizing, obviously, because that was the news. But if you, for the real fans paying attention, you didn't get to see him do that. Did I send it to you? The kill Tony minute that he did at the press conference? Oh, my God. So funny because he's like purposefully bombing. So he's literally doing a joke. He says, you guys know Tony Hinchcliffe, I'm going to do my kill Tony minute. And he's purposefully like bombing. It's corny, purposeful, bad jokes. And he's going, man, tough crowd. All right. Let me try this one. Literally being hilarious by strategically trying to be funny, but not being funny. You could tell that he was planning on nobody laughing, but that it's set up punch. And he's just fucking, he's just trying to entertain, which is trolling. He's just trolling. He's getting attention. And then the most important thing he can fight. Yeah. That dude's good. He's fucking good, man. He's fast as shit. All right, heavyweight is very light on his feet. Fast shit, fast hands. Yeah. So fun to watch. And you know, what's interesting is he talked a lot of shit about Alex Pereira. And you know, I want to chama on your mama or all that crazy shit. Pereira losing to cereal gone. If Pereira decides to fight again, I don't know if he's going to fight again. He might be done. I think he said he might be done. But I mean, a lot of fighters say that after a fight, and especially after a loss. I'm sitting around for a while. Then they come up with, he's not done. They back up the brinkstruck, he had him versus Josh Hoke. Oh, God. As a co main event, a fucking banging New Year's Eve card. Oh, let's go. Hook it all me making fun of his head, dress, and his face make out. Oh, I'd be insane. I would be insane. But you know, the thing is, Hoke, it's kind of deal with that guy. That's a different guy. That's not Derek Lewis. I mean, if he continues to fight heavyweight, it is interesting. Watching a guy who's been so dominant at 85 and at 205 with that all that extra weight on, I don't know if that necessarily was the right move. You know, I mean, I think like some weight is probably good, but maybe even 20 pounds lighter, like maybe two 30 something. Maybe that would be a better weight if he was willing to fight it heavyweight, because it seems like he was carrying. I mean, just you would work out with the weight vest on. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. So you got to realize he had fought at 185 and he fought at 205. That was what he weighed in at. But let's be honest at 185. I think he probably weighed 220 something, 226. I think it was fight night, which is nuts. It's 40 pounds difference. And at 205, he probably got into the 230. So he's like 235, 236, something like that. But still was not didn't look like he looked at 251. 251, he looked like he was carrying unnecessary weight, a little bit of it at least. And if he was just like 20 pounds lighter, he would still have that speed and movement, but he's always had crazy knockout power. It might be a better weight for it. It just seemed like it was a lot of weighty at on him. You know, you know, it all went to a thas. His ass was giant. Fat ass. Big fat ass. You know, that's all I'm looking at. That's why I watch UFC. And yeah, it was all there. He's like a backpack. Well, that's where all the power comes from. When you're pushing off your feet and you know, you're pushing off those fucking quads and pushing into those glutes and then torquing that body the way he does for a rosius power, dude. But damn, that cereal gone's good. Whoa. Yeah. Whoa. Yeah, crazy. So good, dude. And he's in his prime right now. Cereal gone is like really coming into his own. There's no heavyweight like him. No one moves like him. Yeah, he's going to say extremely accurate for a heavyweight. Not just accurate agile. Because we were talking about this the other day that basketball is a great place to start. If you're a big athlete and you want to learn combat sports, especially striking, because think about how many direction changes basketball players take. Where they're always kind of doing that. They're always spinning and moving. It's a series of plyometrics. A series of hops and jumps like Jordan's jump. The amount of Jordan out of fly knee. Right. Right. Yeah. He's, he was a fly knee for 14 feet away. Yeah. What do you got? What's that? It's interesting because cereal gone's. Yeah. So he started out playing basketball. He's where I come from basketball season and foot wrestling season. All right. The same time. So I wonder what he was doing back then. Well, he's in France. Right. So France does not a wrestling in their high school or in their college. You know, and he learned wrestling after he had become a really elite world class Muay Thai fighter. So he's got the grappling is come up in big ways. Like his grappling is much better than it used to be. But really primarily he's a striker. And when John fought him, like John just got him to the ground and submitted him like quickly. It's like the different. I think that fight was kind of a big ass wake up call. And France has beat him too. So France has beat him by just, Francis just got a hold of him and most of the fight was on the ground. A giant chunk of it because Francis fought that fight with a blown out ACL. What? Defended his real title with a blown out ACL. Crazy. Had big ass knee pads on. Ooh. I know. Wobbly ass knee. But that's how dangerous Francis is. Yeah. He could just win it with grappling. It's a shame that he's not in the UFC. It's a real shame. Yeah. Because like that whole thing was what drove everyone crazy about boxing. You know, that it was really hard to get these guys together. You know, and this was the whole idea why everybody was excited about what Riaad season was doing. And Turkey, Al Sheikh and you know, all those people that put together these big ass fights like Tyson Fury and Alexander Osyk. And the last one they just did, Ricoh Verhoeven and Osyk. Like they put in together these big crazy fights. Like that was the thing that drove everybody nuts about boxing. And that's what drives everybody nuts about MMA. The one that is the heavyweight division, the fact that the best heavyweight, or at least the guy who was the lineal heavyweight champion of the world, isn't even fighting for the UFC. That's crazy. Crazy. Yeah. Who knows? Maybe one day. Right? No. No. I think so. I tried to make it happen. Damn. I think we need to get those dudes together. Look at that. Look at this hero gone. I know. See that kind of ability to throw your body around like that is so huge as a striker. Because a lot of those guys are plotting. You know, they're plotters. They just kind of wobble through. I think what they need to do is get Francis and the UFC together. They all do mushrooms. Yeah. Just like make friends. Yeah. Because he doesn't have much time left. I think Francis is 38. Is that all the views? I think he's 38. Which is different. Is it heavyweight? Heavyweights? No. In terms of 40 in September. No. How much time left? Right. 40 you can do. Unless you're Bernard Hopkins fighting on a world class level in your 40s. Kind of unheard of. I remember when Bernard Hopkins fought Kelly Pavlick. A lot of people did not think that he had a chance. Oh yeah. They were very clearly. And he outboxed the fuck out of here. Oh man. Look, he looks so good. Truly the executioner. I want to say he was in his 40s when that happened. I think so. How old was Bernard Hopkins when he fought Kelly Pavlick? He fought at a world class level until he's 50 years old. Yeah. It's nuts. Yeah. We were all watching that one. Everybody from Youngstown going, all right. This is it. We're going to get back on the right path because it was after his loss to Margarito. Is that right? It's the guy that got caught with the cement in his gloves against the one guy. Oh. Antonio Margarito idea. Yeah. 43. He was 43 years old. Wow. Crazy. 26 year old. Crazy. Especially at 170 pounds. Like nobody thinks at that weight that you can be competitive at a world class level into your 40s. Most of the time. People just write you off on that number. Yeah. They don't care what you look like. He's not going to be able to do it. Was he the first one to beat Kelly? Is that what I just saw? Wow. Okay. He lost to him and that's where shit started to get fucked up because then he went on a bad run after that. Well, he got beat up like that. Yeah. It's just tough on the brain, dude. There's only so many of them fights that you could take where you get really beat up like that. But not put it on them. You know, there's been a bunch of fights where a fight got beat up really badly and then they were never the same again. Melchic Taylor versus Julio Cesar Chavez. That's a great example. Chavez just put it on him and dropped him in the final moments of the round and then Richard Steele stopped it and it was like this crazy fucking controversy because he stopped the fight with like one second to go in a fight that Melchic was ahead on the scorecards. But the real the real story that fight was that the damage that Chavez had put on Melchic Melchic was never the same again. Catholic actually won his next two fights and then had a bad staff infection problem. Oh, wow. So after he beat Sergio, so he was set to fight Paul Williams, but to major staff infection and allergic reaction some antibiotics nearly killed him. Whoa. He eventually was able to fight again against light midway champion Sergio Martinez. Sergio Martinez beat him. Martinez beat he beat him. Martinez beat him. But yeah, unanimous 12 round decision. Martinez was a bad motherfucker. Yes, it was. Yeah. And wait. My tears came up. Yeah, it's it's just a crazy sport man. You only have so many wars in you. There's only so many times you could do that and the really clever guys or the guys just don't get hit much. I was done on my Donna rabbit hole recently. Oh my God. That fucking guy's a freak. Oh, he's an animal. What a career. Oh, he was an animal. Unbelievable. He fought everybody. He was one of the few guys to really rock Floyd Mayweather. Yeah, knocked his tooth out. And war is tooth around a chain. Oh, I love that. Yeah, he got Floyd's tooth and wore it as a piece of, see if you find the tooth that my Donna had a florida. Oh my God. That is so cool. How hilarious is that? That's so funny. He had his tooth put on a fucking. He wears one. It's too un-neckless. Wow. That's crazy. But what a square jawed motherfucker that guy is. Huh? Yeah. Look at that jaw. That guy looks like he could hit him with a baseball bat. He was a tough dude in same career. I think he fought everybody. The Broner fight too. He dropped Broner. That was when Broner was in his prime. Yeah. He was a beast. It's a hard ass fucking sport. Any combat sport. That is a hard way to make a living profitable. Do you see all the stuff that's going on with Floyd? Yeah. I can't wrap my head around it. I don't understand how someone makes that much money and doesn't pay taxes or whatever. Yeah. Well, I could tell you, you run out of money. Yeah. You spend so much money on things. Do you think he has a business manager? Maybe he wasn't looking out for his best interest. I mean, just. You got to put somebody in charge of that amount of money. You would think $750 million was worth. Just you gotta put somebody in charge of that amount of money You would think you would think seven hundred fifty million dollars last you all yeah, he's I mean, he's I mean 50 give one guy five percent I was no Yeah, put some away. But the thing is it's like That lifestyle his lifestyle was all about showing you his wealth his lifestyle He's 49 I Imagine making seven hundred and fifty million dollars and you're 49 you broke. Oh God That's crazy, but Tyson talks openly about how he spent hundreds of millions of dollars Just went through it You know if you are living that life where you're just wearing diamonds everywhere and you're buying crazy watches and you know Floyd does these things you're seeing way he'll go into a hotel room when he's traveling and he talks about like the watches that he brought and so he opens up suitcases with Millions of dollars and watches it just opens suitcase You ever see these now find them because they're kind of hilarious because just trying to figure out which one he wants to wear Well, it brings them all with them. Yeah. She's showing off and you're showing off that he's got two suitcases filled with Diamond and crusted partake protect the leaps and you know The most high-end of watches look at this see if you do have the clip Here it is let me put some volume on this look at this What I'm doing what Floyd is doing what Floyd ain't doing what I do got what I don't got Just know I'm gonna stand in my lane. I am on fuck with nobody and I don't want nobody fuck with me if I go vacation My fault when I go on paycation for 30 days. I take 30 watches with me Look at this. Did you know what you know what was crazy as this if we add 10 more days I take 10 more watches But then I say fuck it if I want to bring out the one and only you're not bring out the watch that costs 18 million Oh, Jesus Matter of fact, you know what I'm gonna do for you motherfucker. Hey today. I'm gonna go fuck off 50,000 Because I got shit else to do money made or I'm on the fucking day You know, that's the problem So the that you can only do for so long. Yeah, so if you have one 18 million dollar watch like Okay, let's like it crazy. Let's not get crazy. You want it to get it. You got it. You have seven hundred fifty million dollars You have one 18 million dollar watch you can't have 18 watches That cost millions of dollars like because you're gonna need more you're gonna keep one to buy more You're gonna keep you're gonna run out of money. How many rolls Royces do you have? Okay? Each one of those is a half a million dollars You have four or five of them. Hmm. I mean for worries. You got 10 for worries. Okay. What? Some of those fries are almost a million dollars. You have 10 almost a million dollar cars Okay, so just in watches and cars alone. We're looking at 50 60 million Okay, and then you have to make 120 plus to actually have 60. I don't know if he's leasing them I don't know how he's financing things. I don't know but I just loved to know the remake that money back by He can make the money that he needs back by Literally making a super documentary about how he spent it you ever seen that 30 for 30 broke about how the NFL players all spent their money No, well, it's unbelievable one of the easiest watches ever and like it's It's got to be 30 for 30s like biggest production ever like it's everywhere. It's it's just huge and Yeah, who the hell doesn't want to know about that right and I'm waiting on that Nicholas Cage doc that I probably know He's making either where it's like because he's a different version of that. You know about this. He went broke. Oh, yeah But he then he made it back again. Well. Yeah, he works his ass off. So he went on a he's on a terror. He's just making movies left and right and Yeah Going from hundreds he faced severe financial struggles in the late 2000s going from 150 million dollar fortune to being six million in debt Whoa, he never officially filed for bankruptcy, but he cleared his death by relentlessly taking on movie roles Including direct to video films and selling off extensive real estate and assets I guess he bought like a lot of t-rex skulls like he spent his money on like crazy things He didn't just go watches and cars He would find crazy pieces of art and like old Historical things I think Well, he was a movie star from way back You got a real is like what was his first film? I think his first film was like 1980 or something Yeah, I remember him being a movie star when I was in high school. Yeah, that's a lot of time of being in that Pizzaro Hollywood bubble Getting your brain cooked by fame. Yeah, he's one of those you can watch him do any things like one of those freaks were even though people will say I don't like this Nicholas Cage thing I don't like that From an article about what he spent his money on four and a fifty five thousand dollars for two snakes Okay, so it was two hundred seventy six thousand dollars in two thousand five the equivalent of four hundred fifty five thousand dollars today Thanks inflation how crazy is that? What's the four thing about that two hundred seventy five thousand dollars in two thousand five is four hundred fifty five thousand dollars today How fun is inflation? What was Nicholas Cage's first movie? officially yeah Just that crazy movie with him and Reising her son and to be like the first big hit right that was a big one. That was a big one Is new ones are good too? These whackers filmography if you go all the way back 1982 fast times at Ridgemont High is Nicholas Coppola Valley girls. What else thinking of that was in 83 Yeah Credit is Nicholas Coppola. That's before he changed his name because he didn't want to be connected To what is his uncle Francis Ford Coppola. So it is Valley girl. So Valley girl was 83. So I wasn't high school dude Big those were huge movies dude raising Arizona so fucking funny I saw that like a year ago I forgot I forgot how funny it was Remember Ty co or a techs cob is in there the boxer with the flat nose and fought Larry Holmes He did a bunch of movies like yeah big fucking corn fed white guy motor. Yeah It's a Cohen brothers movie, right raising Arizona is Those guys might be the goats. They might be the goats of comedy. They're necessarily brothers. Yep. No doubt Yeah, how many amazing hilarious fucking movies and the Cohen brothers there's there were always so out there everything so out there Some of their films just like what the fuck are you guys doing this? Like King it was kingpin fairly brothers. Yes those guys too like that a doubt fuck that was good unbelievable Fuck that's a funny move so fucking great so funny To scene where he's throwing up in the toilet when she's talking about him you know To pay it's right Woody's range is incredible you know what I heard about that movie that they had primed all the actors To get really excited when Bill Murray throws three strikes because he had to throw three strikes in a row And so this this might take a while so we're gonna really need your enthusiasm and then Bill Murray actually threw Three strikes in a row first attempt and everybody went crazy like for real Because they were you know like they were said this is not gonna happen this way so when he actually did it Everybody went fucking bananas That's how a lot of it dude. Woody's a freak bro since he's moved here and goes to kill Tony and like we hang out and stuff only after Like be making friends with him Like I knew he did a lot of great stuff, but he sneaks up and so many great things It's insane. He's in fucking What is the cone brothers one with not there will be blood who's made at the same time with Javier Bardem? Oh my god How am I blanking on this it's a no country for old men? Oh? That's right. He's in it and he's not even they don't even like promote him on that or anything He just comes in the movie halfway through with all these other fucking greats and he's crushing It's hard to think that that's a common brother's movie the people versus Larry Flint He's a freak of nature fucking Well the thing that you sent me the day with him when he was playing LBJ. Oh my god It's so good. I randomly stumbled across that one I'm like, oh I'll fall asleep to this Woody is LBJ and it's one of those movies the fucking kept me awake Because it was so goddamn good mesmerizing Super nice guy too like easy to hang out with oh my god the best very chill with everybody Just hangs out when he's in the green room. It's just like one of us. Yeah normal. Yeah It was just hard to do and you've been famous that long just be cool Yeah, but also he doesn't have a phone you get a hold of him You got to get go through his wife to get a hold of him. He's smart just insulate him from self from all the nonsense brilliant So wait a minute. Yeah, but I think when you get to like that level you kind of have to where you'll go crazy Yeah, you know, yeah, he has this funny like laughing sipping his tequila Smoke and his weed He's got it all figured out grows his own weed makes his own tequila Eat live food or whatever and just laughs and enjoys life It's perfect. Yeah, it's nice to know that people can make it through that crazy maze and You know you could either go nuts and buy Tyrannosaurus Rex calls Or you could just completely disconnect from it all and just be yourself. Yeah Just keep keep killing it. I know him and McConaughey have a TV show that's coming out. Mm-hmm. Would they play brothers right? Yeah, I think it's on Apple TV coming out soon Hmm Yeah, so What's it been like like the the weirdness the post roast weirdness? I'm always surprised by these things. I'm always surprised that They last so long that anybody's talking about it. It's so bizarre. I was surprised With the pang dang thing I was surprised at the Trump thing and this one is really surprising because with other ones are like Ah, there's a time and a place for jokes like that or this or that or whatever and This is the time in the place for it is like the roast of Kevin Hart, you know, I'm gonna go for it Yeah, and we roasted Kevin, you know, I did it fucking George Floyd joke in the At the Tom Brady roast and I did a who's the white guy that shot people It's the same fan base as God damn it the kid that shot people up and wherever People was Why can't I'm the white guy shot a couple people had a gun at a thing? They made it look like it was black people, but it was actually white people that he shot that were shooting at him or had guns What name has the I've no idea who you're talking about David Lucas's friends with him brought him to the Oh Kyle written that's it. That's it. Oh Written house joke like this and then this one people are offended or something I don't know and yeah if you just watch that clip on my dismount It's a crazy clip But if you watch the entire flow of the roast set, it's just one last departing joke which That's my thing man. It's like I knew earthquake would be standing up on his feet like he was halfway through my set You know, you know, you know, there's standing o's that are happening during my actual roast and on this one Because there were so many people on it. It was such a long big roast, you know, they set you to in a lot of time So I'm like, okay, I'm gonna do something. I don't normally do and blast off more jokes per minute than I normally do Instead of milking it and getting applause breaks and things like that. I'm just gonna create a bang bang bang bang bang final stand of things You know, what's funny is that I Have something that's supposed to offend everybody like I don't want you to like 100% of any of my jokes I'm not that guy. I'm healish. I'm a bad guy. You're so really fail. Exactly. So what's funny This people got offended about the George Floyd thing and people a lot of people said yeah Well, Pete Davidson did a Charlie Kirk joke and they're comparing these things from two different spectrums But with what they didn't mention is that I did a Charlie Kirk joke in my set So fuck them fuck them fuck them fuck them fuck them. You know, everybody gets them everybody gets it is always Nobody gets some jokes everybody does. I said that Kevin has a What quite the fan base he has more gunfire at his merch table than Charlie Kirk. Yeah, or whatever and So you know for them to for people to nitpick that joke and be offended and it's funny because it was a lot of a A lot of comedians a lot of black comedians were like I'm upset about this. You know, they made their videos Which is just hilarious because they're not on the roast. They're not in attendance at the roast You saw Tiffany Haddish that that was the best one nobody handled it better than her fine Tiffany Haddish getting Asked questions. It was a TMZ thing. Yeah About the roast because she handled it so perfectly trying to they were trying to be everybody Of course everybody even Cheryl underwood who handled it all like a champ. We made friends before At a Netflix brunch that week that was for that festival. Well, do I told you about Cheryl? Yeah, she's the shit She's awesome. Yeah, I worked with Cheryl in like the early 2000s I think it was in Montreal. I told you she's a monster. Yeah, she goes to her purse on hold just clutch her purse on station She's here's a little Tiffany See roll Yeah, like 30 seconds to chat. Well, they quick. Yeah, so talking about Kevin Harvros, right? Yes, it was so much fun So my new love didn't think so. My new love was like, you know what it's exhausting. It's edgy specifically about the George Floyd Joe what are you thinking is it just comedy should they have been a little less? I think it should have been shorter the show was too long Okay, I mean, I was sitting there the whole time. I had to be something. I didn't hear the George Floyd joke because I had the piece so bad Yeah, I was a glorified a seat filler that I was tired. Well also, I mean Lonnie other people like oh, maybe it was a little too racially Motivated what are you? It's far as like the jokes is this just comedy or are people taking it too seriously? Is this all comedians saying it that wasn't invited? Oh That's the fucking comedian Tiffany Haddish, but that was her version of the Shauna Mally walk-off. I love it. I Love it, man You never forget those people that actually are answering honestly and real real comics and again It's the same thing for 100% she's not only is it a fun walk-off home run But she's also 100% correct. There's nobody that was there that was offended. There was no ruckus there It's just like everything else where you leave and you go. Huh, this things this thing's kind of crazily taking off it seems a lot of people are talking about that one joke at the end It's so weird. We live in an outrage culture and an outrage There's a there's a there's money in outrage. There's engagement in outrage. Outrage is the Commodity that everybody wants. Yeah, they want to be outraged. Yeah, and they want to be right And if you're outraged and you've got a good point You just ride that fucking thing for as much juice as you can get out of it and then you move on to the next thing Yep, what do you mad at now? It you know there's never in any of these things there's never a moment where I'm like okay This could cause a problem It's never been that way while it was high it was high fives High fives and laughter after my 3 p.m. Set in a half-filled Madison Square Garden waiting for the 8 p.m. Arrival of Trump to speak I'm you know on a 34 person lineup Everyone was thrilled way to get the crowd going. I mean Party started the lights were up like it obviously Wasn't the best position for me on that lineup But the same exact thing and then it's like a little bit later You realize like oh they're making a new story about the Puerto Rico joke of all things so interesting It's gonna be a problem. Yeah, I would have never told you to do that joke during that But I told you that was gonna be a problem in your end wasn't supposed to be in my original thing for that It was a last second filler because they gave me more time than everybody it was a very bizarre thing They gave me more time for it was our thing The idea that you would go on after someone like who went on before you Stephen Miller No, not it was it was the national anthem with a guy painting a Painting Actually, no, he went on after me. I was so right after the national anthem But someone had some kind of like raw raw speech Make a man. I wish I wish there was that all came like away after which is crazy. They just had me on the wrong position on the thing and You should only just stand up. Oh, we're totally doing stand up totally totally. It doesn't work totally But you got to say but then again, it did it did work in house the place isn't miked for I'm sure you're in a comedy or lit for stand up or anything like it. No, they were laughing They would have an a bit old time well, they're probably happy that something wasn't stiff and boring taxes and fucking Yeah, I mean Rudy Giuliani went on like three hours after me. That's crazy Yeah, it was a nuts all day. It was a super long thing My point being is that it always surprises me that I'm the news even though I'm because if someone else said it if it was a politician that did it or someone else Someone high up in the administration. That would make sense same thing with the roast if it was a Clean comedian right if it in a barghatsie or Jim Gaffigan were on it and they said that that's crazy Me saying it that's normal. They don't know that though See the thing is it's like you've achieved a level of fame that like really snuck up on people over the last couple years You know it's because the rise of kill Tony Has been completely organic like there's been no Promotion of kill Tony that made it become what it is. It's all just people sharing it on YouTube sharing it online That's all it is clips and these moments, you know and then you know obviously the Shane moments and all the Kyle Dunn again. It's been just so many amazing moments. This is a good show It came organically and then you got to this point over the last couple years. Oh, we got to pay attention as fucking guy And then we had us and then after they started attacking you from the White House thing or the Masses Square Garden thing rather which is 2024 Then it was on then it's on like Donkey Kong right? So that's two years later So now you're a guy that they go to Like to get mad at and there's a bunch of people like that online that that's their business His people are mad at them. They have hot takes people are mad at them. Yeah, I mean that's so you're you've fallen into that category and So there's gonna be people that genuinely don't like what you did and don't like you and then there's gonna be people that are just using it as a Commodity they're just using it as outrage which is part of what the game is, you know This this is what they do and they're engagement You know fucking game that they play and it's kind of what we do in the joke game Yeah, you know you get engagement you get people to laugh they you say outrageous things that you don't even really mean But this because it's a funny thing to say it's just like I always say Bob Marley didn't really shoot the sheriff You know that right? Just jokes like when you say inappropriate shit on purpose I mean that is like everybody used to know that like Louis CK was a very left-wing Progressive guy when he was saying really fucked up things that he didn't mean on purpose because they were Funny yeah, like that was what he did and everybody was fine with it Till somewhere around It seems like it was like 2016 2000 like it started turn or corner where it became like people are starting to take these things as Statements rather than as comedy material And they started trying to pretend that the person really means this Like that's where it got crazy and that happened around the time where social media really came into prominence Because before that there was no real avenue to do that. There's no real avenue to pretend you were really deeply upset Yeah, I mean, I'm sure there's some people that were upset But there's also a lot of like people that are just ill they're online all the time on these social media apps Just arguing and and spitting out venom and yelling at people and they yell at them It's like they're in hell all day long and then anytime something comes along they could be upset at they got a they have to have their take They have to have that hot take yeah, and if their hot take gets engagement They're all looking at their likes and they just start re-engaging with that subject and going back on it and this is the real problem Okay Good luck with that. That's bad for your head kid. We're right exactly very bad for your head All those people that I know that are alike especially comics that are doing it the comics that are doing it almost all of them Don't have good careers But no all of them right none of them have like impressive career Especially compared to their contemporaries that are doing well and then on top of it. They're all mentally ill They're all people that are fucking filled up with pharmaceuticals and they're going to therapy They're literally mentally ill and they're online. You're talking about fascists. Right. You know like stop Get your shit together No one your opinion is not that valuable to people because they know that you're fucked up Do you not understand that right like the way you view the world is it's not a healthy balanced perspective? Like you're viewing the world in this like Mentally ill lens well the whole online thing doesn't it doesn't even convert to sold tickets or a bigger thing It's such a temporary drug for them to get to fill this void of what they're not doing Right it doesn't convert to them people want to go see them. No I mean some people maybe they look a little juice out of it But it's not enough because you're also opening the door if you do become popular You have to understand that if you've been spit and hate it people for a decade and then you become popular boy That hates coming your way. Oh, yeah, it's coming your way. You know and This is one of the things that I said after them and see a stuff I said even though I think it was the right thing to do. I wouldn't do it again Because it's just too much. Yeah, it's just too much. You just you create all you just feel the darkness of it all the negative It's all negative. It's all negative even though it had to be done because you've got this guy that with it It showed me how completely Absent of morals and ethics the business is completely absent. Right. They knew what he was doing and they did not care They didn't care because they were profiting from it. This is the conversation I have with my agent when they were dumping me I told them I go you're making a mistake right now It's gonna affect the rest of your life. You have to understand the choice that you're making you're choosing to align with someone Who had any other industry that person would be in jail? Right If that person was doing also if this was in literature or if this was in music, they would be sued into high heaven Like there's songs that like they don't even seem Like they're that close to each other and people had to give like songwriting credits to it. Yeah Oh, yeah, like songs like people get inspired by certain songs and then they write a song that sounds Close enough that there's a rhythm to it that people get upset Well, there's only so many notes and so many chords and there's only so many beats and so much timing and It's often the same thing with comedy like there's some Crossovers in a writer's room, which I've been in so many of so many people writing on the same subject will have the same joke It's only when it's like what men see it was doing word for word long form Well, that was a different thing what he's he was a buccaneer that was a totally different thing But there's songs like okay, so I was listening to this video the other day watching this video the other day rather that was comparing Radioheads creep to an older song and they had to give creep Radiohead rather had to give this older song writing credits for this which sounds so different and then Radiohead accused Lana Del Rey or someone from the organization accused Lana Del Rey of having a song that ripped off creep or was sounded too much like creep and it did sound a little like creep But it was very different like it should be obviously this is like inspired by it, right? If that's the like Elvis Presley's entire career was inspired by Black musicians like the way Danson moved in the way saying So it's like what are we doing Like they're stealing and then there's inspired by inspired by is what we were all doing It's like we were talking about that computer earlier that chip manufacturing thing that thing was built on the back of all The fucking super wizard geniuses that have been working on all the different technology that led to that being you can't just invent that in a vacuum You have to invent that on all these other inventions that have taken place for decades before you right? This is the say I dislike with music. It's interesting how Litigious they are maybe it's because they're run by a certain group of people Don't but they're so good at like suing people like bittersweet symphony you remember that song. Yeah, totally they had to they had to give all their money to the stones Yeah, because it was what's on What's house perplexity Well Tony is Or while Jamie brothers Oh, I can't do that. That's right. Oh, we have to do it. I know are you we? We've song if I mean we learn this the hard way because I have an actual band That can play anything and everything and years ago. They could play anything and everything our old episodes hold Because you know I'd literally be I did to a you know a shy person I'd be like what do you you know you ever do karaoke? They're like yes I'd go what song do you sing and then they go dah dah dah dah and I literally they would go right into it and now you can't hum a song for a few seconds so bittersweet symphony was a sample from The verb developed bittersweet symphony from a sample from a 1965 version of rowing stone song the last time Adding vocal strings guitar and percussion after a lawsuit by the rowing stones former manager Alan Klein the verb relinquish all Royalty so the rowing stones members Mick jagger and Keith Richards who were also added to the song writing credits Wow 2019 10 years after Klein's death jagger Richards and Klein's son seated the rights to the verb songwriter Richard Ashcroft because he was probably broke there's some little things that have happened recently with I think Olivia Rodrigo and paramour and then like puffed atty and yeah Can you please look up the other one that I set up though? Which was radio head creep? Lana del Rey and radio head creep had to give songwriting credits to another band The hollies. That's right. What was the original song? The air that I breathe It's interesting when you listen to let's listen to them see if you could find that there's a comparison video that I watched on YouTube see if you could find that because it's interesting how they they Say the first one and you're like jeez. I don't see it Will have to edit this out ladies and gentlemen, but you could find yourself radio heads creep versus Lana del Rey's get free versus the hollies The air that I breathe yeah, that was a live version of it, but if you hear the recorded version of it's even more You could see But people get inspired by things I get it though I get it in those cases Especially at the beginning of the hollies song and then the beginning of radio head like also them Dead on yeah They're setting a mood like a very specific mood have you ever seen how the guy from here's a crazy one the guy from The gorillas the song Clint Eastwood. I think it is he had a like one of the Have you ever seen how the guy from here's a crazy one? The guy from the gorilla's the song Clint Eastwood? I think it is. He had like one of those like little kids kind of keyboards and he hit the demo button because like oftentimes it'll just have a regular song or whatever and it's the entire backbone of their biggest hit. You'd have to pull it up I guess to understand but it's that bah, dantah. Yeah, there it is. So that's just on the thing. Wow. Somehow they can away with it. Wow. And then all they do from there is just yeah. That's the preset is the rock one preset. That's so crazy. They use that, they use a preset from one of them little machines like a toy and much like the fucking crazy jokes that end up getting me in trouble. I bet they don't even think that's gonna be the hit. You know what I mean? Like they're probably not like this is the song that's gonna fly off the show. Yeah, but other people see it Tony. I was the one who told you you were gonna get stabbed for the Puerto Rican joke. There was that was so many years later it's crazy. I was doing that joke during the pandemic to the point to where it got extended to where you were part of it. And what's funny is I left those tags of the longer joke out of the Trump rally one which probably would have protected me. They probably would have saved it going. Ah, it's gonna get me stabbed whatever you know what I mean. Then you would have to do the Amy Shovel joke. Well, yeah, there was a lot to it. Yeah. People don't realize that that's a giant bit of a much much bigger chunk at the time. Well, that's why she'd be in a set. You know, comedy is such a weird art form. I mean, look, I love it to death, but real comedy should be seen in person. Oh, yeah. You know, Stan hopes said this once. Like it was like everything we do on TV is just to try to get people to come see us in the clubs. Exactly. Like that's really what it is. So you just really want people to go there live because that's the real fun. Yeah. The real fun is all us a bunch of human beings fucking around and having a good time. Right. So it's just start taking it seriously and making it something that it's not like you're I get while you're doing it because that has become a thing that people do today. But I'm just saying like for your own mental health, it's just not, it's not good for you to be engaging. Like I was saying about the Carlos thing, like just engaging in conflict. It's not good. It's not good for you. Bad for you. Yeah. Feels bad. It's not good. It's not, it's you. This is net, there's negative energy and positive energy. You should spend as much of your time possible on things that make positive energy. I know that sounds hippie and because I'm a little bit of hippie, I got a lot of hippie in me. But that's what I believe. I believe you should spend as much of your time having fun making people laugh, having a good time and less about dwelling on shit. Yeah. That's why I try to stay off Twitter because when I get on, I just start freaking out at all the different news stories that are just abomination of abomination. We're just so angry. It's just impossible. Now, and you know, it used to be Twitter was Twitter and this and that. But really, it's just the news. X is the news. It is the news. It is so hard to absorb that. It was fun. And you know, it's cool and all. And my algorithm still shows me stuff that I love police chases gone wrong and UFC highlights and all of this stuff. But all the stuff around that is just crazy. I did a thing because I was staying at a hotel in, in DC right after the state of the union or something. Anyway, I'm like, okay, it's a hotel TV. I never get to watch regular TV. I'm going to be asleep in a few minutes anyway. So I threw on, I ended up going by CNN. I'm like, let's see what these wackos are saying over here. Let's see how fake the news can possibly be because from what I understand, the most recent state of the union was a solid state of the union and very positive and long and entertaining. Let's see what they say. Oh, racism this. He caused the deaths of black people here. He's the reason why we, why America is failing. It's the reason why we're the laughing stock it made me so stressed out. And I'm like, okay, well, let's see what Fox News is saying. And it was crazy over there. And then you have, well, they had their counterpoint person on unlike CNN where they're just all in agree ends. Yeah. Yeah. And going by six people, literally going, yeah, he's the worst. And let's not forget that he doesn't think trans people deserve this and this just going on and on about straight doom. And Fox News had a counterpoint person that was stressing me out. I swear to God, I'm not kidding. This is not a joke. I was flipping through the different channel. Go by MS NBC. I'm like, oh my God, it's crazy. I put on silence of the lambs. The car is off to. I swear to God, I was asleep five minutes later. Simon, and I ended up, it just coincidentally was on the Buffalo bill part where like, he's got a girl in a while. A little ocean, a little bass pure darkness. And I'm like, oh, finally some peace on the cable television. I never get to just watch normal TV. So did Fox News have a positive spin on the state of the union address? I did not watch it. I remember for some reason it was stressing me out, whatever was going on because like they at least Fox has, they'll argue still like the news used to be. They'll have both sides on and kind of talk it out. And CNN has that poor guy, that poor one guy that just takes all the bullets for everybody is just going, you're lying. This is that stat doesn't exist. Scott Jennings. Yeah. Yeah. That poor guy is probably he's probably as months to live. He takes so many bullets every day. He's a fucking war hero out there. It's a, it's a very turbulent world when it comes to discourse. Everybody's mad at everybody else. It's really weird to watch, it's really weird to watch these, these shows on CNN now that are basically like bad podcasts that get interrupted every five minutes for a commercial. It's really what it's like. I just don't, I don't remember it being that way where it's just so many panel opinion shows. I remember it was, like CNN used to have more Danes show on. Yeah. You know, what they would travel around the country and check out or travel around the world and check out food and it was interesting. Yep. And he would, you know, give you his perspective on the cultures and all the problems and the things that these people were facing, their food and what the with the community was like, it was fucking great show. They did a bunch of different shows that were different, you know, and then somewhere along the line, man, they just went all outrage Yeah. And I don't think that's going to get any different now. I mean, now it looks like Barry Weiss is going to be running that as well. So she's running the CBS news and perhaps she's going to be running CNN. The same company is going to be running CNN. It's like, okay. Good luck. Good luck. Because it's already, people already don't want to listen. They don't want to take it seriously. Yeah. They, you know, and that's why X has become the news. The reason why it's become the news is because they can't trust the news. Right. You know, totally. It's crazy. Tim Dylan had these two New York Times reporters on this podcast. And I listened to him talking about it. I hadn't listened to them on the podcast, but I listening to him talking about it. And he was saying that they said there was no evidence that Jeffrey Epstein was intelligence. I was like, what? There's no it. If I watch one Mike Benz episode of my podcast where he breaks it down, it's almost impossible that he's not. Right. Like with a fuck, are you like no evidence? No, that's not true. There's just evidence that you're not considering. So it's like, if the New York Times and the people that we're always supposed to trust to be the objective purveyors of all that's going on in the world, if they're compromised, so they're not allowed to say things or they have narratives that they could, they're supposed to spin one way or another or they're very cautious about being honest about their opinion. Very, very shielded about their actual opinions. Either either one of those is not good. Or if they actually believe that, that's not good either. Because that means you're not really paying attention objectively. Like watch a Mike Benz episode where he breaks down Epstein's connections. It's nuts. The whole thing's nuts. It's crazy that anybody could say that he was an intelligence. Yeah, there's no doubt about it. But they will do anything to push their own story. They don't. Yeah, it's a propaganda network. Yeah. And whatever that propaganda is, I mean, that propaganda will shift depending upon who's in control of the realm of the reigns rather, the realm really is a realm, realm of nonsense. But whoever's in control, they're going to be the ones that dictate how the narrative goes. And it's always going to be whatever the sponsors are. That's why you never hear anything about any of these studies that they're showing about the vaccine safety signals that they found very early on, how they hit it, all this fauci stuff. They're not showing any of that. The Tulsi Gabbard talked about that, where she gave this speech explaining how he lied to Congress and fauci pressured these other scientists to change their perspective on whether or not it was gain a function research. Yeah. The shift that we had a pretty big feeling about back in 2020. Yeah. You don't hear any of these people. They're not covering it. Yeah. And they can't. Because they can't really tell you the whole news. They can only tell you the news they're approved to tell you. And that's not good. And that's how X comes about. Yeah. That's how X becomes the place where everybody trusts. But then you go to X and it's just filled with horseshit. There's so much lies. There's always video of something happening. And they're saying, this is going on right now. And you're like, and then someone says, no, this is a video from 2022. Right. This is in, you know, this part of the world. This is AI. This is China. This is not Israel. This is, you know, it's like there's so much horseshit. And there's so many bots. It's like, you just dip your toe into the water and you just feel poisoned. Like, I got to get out of here. Yeah. But then you feel irresponsible for not paying attention. Exactly. You know, I feel like so many people feel like they're doing the right thing, watching the news and being informed. And they hear that the news is fake. And they think that's just like a Trump talking point. I've always said that Trump calling it fake news was like one of the worst things that could happen because then it sounds like a Trump thing. And the Trump enemies go, I'll fake news. Sure, it's fake. If he's saying it, then it can't be fake because we have to disagree with him. Meanwhile, it's a fucking, it's a goddamn production. I mean, it is fake. And they're right. It's fake. Yeah. It's fake. There's a lot of the news is fake. It's not true. All that. I mean, the fact that no one got in trouble for all that rush-a-gate stuff crazy, absolutely crazy. And that there's still this, the same people that we're pushing that rush-a-gate shit or they're still giving opinions on TV. Right. It's nuts. Yeah. There's no repercussions to be found. They get to say whatever they want. It's crazy. Well, the repercussions is no one takes them seriously. And that's real. They've suffered that. I mean, we've seen that in real time. And I think the pandemic was the big, that was the big wake-up call for a lot of people, especially people that were forced to take the vaccine because they had jobs or, you know, they had a fly or they had family members. And then they got some horrible side effect. And those people got what they call red-build. You know, I know a lot of people that got red-build from that. They just can't take it anymore. It's crazy. And it's bubblish. You know what I mean? There's certain areas geographically in which that's the mentality and they stick to it. I mean, here in Austin, I'm known as, you know, a skinny little faggot. I went to LA and it turns out I'm a racist Nazi. Like, I'm like, they were doing jokes on me at that roast in which it's like, oh, what are you guys talking about? There's parts where I'm literally like, what the I've never even heard this about myself. I'm on a comedy show every week where people take shots at me. And none of this is a thing. Well, it's made up. And it's all they also made up a bunch of stuff about like you going to Saudi Arabia. Yeah, which is crazy. Right. Crazy. They just made it up. Yeah. Like, not only made it up turned it down. Yeah. Didn't go when offered vast sums of money that the bus boy bag boy Tony would never imagine turning down. And people don't even know that you turned it down. Right. Because you haven't been public about it. Right. I mentioned it. I meant glazed over it on one for one moment on Kill Tony once. But yeah, the people that turned down that money are you and Shane Gillis. Yeah. And meanwhile, Netflix clipped that and put and pinned it on their Instagram that joke. And with the caption long sip because I'm sipping my water because the joke isn't on me. So the camera shouldn't be on me. Meanwhile, they're getting my reaction shot to all you guys took that Saudi Arabian money and it makes it look like I'm offended or something or guilty of taking Saudi Arabian money. But just a joke when you just lie about a fact and to make a joke is crazy. Because you're just lying. Like that's there's a difference between that and making a joke about something. Like you had to make something true and then criticize them for something. So you got a lie about something and then criticize them about that lie that you just invented. Yeah. Which takes three seconds to find out it wasn't true. Exactly. It takes a really quick search Oh, he didn't go right. Okay. On the contrary, the guys that Chelsea was complementing during that set basically Kevin Hart and Pete Davidson did take the money and went to Saudi Arabia. Also, you don't think Chelsea handled what is there going that money? If they offered her to go to Saudi Arabia, she went to dinner at Epstein's house. Exactly. What the fuck are we talking about? But it's all right. Cause Woody Allen was there. Yeah. And apparently she gave him the what have you told him. That's what they said. She told him she was right. That with him. Yeah. At the intelligence agent slash sexual predators house, guys arrested for statutory rape. That's fun though. Crazy. Just yeah, don't be a white guy. It's just the whole thing is so stupid. Like if you want to make fun of someone for anything, for you know, you looking gay or you like you're down but you when you invent a fact, that's not true. You say it's not true. And then you criticize someone for that. Like that's stupid. That's a stupid way to do comedy. Yeah. You know, in the way that it's covered and everything. It's like, what are you guys doing? Well, if you didn't know and people didn't know obviously because they laughed, they thought you maybe you did go or maybe Shane did go. They didn't know that you were the two people that did say no. You know, Jessica curse on when she got criticized so much she gave her money away. She gave the money away. I think she gave what did she do with the money? Find out what she did. But I was like, oh man, listen, those people that went to see Jessica curse on first of all her, she murdered over there. She's very funny. She's a fucking dynamo. She's a killer on stage. Very, very entertaining, lovely lady. I love her to dust. She's fun to talk to. She fucking murdered over there. I heard. So a lesbian woman from New York went to Saudi Arabia. Okay. Donates, Riyadh comedy festival fee to human rights campaign. Well, all that money is going to someone's payroll. Yeah. It's going to be a daycare salary. Yeah. You feel better. But meanwhile, it's paying for someone's salary that's probably not fixing homelessness or whatever the phone is. That's what they do. Tom Saguaro went and put a photo of a Ferrari and said, thanks Saudi Arabia. Yeah. But everybody was very upset. But my perspective is the people that are in that audience, if you're upset with the people that are paying and organizing, okay, the people that are in that audience, though, that they're performing to, they don't get a chance to see Americans stand up comedy and they're getting a chance to see it live and stand up comedy, like music, like literature, changes people's minds. It changes all art where you see someone, a different person than you with a totally different perspective that lives on another side of the world that says something that you think is hilarious and you love it changes, you know, it changes people's perspectives. You win hearts and minds. I mean, that's real. Like you can change the world a little bit by getting people to say, Hey, we kind of are, we all have a lot of shared interests. We just want to have fun. We just want to be with our friends, be with our family and do what we want to do. Like everybody wants that, including those people in the audience, like those people in the audience in Saudi Arabia, we're just Saudi Arabia and citizens. They just a bunch of people that lived there that came out to see comedy, like performing in front of them. I mean, what is wrong with that? It's wrong. You're supposed to boycott it because the people that run probably were involved with the killing of Jamal Khashogg in some way or the people that finance it. Okay. Maybe I see how you didn't want to do it and I see how Shane didn't want to do it and I probably wouldn't want to do it either, but I don't have any problem with people doing it. Because I think at the end of the day, you're just like I don't have any problem with the Saudi Arabia putting on these boxing matches that I talked about. I love that they put on these boxing matches. And oddly enough, that's not really criticized that much. Even by like heavy duty left wing MMA media, which is a real thing, there's a lot of like shit, shit libs that are MMA media. Just because they're journalists and they just happen to be fans, but they have that like hardcore left wing perspective. They don't seem to have that much of a problem with it. Not like people had the problem with the comics over there where guys like Louis and Bill Burr, they just get destroyed for that. Yeah. Yeah. It's nuts. But I think Saguara had the right move. Don't even pay attention. Fuck off. I'm gonna perform wherever I want to perform. Yeah. Yeah. No, it makes sense. Totally. I just can't go straight from a Trump rally to Saudi Arabia. A little bit of a hop a skipping a jump. I know. It's also, it's like, you know, is that what you want to do? I don't want to go there. It's too long. Right. I want to be on a plane for 16 hours to go anywhere. Yeah. Why? I hate it. I hate flying. Yeah. Fuck off. It's terrible. Come to Texas. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. It's just we live in a very polarized society. And I think a large part of that is what we're talking about early with social media and mentally ill people just screaming into the fucking void every day. I just would like to suggest to people just try not to engage like that for a month and see how much better you feel. Yeah. Just try it and talk and make friends. And hopefully that's not how you've set up your life, where you have to do that for a living. Hopefully you're not one of those people because there are people that are paid posters and they make a pretty good living just posting and getting engagement. Well, you know, I don't know what tell you, you're trapped. Right. You know, if your whole thing is like shitting on people all day long, you're kind of trapped. Yeah. But you can't feel good. It's no way. No. There's no way. It's like the amount of cortisol that must be pumping through your body all day where you're going over. And I see like people that do that, I see how they get destroyed in the replies. And I'm like, and I know they're reading that. Like good Lord. Yeah. Like, I don't know how Gavin Newsom is still alive. Every time he posts something, the way he gets destroyed in those comments, it's like, fucking insane. Well, no one is happy. It's just the funniest thing because it's he reminds me of like one of the last actual politicians. Like he's a different just lying, ignoring of facts type of human being because we're witnessing it. Maybe it's easy for someone in, I don't know, New Hampshire to go, aah, that Gavin Newsom's the future. But we lived in California. And I've been to San Francisco recently. And we've seen it. Like when you travel, you know, comedians aren't the end all be all in these wise, whatever sages, perhaps, but we do travel a lot. And you spend a weekend in a city. And you're not just doing your shows. You're having lunch somewhere. You're having coffee somewhere. You're dealing with the people at the hotel lot, whatever it may be. There's different communications and vibes and energies. And there's so many of these places, especially California. You know, San Diego's like a last stand Huntington Beach is an area around there. There's like these little pockets in which there's still some common sense and happiness and joy, new port, these little pockets. But those major cities are fucked, man. Even the drive. And you know, I go to LA basically maybe once a year now for a quick, always fun visit, always doing some arena and a couple nights at the store, which is different, unfortunately. But the drive from LAX to that area of West Hollywood slash Beverly Hills is gruesome. Everything is for lease. Everything is empty. There's nothing new, except for the crazy looking weird ass Obama Museum library, which is the craziest weirdest I saw humanly imagined. Where's that? It's like on the way up there. I can't remember if it's like off of Los Sienega or Fairfax. That's not the new one because the new one is in Chicago, isn't it? Oh, it is. What's the fucking, they built something that looks just like that monstrosity. No, the one in Chicago, people don't like it. I think it looks dope. It looks like it looks like something from Blade Runner. Yeah, I like it. A lot of people don't like but it costs a lot of money. It costs like $850 million. So you can find out what that building looks like. Show me a photo of something that looks just like that building. It's complex on law. I'm also in the list of made who did the Obama's. Yeah. What is the, um, the one in Chicago? A lot of people were criticizing it and I saw that thing looks dope. I love it. Like that thing? Where is it? Yeah, the one there where your cursor is click on that. Oh, that's a rendering. Oh, it's not done. Maybe I don't mean to reflect. I thought people were in it. I don't think so. What's it down there in the lower? I think it showed this online and everyone was going crazy. I thought people were already going to it. I don't know that. Um, I think that's it. That looks like a rendering to me. That looks fake as fuck. But that one down there, that one down there with the darkness. Oh, in the corner. Yeah, right there. Is that real? It's like a pretty botanical. I think that's a real photo. I think it's done. I might be wrong. But see if it's, oh, you have Los Angeles, Chicago. Yeah, it's real. So it's up. But I think it looks cool. It's different. People are saying it's ugly. It looks like you're seeing the fine photos of it. Go to images. Yeah, it's, yeah, we go. Like there. Dude, I think that looks dope. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Window list. Look at how it's a writing on the top. What does it say? Go all the way up, please. Oh, oh, unconstrained. Conventions by what is written on two sides. So oh, right. Oh, it goes all the way around it. Oh, that's fucking cool. I think that looks cool. I mean, maybe I have no taste. I mean, we can't even find an angle of what they're trying to say. Right. I don't know what it's saying. But I think it's cool that they did that, that they had words that go across like that. I just think it looks sick. But I like that kind of brutalist architecture. I think that's what they call it. Yeah. I like that kind of cool cement with big glass. Like there's a lot of houses like that, especially like in the Hollywood Hills that I love. I looked at one of them back when I was starting to make that cheddar. And I was like, maybe I should live in a Hollywood and then I could just do the store right there. But I was like, probably not that safe. I looked at the house above the store that Mitzi was selling. What was on Colfax? Was that what it was? Was that those street? It was the comic store, the comic house where like, can it's in state there and poly lived there for a while? But I had dogs and I was like, this is not enough backyard. It's too small. And also it's like, it's too close to the machine. Yeah. It's like right next to the beast. Like I don't know if I want to be like right next to the beast. I think I'd rather be outside the beast and go visit. Like that for me, for my head. But I looked at a couple of houses up there and one of them was this house that was like really, out of my budget really. I was just, I shouldn't have been looking at it. It was like 10 million bucks. And it had crazy like concrete with massive windows, but it was right there on the street. Like you're walking on the street. There's a sidewalk, you could re-nover and touch the front door of the house. I was like, yeah, this is kind of crazy to buy this house. And the guy was like, don't worry, we have state of the art security system. So like, yeah, you know what that is? I go, your camera is going to catch a guy with a ski mask robbing you. And who weeks after I said that, the guy who owned the house got shot in it? Whoa. Two weeks. Got shot in the neck. Fuck. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So hey, that's these places, man. But the architecture, that kind of architecture, I think is dope. I like like the crazy, modern cement stuff. But for a house, like what you're going to live in, the reality is, you'd probably be like, I'm sleeping in a museum. This is too weird. Yeah. I'd rather just have a regular house. Yeah. Windows are a necessity. Yeah. I just want to see stuff. I just want to be able to have a cup of coffee and see some trees. You know, let me just sit out and fucking collect my thoughts for the day. You know, I don't necessarily need to be in a fucking museum. Concrete-ass, big, it's something weird about it. It's like you're too weird. If you live like that, you're weird, man. You're living with his giant 20 foot high glass wall in front of you that looks out at the blade runner scape that is Los Angeles from the hills. Yeah. Have you seen that view at night? Have you ever been up to a house? Oh, yeah. Have you seen this house? Oh, that's sick. I love that house. That's known as like the Oakley Founders house. I don't know if he still owns it. But yeah, that's up there. Yeah. That house, I love. See, if I was single and a baller, that's where I would live. 210 million, a bargain. Fuckin love that shit. I see shit like that. I'm like, oh my God, that's where I love it. But I don't want to live there for real. Yeah. I think after a while, you would be like, I'd rather have a log house. I was trying to find pictures of Kanye's concrete house, but this is not the one I was talking about. That's fucking dope. I just love those kind of houses that look like that, especially that one, that circular one. The way you pull into that driveway and the entire back house faces the lights and you see the lights. Like it's hard to see from photos of how, look how sick that looks, man. That's sick. I love that. But the lights from that, like, if you're up in the hills, you want to be above looking down and it's like a movie. It's like a sci-fi movie. It's one of the coolest fucking views I've ever seen. Polly has the fucking as crazy as it sounds that motherfucker when he made it. He bought a house that's on top, top, top, top of the Hollywood Hills with that MTV money. Yeah. Dude, it's crazy. He remodeled it recently. When I was there for the first place, like, dude, you got to come see the house, come see the house. I'm like, Polly, I'm so busy. That's very highly unlikely. Come see the house, dude. You got to come to the house. Sure enough, I went there one afternoon for a fucking coffee. Bro, it is crazy. He was right. He's got the house. He did it. It's on top of everything. So there's, if a robber does try to go up there, they're robbing someone else's house. They don't want to go to the tippy top of the fucking hill. That's a toughest escape. That's the problem is the escape. You want to be close to the bottom. Right. Speaking of which, I've been watching, I got, I went to down a rabbit hole the other day on YouTube, where street racers. And this is one guy who is like a famous street racer because there's all these videos of him. He got his There are street racers and this is one guy who is like a famous street racer because there's all these videos of him. He got his his things set up where he can shut the lights off. He's got this black Corvette. I'm gonna send this to you Jamie. Yeah, his name is really slow like r y l s l o. And he's got videos of these cop encounters. So they like bait's cops and then goes on these mad runs and you you watching you go. Holy shit. I love it. Carison screen. Yes, this is the dude. Yeah, so about him not just one. Yeah, this is well, he's like a legend online because he does interviews only with a voice changer or purchase voice or or bird. Where he describes all the modifications that he did to his car. But he puts a 3D camera on the back of his car and he you know they have those things where you stick it on the back of your car. And he gives you a 3D view of the automobile and he has video of the cops like flashing their lights and his car has got a thousand plus horsepower. So these poor cops and they're like 300 horsepower fucking crown Victoria. They try to chase this guy. He just disappears. And then once he gets out of the line, like go back to that video where it was before watch this. I mean, it's this is it's just not his videos. It's just so I understand. But if you just I know this video. But if you what what he does is they start pulling him over and in the beginning when they pull him over, he hits the gas and then shuts his lights off. Did you pass that's what's here it is. So this is it. So they hit the lights and he's like, see, are they going to show it? Yes, this is not the right. Okay. So it's not the compilation. So when he does it and he hits the gas, he gets far here it is. He gets far enough away from them. They're not showing it. He's motherfuckers. They have to edit their own shit. Leaving it alone is better. So he gets ahead of everybody and then just he has a button where it kills his headlights and he's using night vision. Oh, wow. Yeah. It's nuts. So is this it? Yeah. Yes. This is it. So this is this guy. So his license plates as will run like it's a fake. It's a fake license plate. The cops get it behind them. They hit the lights and he goes, bye, and the cops realize there's no way to catch this guy. It's not. Look at that. Oh, lights go out and he's gone. And he's flashing lights on people to get them to fuck out of the way and there's no way to catch him. And then he bangs you turns. He knows where he's going. He plots it out. And the thing is he's filming this and uploading it. Oh, yeah. So he's got to hide his identity through how many different channels. How does Instagram not know who he is? How is he posting? I guess he's using a VPN. He's probably using a proxy and he's probably going through some other country or something if he's smart. If he's smart enough to avoid detection, but he just has these fucking crazy car bills like he's got a call vote Viper that has like, I mean, I don't know how many fucking horsepower that thing has, but they make some of these call vote vipers that's a company here in Texas. They make vipers that have 2000 horsepower. What? What are you talking about? He's always doing the same. I think he's in the Dallas area. How fun. We yeah, well, not good. If he kills somebody, but it's very spooky. Yeah. Yeah. It's not. Because this fucking dude really knows how to drive too. And you see these poor cops and one of them the cops wipe out. They slam into another car. I think they're trying to pass by these cones and the road cuts off and the cop hits the cones then loses control of his car and slams into another car. People can fucking die, especially if he runs red light and he runs a lot of them and someone's being an idiot. Maybe someone's doing exactly what he's doing while he's running the red light. Dude, you have to see what Kanye is doing right now. It's a historical moment and all of our it's unbelievable. Yeah, you said that he's standing on the globe, right? Well, not only that. He thought an entire everything is a super production and it's all him. Like you could tell he's made every decision and tweaked everything to the color of everything to when it happens to how it happens that it's not too much. He's not overwhelming the senses with lasers and lights and all of this. It's all so strategic. But most importantly, it's first of all, it's the fucking greatest production I've ever seen of anything. I've come from Pink Floyd land where the live show has to be ahead of its time and state of the art and everything for my mind to be blown. And I was expecting this to be like every other rap concert that I've seen which is going to be fun and good and maybe great of course it'll be great. But this was like a thousand times my expectations because first of all, he's doing pop up shows at stadiums, which is crazy. And it announces that a week or two in advance and the stadium's like, okay, we're sitting empty that night. We love to sell beer and water and get a percentage of merch, right? How these venues work? They don't give a fuck and he's not promoting it. Everyone else that's been to one or seen one is promoting it. And then the mayor of whatever city or whatever leftist person, whether it be the governor of that state or whatever's like this shouldn't be happening. So they're promoting it for him and it's filled to the top of the fucking stadium where he's even Pink Floyd or the Rolling Stones or whoever announces a tour all at once and goes, hey, by tickets, I'm on tour pretty please come, right? He's just like San Antonio July 4th, like a week ago, literally. And what's crazy is that my buddy got me tickets to go see him in Tampa because as all we knew is that he was going to Tampa. And so there I was and I'm looking and it's filled to the top and the floor is filled and it's he doesn't stop. He doesn't take a break. There it is. I saw that on Instagram after his first one that he did. I think it was in LA and I'm like, oh, that's crazy. I need to see this. That is nuts. That stage is nuts. But these pictures and videos do not do any justice to what is happening. Sound wise, energy wise, just that stage alone is fucking insane. It's crazy. Any enters at the he walks through the crowd because obviously it's in the round. He comes out and you hear a pop from one side because they can kind of see him and then the globe turns on and you know he waits until it's dark. So he enters at one point and then inside is a a lift that only takes him. So like there's no one that can storm that stage or anything because it's inflatable on the outside. So it's an impossible impossible to you know storm the stage or anything like that. And he's the only one that has access to the lift obviously and he has a tether that he's attached to so that he doesn't go off or anything. So it's fall into the balloon. Exactly. And it is the most diabolical show I've ever seen in my entire life effort and that includes all the fucking everything. And again, I come from the school of Pink Floyd, which is always 10, 20 years ahead of its time production wise. And this was fucking nuts because he does not stop. He does not take a break. He doesn't go thank you guys for coming out until the very end and which he goes. It's all about love. I love you guys. Thanks for sticking with me all these years when all these people said this and by that point two and a half hours in when he's saying that you're just like you got to be fucking kidding me. He realized the bulk of his work. How many ooh, bangers that guy has. It's nuts, bangers. And I as an experiment took my one buddy who said that you know part of the group was my one friend who has always been like, Oh, no, you fucking love Kanye. I mean not really my thing, but he's not he's just not really a rap fan is the reality. So I invited him on this trip and his mind was fucking now he's a diehard Kanye fan now he's going back and you know realizing that he's always been a Kanye fan. Like it's such a crazy fucking thing because not only does he have hits on hits on hits, but he does not stop in between songs because some of his beats kind of correlate or this and that. He'll literally just keep going and going and going and till his amazing on his new album. He has this keyboardist with one of those like crazy blow into tube instrument things. I don't know what it's called, but he has a solo a big one on one of the songs which gives Kanye a minute and a half to catch his breath an hour and a half into non-stop going. And also on top of all that you know a rap concert, a rap concert, Kanye is the greatest producer of all time in that industry. So every noise that's happening even if he's not talking or singing or rapping into a microphone is all him and him only. You know what I mean? Like he might get an idea or an inspiration as we talked about or he's a master of sampling. Old hit songs and having them be in the backbone of the thing and everything, but this is just a whole nother level. Absolutely insanity. Like I thought I was going to go there and be like yeah and maybe move a little bit or sing along or whatever and instead my job was dropped the entire time. Is there anybody that ever bows back from being canceled like him? And that's really the underlying thing. There's this feeling of loyalty that's there and we're right. You know what I mean? There's a feeling that everybody there is like their correct. Does that make sense? Yeah. I saw breakdown of it because my algorithms feeding me Kanye stuff non-stop since I went to it because somehow fucking Instagram knows and whatever. And I watched a breakdown of it talking about how like it's like this psychiatrist or energy specialist or something that's talking about how and why this is the craziest concert ever done before. And she breaks it down and goes people that like Kanye believe in themselves because if Kanye sang I'm the greatest I'm the man. Oh my god all of these things makes you not like him and you insecure. You're insecure. Does that make sense? Like it's like he if that turns you off to somebody then you don't really like yourself that much. Why do you think that? Well again this was someone else's psychological breakdown of it and I'm probably not explaining a correct because I was stoned on a couch. I see what they would be saying to try to defend them but there's some people that just get turned off by that kind of bragadocious rap music. I don't. Right. I love that shit. Well I love 90s hip hop talking about how great they are. I love it. Yeah. I'm a giant fan of that shit. Yeah. You know I think like some of my favorite rap lyrics like some of Nausea's lyrics just him talking about how he's the shit. Yeah. Totally. I don't mind that at all. But it's like it's when you're singing along to that stuff and you're listening to that stuff. Like you're feeling with that guy's feeling when he's saying it. And if his raps or hit it his rhymes are really hitting especially like Kanye or any of the greats. You know biggie, Tupac, Nas like when they're now it's like oh. Oh my god. Oh. Oh. With good lyrics and good execution. It's a fucking amazing art form even if USA really did create it. Yeah. I don't want to believe that. You know I think they probably very they promoted it. What's really interesting is the lack of big rock and roll bands. I know Jamie's kind of defended this but I think it's a fact. Oh no doubt. No doubt. This is the last big rock and roll bands when we were a kid. When we were a kid rock and roll was everything. It was like rock and roll and if you like rock and rap like you are a weirdo. You know. Like I really became a rap fan like almost like silently like secretly. Cause you had to be a rock fan. If you if you loved rock music and you went to rock concerts like that's all you like. But I was like yeah but this is good too. Oh yeah. You know I'd like listen to ghetto boys. I'd be like yeah listen to this. Come listen to this. Shit is awesome. Oh my range is absolutely ridiculous. I just got Roy Orbison on vinyl. Oh yeah. Oh my god. And again that's what we're going to be trouble for that. Probably. Fuck. Fuck. And again pretty woman much like Pink Floyd's wish you were here is like one of my when you get into the radio stuff. It's kind of funny how some bands and musicians get like type casted by their hit. Whereas like pretty woman's kind of repetitive and easy even though it's a jam. Right. But his other songs. Like I hadn't even heard before cause I'm like this guy seems like he has some fucking some hits and he does man. And you know I what I mean by the Pink Floyd thing is it always fascinated me that people go oh yeah I like Pink Floyd wish you were here. and other brick in the wall and it's like damn it. It's because those are their radio songs. Cause they can't play an 11 minute long shine on you crazy diamond. Right. All their real hits that their real echoes which is like 17 minutes. It's so slow and fast and bluesy and then jazzy and this and that. Yeah there were so many songs like that especially from like the 70s where they just took wild chances and long ass songs. Like famously pre bird like record executives are telling them like the beginning of it is too slow. Yep. And they're like no this is the song. Exactly this is what it is. Bohemian. I'm sitting. Yep. There's another one. Yeah. A lot of love. Yeah. Whole lot of love is a minute and a half of fuck sounds. And symbols and shit. It's weird. I only recently got to see the queen movie. Whatever that is. Is that Bohemian or Absidy? Whatever. Whatever they haven't seen it. Yeah. Well I walked in on a part where it's the record executive's office and he's going this can't be the main single off of this thing. And Freddie Mercury's like dude it fucking has it. I'm obviously not quoting this but. And the record execs like man you're saying gibberish at points. It's slow with a piano. You're saying things that don't even make sense and it's fucking eight minutes long. Like what are you thinking and they're arguing back and forth and back and forth. And his bass player guitarist or one of the guys that's in the meeting with this record exec sitting behind a big fancy desk points at the wall and goes see you were the record exec that made this huh. And he points it dark side of the moon. And you see the record exec. Oh fuck. Because what the fuck was that. It starts with a heartbeat has no words for the first what however long. Also what is the deal with it aligning with the Wizard of Oz. Crazy. Roger says it's just coincidental. I know. But it seems like the universe organized it. It almost seems like evidence of the simulation. Yeah. Because it's so good. The way it lines up. Yeah. It's too good. I've always said it's the craziest coincidence of all time. I feel like it's evidence of the simulation. There's something about it. There's evidence of like some weird bizarre synchronicity between those two pieces of art. Yeah. The producing that would have been near impossible. Yeah. But you couldn't. Yeah. The mountain plan. So hard. Yeah. The technology then would have been so hard to do. Yeah. So hard. Pink Floyd would have had to they would have literally have to watch it and then go over each beat and decide how high was the person that figured it out to. Right. Right. Yeah. How do you notice that hold on. Is it going. It's still going. Right. But meanwhile, it's perfect. Like we've watched it before. Yeah. It's perfect. The lyrics of the scariest part. Which one is which at one point when only when the only moment when both the good witch and the bad witch are there? Yeah. It's nuts. And the wildest one to me is always when she's balancing on the thing, you know, in black and white and with the other farmers around and on the run that crazy bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla starts and she falls off at that exact moment. Okay. It's happening. It's crazy. Is there a why in that conspiracy? You know, like why would they have done that just to do it? Just for fun. Just because they were pink. Yeah. There's a lot of them as you could have picked. Well, I mean, Roger Waters says it was an accident. I know. I'm just saying like I know. But the conspiracy theorists. Yeah. I mean, I would imagine they think that I brought the people that believe that it was some sort of a coordinated conspiracy. It's like, why wouldn't they say that? Why wouldn't they just say we, we lined it up with the Wizard of Oz? Yeah. They said that make more people watch it and more people listen. Well, they did pretty good off. Yeah. They did pretty good. Who will we to get the advice? Yeah. Speaking of doing pretty good. You're fucking killing it, dude. Congratulations. Thank you, buddy. It's awesome. You've taken all the hits. Yeah. Keep on moving. Keep on trucking. On to the next one. Makes the jokes better. New jokes are killing it. Yeah. Yeah. It's fun. We're having a good time. Yeah. Two days and Wednesday's the best working them out at the mothership. Yes, sir. All right. I appreciate you, brother. Thank you, man. Oh, yeah. Bye, buddy.