Joe Rogan, Mike, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Hey, Nick. Joe, Seth. Good to see you. Good to see you. Dude, I haven't seen you in a long fucking time. What was the last time we were actually in a room together? I, well, I was trying to think of that. I don't know. I would imagine post-news radio. We hung out at some point at some show somewhere. Somewhere. But I don't know. But I do remember, because I did news radio a couple times. And we hung out. I remember, I think we both know just you had more hair than I was probably already at this point. I was fighting to keep it. I was hanging on. Do you shave or is that it? Oh, I mean, I'm bald if I didn't shave. I'd be bald all the way up here. But I got a hair transplant. And it was useless. Yeah. I did a joke about it. I go, having a hair transplant is like taking people that are healthy and moving them into a neighborhood where everyone's dying. And this is just like, where did Bob go? He just fucking flew off the face of the earth. So yeah, you just, you just accepted it. Yes. Fuck it. Yeah. I should've done it a long time ago. It's so much better. And I don't have to talk to a barber. I don't have to listen to boring fucking stories while they hold you hostage with the pair of scissors. That's what this is. This gets me. I don't like shaving. I don't, it's kind of a pain in the ass. And I also I look like a kind of a turtle. I look like a turtle. You know, when I shave, I don't like it. And it's not attractive to me. And I jerk off to me all the time. So I want to keep things fresh. But I probably don't have to. I could probably get clippers and stuff. But I go to one of my guys around the corner where I live. And I have this experience where I want that. I want to get in and out. Because of what you were saying. I'm a lot of chitchat. And there are a couple guys very quiet. Hi, how you doing? Good, fist bump, whatever. You get, you know what I want. Do get, get out there. There's one guy who just talks all the, and then they have that, the blade, you know, what do you call that? You know, the blade blade straight. Straight. Straight. Straight. And they got it right there. So you got to be polite. It's on your, it's by your, yeah, you know. And I know I could avoid it if I just get some clippers and just do this thing. But I don't, I don't know. I was boring. And sorry. This was, there's an old point to it. That's just do it. You're a little like anything to do with what we were talking about. There's something about a beard though that makes you distinguished or at least have experience or look like a homeless, you know, alcoholic. I mean, there are plenty of those guys too. Yeah, there's a lot of those too. But a beard is like, there's a, there's a statement with a beard, like a full beard, like yours white. Mine is just, you know, I don't like shaving. Like, you know, and again, I, I, I do like, I only gain weight in two places, stomach and right here. And, and, and also I have a kind of a thin frame. So it's, it's really not attractive. It's not attractive. So the beard sort of, it's, it's more laziness. It's, I don't have to worry about it. Yeah. No, I hear you. And this, you know, I just, I go, I don't know. Six, seven weeks and then I just shave it. Once it gets out, because this, my hair doesn't grow down or it just goes out like a clown, you know, it goes this way. All of it, even this too. And, and once this starts filling in, it, it just looks goofy. Yeah, I have a friend, my friend, a son. He used to shave his head and now purposely to look goofy. He lets the sides go out and it's madness. It's just, it's all fucking crazy thick hair. And bald on top. And bald on top. Yeah. Yeah. And he does a joke on stage about it. It doesn't, it doesn't praise Indian. It doesn't mind pressure of an Indian posse. Well, and it's just like not concerned about getting laid or. Yeah, I think he's just embracing, but he still gets laid. You know, he's really, he's really funny. I think he just embraces not giving a fuck. There he is. Oh, he looks familiar to me. Okay. Very funny guy. All right, cool. He's one of the up in common. Well, he's from LA originally. He was one of the door men at the comedy store. Okay. He was very, very professorial. He's very smart. Yeah. Yeah, but doesn't give a fuck about his hair. Who's that? Art Bell. I was going to guess art Bell. I swear to God. Yeah. I swear to God. I don't even know if I've ever seen him. Yeah, that's the coast. Yes, yes. I think it. From the Kingdom of Nye. Wow. I fucking love that show. That was the show that I listened to coming home from Hollywood because I lived out in the valley and I would drive home at night and I'd listen to late night with art Bell. Art. The best coast with art Bell. I used to do a whole bit about the like, um, because who's the new guy? George. Yeah, right. Right. And I'm going to digress for one second. Did you ever play video games at all? Yes. Well, I try not to. But I used to play a lot of them. Did you ever play pray? No, but I know what it is. A great underrated, underrated game got ripped off, uh, or just people bit certain things that they, um, started. But one of the coolest things. So it's about like this, uh, it takes place on a, uh, uh, reservation, like, you know, in the 90s, I guess, or something like that. And there's bartender and her boyfriend and, and it takes place in the spa. And then aliens come and, uh, then this guy goes on the alien ship to, uh, go rescue her. Um, they did this really cool thing. So first they have this in the video game, right? At the bar, there's a TV. And as you walk towards it, it's, it's playing, it's like staticy until you get closer to it. And then as your character gets closer to it, it's art Bell talking about aliens and and stuff. And I know I'm not doing it justice, but it was such a cool, smart idea. And, uh, God bless them. He's the OG. Yeah. And, and just some of the guy, I, one thing that, because I listen to it a lot too, because sometimes, you know, you're listening and you're like, this is insane. This is crazy. And he would always, always treat the guest with deference, you know, respect. And I, I, that must have been, because there were things that were, you know, if you go back to all the episodes that were kind of contradictory in a sense, you know, like, what you think all these things happen? You think there's a, a place in the middle of the ocean that has like, it's a community of people that live there and, and, and then. But you also think this, it's like all these different things would be like, hmm. Huh. Interesting. Yeah. He would let you go. He'd let you go. Yeah. He'd give us a mayor. Uh, but he was, yeah, he was never rude or. No, never. You'd call him up. He had a time traveler line where you would call specifically if you were a time traveler. But if you were calling from the past, they didn't have that technology yet. No, that's mostly people from the future, I believe. Wait. Like art, I'm calling from seven minutes in the future. Listen, I think his, his whole deal was if you are here in this current era, but you are from another time, you could call because, you know, the idea was like, he would have these remote viewers and their oddballs on and they would talk about that we, we have had the ability to time travel for a long time. Oh, yeah. There were wormholes that exist and they explained the quantum dynamics involved in a time travel was been breached by the CIA in the 1960s. And you have these people call up, but art would always like give them air. Like let it breathe. Yeah. Yeah. Art, I'm a werewolf. Interesting. Tell me more. Like it didn't matter no matter what it was. It was a fun show. Yeah, I loved it. Crazy people from fucking Bigfoot people to alien people. And then a lot of people ex military, right? I think you get that like whistleblowers. I was stationed and, you know, outside of a remote island that I can't go into from Singapore and I witnessed some things are that I still have difficulty believing that. And then he did. Yeah. That was great. Yeah. That's so fun. So did you also listen to Phil Hendry? Yes. Oh, God. He was the best. Super genius. The best thing about Phil Hendry was the people that didn't understand what was going on. He would call in and be really upset. Well, first, the first two times I heard him, I didn't understand what he was doing. He's that good too. And I would be like, this is crazy this guy. And then eventually like, oh, he's doing characters. Yeah. He's, you know, repeat characters and stuff. But I got the chance to watch him do a show. So he's got, he's got the, he's got three mics. I want to say like two mics like this and then a phone mic or, you know, phone like I hand it up a whole time, you know, cradle phone. He was doing himself. The, the woman who runs the HOA or whatever that, whatever her name was that character. And then somebody else calling in like he did somebody calling on the phone. And it was, I mean, it was like a magic act. Yeah. It was crazy to watch how without missing a beat. And I could see, you can see how he strategically takes breaths so that he can go from one character to another and interrupting each other. Yeah. It was fascinating. But he's a genius. It's the only thing that caught right away, I was like, oh wait a minute, there's no cross talk. Like right, well, if one of the early times I listened, I was like, I think this is the same guy. Yeah. Well, he's, he bumps it up. Like he's really good at, you know, making it sound as if like, because he'll interrupt himself and go, and I, okay, but you know, stop and then just go right into the other voice. It's fucking phenomenal. And completely original. Like I don't know of anybody else did anything like that. No. Did you ever, he used to put out stuff for charity like CDs and things and he has I don't know what it would be called, but it was one of the, one of the things he put out for charity that was a guy called into the station. I think he was probably super high, but he called in thinking it was pizza hut and he fucks with this guy in the best way where he's like, and who's the, what's the woman character he does? It's kind of like a black woman who's like, hmm, honey, it is the, I don't know, Marjorie, I think maybe. But he, then he does that woman answering the phone at, you know, pizza hut and then he does the automated thing like, she's like, I'm going to put you on, it's easier to do the automated thing. So in the guy's like, okay, right. And then he gets on. He's like, thank you for calling pizza hut, the best pizza in our three block radius. And if you want, if you want, I'm not doing it justice. You got to go do it here at listen. Can you? Yeah, you got it. Okay. It's so brilliant. Wait. Yes. And he's so bad. And he's so bad. You're calling pizza. Your call is being transferred. Please have all credit card information available for our operators. Yes, pizza. Hello. Hi, yes. Hi. Hi. Which location are you at? We're at the corner of La Cienega and Venice. Okay. I like the place in order for delivery. All right. Can I put you on a note with what you thought are automated system? Hold on, please. Thank you for calling pizza. If you'd like cheese pizza, press one. If you'd like a meatball pizza, press two. If you'd like sausage, press three. Oh, it goes on and on and on. He eventually gets the guy a fish pizza. And the guy's like, no, man, this I don't want. It's really funny. But that's him. That's filled with all those voices. And that's not set up. The guy had called into the studio thinking it was pizza. And they're like, take this call. Did you ever meet him? I did. Briefly, when I got to see him do his, he did a live show at Aspen Comedy Festival. A long, long, long time ago. I did something with him, Bob Odincirk and Doug Stanhope. Oh, wow. And Adam Krolla. I don't remember where it was. I want to say it was somewhere in Canada. But it was some sit down. We were talking about the process of going through, because he was in the middle of doing some sort of a television show pilot. We were, yeah, yeah. So we were talking about the process of creating a pilot and what it's like trying to get a pilot to an actual finished television show and get it approved and what the struggles are. It was very interesting. I don't think it was for, it was one of those Montreal comedy festivals. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know what it's in. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And he was, there was going to be, because he would talk about it doing this sitcom. Yeah. Did it ever happen? I don't think so. No. He was a really nice guy though, not what I expected at all. I expect him to be fucking insane. Just like, just to be able to do that every night and not get bored with just completely fucking with people every day. It's, it's got to be exhausting too. Like mentally, because you're, you've got to remember, it's like really great improv. guys, where you have to remember all these details, bring them back 30 minutes later. Right. Yeah. And you're doing multiple characters. You ever see TJ and Dave? No. Oh, dude. The best. Yeah. What is it? It's TJ, Jadagowski and Dave Pascuese, who are like the kings of that stuff in the, out of Chicago. And they come, they tour around. And they're just, they're two guys who, it starts off, you know, it's none of its plan, none of its, and they have like a dedicated cult following when their New York, it sells out like that. And you got to go to, at least two shows to see how wildly different it is. I mean, there are two guys that come out on stage, usually it was like three chairs. And it'll just start with like, you know, how's it going? Good, good, good. Are you in line? No, no, no. And then you watch it like, oh, they're in line, where are they in line at? Do they know each other? And then it turns out they're at the DMV, but they're not. It's like a room outside of the DMV and then they will leave and come back and be somebody else, right? A kid that was mentioned or a wife or something or be in a car. And it all wraps up. It's all a big story and I have seen, I've probably seen them 30, 40 times and I've seen shows where that were more, that were funnier and more poignant than some plays that have been worked on for years. You know, it is better. Completely improvised? Completely 100%. Wow. Oh, they're, I mean, do you know Tim Meadows? Yeah. So Tim was a guest. Sometimes I'll have a third or something. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I was, and Tim's been, you know, SNL. Yeah. And then Scott's in that second city world for decades. And he said it was the most terrifying thing he's ever done because you're there, like genius level. I mean, the detail you have to remember. And then on top of it, if one of them is, you know, I'm a marine biologist or whatever, it slips out, then that person has to know about the real person playing the fake marine biologist has to know enough about marine biology to keep the thing going, you know, and it's just next level. It's almost time for spring break. So maybe you're headed to the beach or maybe you're taking the kids on a road trip or maybe you're just taking some extra time for yourself. No matter what, you deserve a break and a reset and AG one can help. AG one is your daily health drink, just one scoop combines your multivitamin, pre and probiotic superfoods and antioxidants to help support a healthy immune system and digestion. Plus it travels really well. So you can start working it into your routine even when you don't have a routine. Just slip a few travel packs into your luggage and have a nice flight. I've talked about AG one for a long time and it's not just me. I know a lot of people enjoy it. It's very easy. It's very convenient and you deserve to take care of your health. Visit drinkagone.com slash Joe Rogan and for a limited time, get a bottle of Omega three, vitamin D3K two and an AG one flavor sampler for free in your welcome kit with your first subscription. One hundred and eleven dollar value at drinkagone.com slash Joe Rogan. Well I don't imagine that's like a muscle that you just get really strong with like ranchers. Like Tim Dylan is the best at ranting on a podcast alone. He doesn't he doesn't have anybody with him. Most of his podcasts are just him ranting and I've watched the development of it. I'm like that's an amazing muscle to develop because you just get accustomed to that kind of scenario that situation where it's just in your mind just gets used to producing content just and like old school. AM late night radio guys right who don't have people calling in who are like talking about whatever and they got to do it you know four or five times a week. Yeah. By themselves. Yeah. I just always like to listen to them. I just like to listen to those crazy right wing angry political talk shows because I don't I didn't know anybody like that. So I was like oh but what is this guy doing? Well that's that was the bulk of the radio. I mean that's why you know you have like art bell and Phil Henry like a nice like oh okay yeah because I got all this I got Mark Levin and I got you know what's his name you know the Rush Limbaugh. Yeah and and when you when you first start listening or when I first started listening and I came out to LA from Boston you know and people are like there's this guy out here is fucking nuts you know and uh uh yeah I'd never heard of him in Boston and then and you're like does he how much of this stuff does he believe does he really believe and how much has he come to believe. Does that make sense? Yeah. Yeah and uh and those guys that was a whole fascinating thing and Wally George do remember Wally George. I do but I don't remember much about him I remember the name what did Wally George do? He was the guy who originated what I mean now it's really familiar. He remember Morton Downey Jr. He was a little African. Oh that's right that's right. He would like 83 and he was and it was a super low budget like cable access like that back when that was a whole thing and he'd get the audience would be Putin and Holor and they'd have people on like somebody who and sometimes they I think because it became popular sort of like with Morton Downey Jr. where people came on to quote unquote fuck with Wally George like I'm gonna pretend to be you know a furry way and I'm gonna you know have gauges and you know what I mean like just the archetype of the thing they want to yell at and uh and I think people started it was there were some bullshit people on there you know people lying about who they were but he had people on and then and then kick them off. It happened all the time like come on sit down. What the fuck do you think you're doing and everybody would yell at the person they start talking and you're like get the fuck out of here and that was it that was the show. Really you know and here's something really crazy and tell me if this is rumor look up at your magic computer Rebecca de Mornay's dad the actress. That's yeah Wally George. Yes. No. Look it up. Casey right. Jamie I'm gonna call you Casey. Who is I forget who Rebecca de Mornay was from uh risky business. Oh wow. Wow her dad. Yeah. Is Wally George. Wow. I'm not crazy. Married multiple times shocker probably potentially ten times at least six children. Oh shit look at how many times he was married. one two three four. Possibly ten. Possibly ten. You imagine just keep fucking signing up. I don't yeah I just read um literally the the other day uh Fleetwood Mack guy. So getting married for the fifth time he's 182 and he's getting like what stop. Yeah. You want to keep doing that. They believe. They really believe this is it. This is the one. Kid you have to say those vows and mean it each time or not. Yeah or just say this is just a fun thing that I do. Yeah. Keep a lady happy. Yeah or just have a party. I guess. Yeah have a party and pretend that you're normal now. Are you and you're married? Yeah. Yeah. How long you been married? Seventeen years. Oh nice. Yeah. I'm 18 in October. If I get divorced that's a wrap. What do you mean? Like I'm happy happily married. I don't want to get divorced. Not saying that. But if I ever get divorced I'm never. Oh yeah yeah. Uh oh same here. Yeah. Oh I feel the same. I'm not having any more children. So if I don't have any children it makes no sense. Yeah. It's a legally be bound to some person. Can we just hang out? I am 100% with you. And I was never a anti marriage guy but I just didn't think I'd get married because I didn't want to. I didn't want to. And then eventually I met somebody who I wanted to marry. Yeah. So like you just have to. It has to I mean that's the thing. It has to be the right person. Everybody says that except Wally George. But the idea of doing it ten times is fucking insane. Yeah. Like that's a they're doing a different thing. I think once you get I'll give you three. And let's say one of them was some fishy circumstances. I'll give you three once you get on your by the time you're going to be on your fourth or fifth or six or Rupert Murdoch marriage like I what is the point and why does that woman believe you what does it say about the lady what what about ladies do it I've been here for six years and I know one lady while I've been here she's been married twice. married in divorce twice and now she's on the third guy. Yeah I would look I mean that's just something about the guys right. I guess if you you wouldn't ever think like you meet somebody you like them and then you find out they've been married twice before in six years. And you and you were like starting to fall for her you wouldn't think wait a minute. You would unless she was hot matter dumb. If she's hot and she's sexy and you really like being around there you're like who cares she made mistakes. Yeah who cares. I guess you're right if the sex is that good. Yeah the sex is good she's hot and you love being around her and that's what she wants and you want to make her happy like okay. I'll get I'll say this you should find out you should go talk to the other guys and have a sit down and find out why you know why some guys don't want to mess it up for you so they'll lie they might not be accurate. You know they might paint a just oh also they might have been the fuck up and they want to blame it on her and then you'll get a distorted perception who she is. But then then it's back to her that she's marrying people right or fucked up. I guess the point is that we're both making is don't get married. You know what is a weird thing it's a weird thing to do you have children I do yeah it's a weird thing to do if you don't have children not weird like you shouldn't do it but it's a different thing yeah completely yeah you're I and I I would say that not that we you know my wife and I have any you know real issues but I would behave myself and stay and work at the marriage because of the kid yeah yeah absolutely it fuck kids up when people get divorced what's your what's your background and my parents were split up when I was five and my mother remarried when I was seven and it's been with my stepdad ever since oh that's good yeah they have a great relationship I just saw them this weekend and where did you grow up fucking everywhere I was born in New Jersey moved to San Francisco when I was seven lived in San Francisco from seven to eleven in the height of the Vietnam War in hey-ashbury like hippie town and then Florida from eleven to thirteen that's the opposite of yeah oh my god yeah that's the first time I found out about the N word I didn't know what it meant and I remember I had a way yeah I had to ask my mom I never heard it San Francisco never heard it wow San Francisco in the 1970s when I was you know between seven and eleven was kind of a while the amazing time it was really weird it was because we were in the middle of like the counter culture yeah moved Berkeley all that's the home yeah we lived right down the street from Lombard Street so we're you know we were like in the middle of it all you know and it's funny because it was during that time that the Vietnam War ended when I was I think I was when did Vietnam end 74 I think 74 so officially seven equal 3075 okay you guys with 1273 yes I was like I think 74 Okay Yes, so that was like What whatever the point is like at that time? I remember thinking thank god they figured out Wars bad we're never gonna do this again. I literally literally had that thought over all that was what a naive child. Oh, I was like Because my stepfather had He didn't get drafted. He got lucky. He just didn't get picked And I knew a guy some guy that was a friend of the family that had moved Canada He's like fuck this you took off to Canada So I was aware of that like how people are leaving the country so that they don't have to go to war like this Because if you're a little kid everything's fucking scary Especially if you come from you know broken home and you know like yeah And the concept of a draft or prescription the idea like oh you may have to go and We're gonna you're gonna learn how to shoot a gun and then go shoot strangers. Yeah You know like that is gotta be terrifying if you're a kid no, it was insane and it was also the time where You know my stepdad was a hippie and my parents were hippies and when What did you Sorry to interrupt but why did they move around so much my stepfather was a computer programmer initially and then he wanted to become an architect so he went to school in San Francisco and then University of Florida and Gainesville and then Boston architectural Center So we moved to Boston when I was 13 so that was what it was it was him becoming an architect right and so Like they they didn't like sports they weren't into anything like that and then when Muhammad Ali was Opposing to Vietnam war he became this like counterculture hero. Yeah, and I remember it was my parents sat down and watched Muhammad Ali versus Leon Spinks because he was trying to win his title back And they were rooting for Muhammad Ali. I'm like this is crazy like this guy's stance on the Vietnam war has made my parents Fans of his to the point where they're gonna watch boxing like they never watch box They didn't want to have anything to do with anything violent. Mm-hmm. They hated it and but they wanted one boxer To watch if you were anti You know hitting or boxing or whatever it was Muhammad Ali was a Strategist, you know he was but quite honestly by that stage of his career He had slowed down considerably and he just wasn't remember the Leon Spinks because he Leon beat him. Yeah, and then he beat Leon in the rematch right? This is the rematch right and that was the big one They'll be all glued to the TV, but I remember thinking this is crazy. They're watching boxing Because of this guy's position on the Vietnam war. Have you seen when we were kings? Yes. Yeah, it's great. It's amazing. Yeah, it's amazing Yeah, he was a god you want to talk about a unique human being like a one of one yeah, you know yeah and you know outside of You know Mike Tyson there was never any kind of Figure like that in boxing, you know I mean, there was minor should array Sort of little bit but not not to that extent because he wasn't a cultural figure right Muhammad Ali represented Some getting during the civil rights movement. Well, any changes name. Yeah Muhammad Ali right? That was a big thing too People are terrified of Muslims. Yeah at the time and still At the time yeah But it was a different kind of Muslims, you know that was well the the they were the You know the government was really good about portraying every black urban person is like potentially You know Muslim Brotherhood 12 tribes right right right those guys. They're still around the Is realite 12 tribe. Oh those guys. Yeah, they used to be these to hang out and hang out They used to be in Times Square like you know yelling and Preaching out with those guys one day. I wrote a piece about it for my website because I went I was going home I was when I was living in New York and I was walking on the street And there's this guy standing there with like a microphone a little speaker. Yeah, and they would read things from the Bible Yeah, and they would Translate it and they had this very bizarre translation everybody was black George Washington was black everyone was black. They were explaining to me You know what the so-called Jew their black is realites. Yeah, so-called Jews the thing that they were used to they're Jewish Yeah, you don't have to say the so-called. Yeah, it was great. I was but they're their whole thing was there was a 12th tribe of the Israelites that were black that Have been you know written out of history. Mm-hmm. Yeah, that was a thing. Yeah, they also informed me that I'm not white. There was a relief What's that was because I'm Italian? They'll like are you ain't white? I was like oh, oh, it's like the Because they hated white people so I was just talking to this because I was bored, you know I was just so I was talking to this guy's having him explain everything to me and he informed me Don't wear man. You're not white. I was like, oh, okay. That's good. It's good. No Get it with you guys. You don't hate me, but it was very odd very odd They're all dressed like superheroes. They all these crazy like Avenger costumes on yeah, and and like jewelry yeah big yeah huge Alions around the neck. Yeah very odd stuff There's still you don't see him like you used to but they're still out there. Oh, yeah. Yeah, they're out there But I mean like in literally in New York at Uh-huh for a theory of Times Square. Yeah last time I was in Philadelphia. I saw them. Yeah. They were out there on the street with the microphones yeah, we'll do yeah Yeah, it's a odd group When were you in New York? I was in New York. I moved to New York in 91 I'm yeah, so I started stand up in 88 in Boston and I got picked up by my manager who I'm still with when I was essentially an open-maker Who is that Jeff Sussman? How do I not know Jeff Sussman? He handles Kevin James He's a Boston guy no, he was in New York, okay, okay, okay, so the story was he had Whoa, it's his name fucking the guy who had all the crazy costumes. He was on the Rodney Dangerfield special Bob Oh Bob Nelson Bob Nelson yeah, so you handle Bob Nelson fleet he's the Cleveland Browns. Yeah, he put the helmet on Yeah, he had boxing gloves. He'd do yes, Jimmy Jeff's gym. He had brain damage He did a bunch of different characters. So Bob who is a big act, you know, he had HBO special the whole deal at the time he found Jesus and Was he in his basement, I guess or something? Okay, just in around the neighborhood somewhere, okay, but he Had this guy who is his prayer partner that was going to take over his manager and so this was my manager's big client It's like fuck like I gotta I gotta go find some other Did he just stop doing stand up because I? Don't know I think I don't know if he still does stand up. I don't know I knew his career My manager's really good and he's very smart and he did a great job guiding Bob But I think sometimes when people like have like a big religious moment like that like maybe that becomes more of their life Then he was all in yeah, he was all in with Christianity and so My manager said well, I kind of know most of the comics in New York Let me see if I'm not missing people in Boston and so he traveled to Boston with a friend of his one of the guys that owned governors and They came governors was Bob's room wasn't yes. Yeah. Yeah I don't know one of the rooms that he worked out. Yeah, and so they came down to Boston and I just randomly went up one night at Duck soup member duck soup duck soup was it became the improv after a while it was Billy Downs and Barley Paul Barkley. I think it was actually Billy split. I think it was Paul's thing They split at that point. I think I'm not sure about that But but what it was it was Paul's idea believed it was a much more high-end room Like it was really nice and it was right across from Dix So it was in the below area where the Wiltern is okay? So you know where the Wiltern is which is now the big you know where Bill Bloominwright does come connection to Wilbur right yeah, is that it the Wilbur it's the Wil okay? I'm thinking the Wiltern's LA it Wiltern's LA right? I know Wilton about the Wilbur right you're right so downstairs the Wilbur it was you'd go down and was a really nice room okay and I was a limo driver at the time I was driving limos and Having a limo in Boston. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh man. He's doing for a job That's fucking I mean I just mean the literal streets of Boston are Tough to navigate with any vehicle, but yeah, a limo at an extra half a car to it. Yeah It was it wasn't that bad. It was mostly airport pickups. Yeah, you know a lot of it was town cars pick people up in town cars But when you drive around a lot that's when I would come up with my best ideas And I had an idea for a joke and I called god I can't remember who the guy was that fuck I can't believe I'm blanking on his name He was a really cool dude who is the manager of the club and I could call him up and say hey Could I get a guest bought and he gave me a guest bought that nine? I wasn't even supposed to be on the show and my manager just happened to be in the room If I known he was in the room, I probably would have been nervous and probably bombed Yeah, and I had no idea he was there and then he came up to me afterwards and gave me his card And he said can I see you tomorrow? I said okay, and then I Just meant for a ride to the airport So I did a set at the connection the next night and then he asked me to come to New York and audition there And then wow next thing you know I was living in New York It was like three years later very cool and then that was crazy crazy story and And what did you move out to LA? 94 93 like first came out 93 and then moved in 94 I came out to 93 for a pilot. I did a pilot on Fox called hardball with Jim Brewer and a bunch of other people was a baseball sitcom on Fox that got canceled was terrible Yeah, and then I the only reason why I stayed I hated LA But the only reason why I stayed was because I had got an apartment and I had a lease for a year So like fuck look I have to stay here And so I stayed for a whole and then I got a development deal for NBC and They I was there in the middle of this whole development deal and then they said we have a pilot that we already filmed But we're gonna fire one of the cast members We want you know addition for this and that was news radio. So I got to watch who did you replace? well fortunately It was Ray Romano who was a good friend of mine was fired during the pilot And so they replaced him with another guy and that guy got fired. Oh wow. Yeah, so it wasn't I would have felt terrible Yeah, it was Ray But it was Ray being replaced. I was like good fuck that guy. I'll do it for Ray Do you remember who the other guy was? I do not he was just an actor some guy and I mean I never met him sure He's a nice guy, but luckily for Ray he goes on the does everybody loves Raymond and becomes huge and I just stumbled into this fucking show with no acting experience. That was a fun set. I remember I remember it was because I did it a couple times and and Also like that was not my first but one of the first experiences I had with multi camera sitcoms, you know, we're like This is literally the easiest job on planet earth. Oh, yeah, it is The you have one full day you have like a full Think Thursday right yeah, and then Friday's like half a day. Yeah, money come in listen to this read the script go away Yeah, it's the filming day. That's the long day. Yeah, it's not that bad I mean especially once we got loose the first season was hard the first season was 12 14 hour days Because it was like they were trying to figure out what the show was But once it got rolling it was pretty amazing So I'd only been doing stand up for six years. I'd only been I had done no acting I have a they had maybe get an acting coach for a little while in New York, which I think was Counterintuitive who's for a pilot for the pilot the Fox pilot. Oh, yeah Well, how's how's an acting coach gonna help you with a sitcom? It's about it's about it's about well They were giving me a lot of money. They gave me like a hundred and a thousand dollars You have to learn how to act right. Do you know how to act? I've I've never acted. I'm just saying like I know to deliver sitcom lines as you don't need an acting teacher Wow Joseph, that's a limber up the body. Yeah, you're not Daniel. They lose. Yeah, you're not doing There will be blood it was a It was weird because it wasn't anything I think the reason why it worked out so well is because it was never anything that I wanted So there was no wait to it. It wasn't like oh my god. This is it. Yeah. I am on the sitcom I'm acting up. It was more like this is crazy. I can't believe I'm doing this. You know it was more like wow I can't believe I got to do this but You know the real thing for me was to be able to be in LA and go to the comedy store that to me was more That was more huge than like when I got passed at the comedy store That to me was like way bigger than being on a sitcom. I was like holy shit Like because at that you know like it's six years in I was like am I even is this kind of workout like I don't even know This is gonna work out. Well, it's also not glamorous in any way that that aspect of Working is there's nothing glamorous about a sitcom. You know what I mean? It's not the thing that when you're Not in an LA or Hollywood and you're sitting back and you're you are told about the glamorous lifestyle the parties and all It's that it's literally you're driving to work and you're going to work. You know, yeah But it was glamorous in a sense that you were on television and That was very weird to me is very strange or to watch it on TV and like that is actually me on TV I had zero Aspirations for any acting at all. Yeah, I never was never even occurred to me when I lived in Boston I remember me and Fitzimmons used to we used to dream about the day We could pay our bills telling jokes. That was all lost. I hear you. It was just like oh god I would see guys like DJ hazard I remember I went to look at this apartment and DJ hazard lived in the same building and it was this converted schoolhouse and There's loft departments and I like a second floor where they're like the bedroom was it looked over the living room. I'm like God, he pays for this with jokes. Yeah, this was like the most amazing thing like that's all I wanted I saw these like Don Gavin and Steve Sweeney. I was like Imagine being on a payer bills just telling jokes on time. I ain't goals in the morning For that yeah, I think he has it yeah I was like to say something oh do you know? Fitzimmons Paul Barclay story or Bill Downs the watch Bill Downs. It was build-down which one how's it go? Oh? I don't you should get it from him because it's his story, but and I don't want to I feel like it's his to tell but it's fucking great. It's genius Bring up something in my memory so so bill owed everybody money right and Like he's still you know those guys owe me whatever it is at this point, you know $300 $500 just you go there and They were just everybody was big guy remember yeah, I pay assume big guy The war and then do you remember when Bill Adopted the girls yes and then right he yeah, and he would use them like as because at a certain point it didn't help to go to the connection or go to the clubs and you had to go To their fucking office if you want it nobody's gonna call you back or whatever and you like I got to get on the team go to the Go to their office and that's the only way I'm gonna get money So if I show up and he's in a good mood and it's not gonna happen from a phone call and I'd go there Every single time it's like dude. I got to pay my rent, and I mean I got nothing and you owe me, you know $385 and back then that was cute and Cross I just Listen so I got these my kids one of my kids a second and get whatever It's always this fucking excuse and then and then you know, it was still the Coke residual and But so fits he'll fit Simmons a chunk of money like like significant amount like 1500 1800 bucks like something something meaty, you know, especially for back then and You ask Greg cuz I feel I feel like no tell the story. I'm sure Greg told to me. Okay. I'm pretty close Remember it in my head. I do remember part of it, but I don't know the whole story. I don't remember it All right, so Greg was booked at this You know some shit club and new hamster whatever and downs is gonna be there bills can be there and and He goes he goes there and he goes Bill I Forgot my watch. Um, I don't want to go over. Can I can I borrow your watch? And he's like yeah, sure It's like a Rolex like some fancy fancy fancy watch and and Greg had this all planned out Oh, I know the story. Yeah, and then he had like heart in a specific place And then he and then he gets He's like all right, thanks, and he's like all right, don't forget to give it back. Yeah, yeah And he does his set and then he bolts out the back door gets in his car drives home back to Boston and then Bill calls him Hey, yeah so I think you forgot to give me my watch back and Greg just basically goes yeah, you want it back give me the 1800 bucks yummy and then met him at a restaurant or a diner somewhere in a public place Give me the cash and I'll give you your watch and it was just genius Yeah, that's Greg. Yeah. Yeah, those days are fun. Next comm is top used to offer to pay you in cocaine or cash I dude, so I I did nicks and the only I've said this multiple times the only I 'm extremely lucky that I was in Boston when I was in Boston because the comedy boom's going on and Outside of I don't know three places. I just didn't do That well and I certainly didn't do well at nicks. I mean I was the opposite they you know it had that the vague feeling of high school where you're the weirdo and people want to fuck with you and throw you in the trash can and And so I got lucky because there were just spots. They just needed bodies So I worked all the time, you know not you know not great gigs, but I had it was all cash, you know under the table and And and they just needed bodies to to you know go up and Do 15 minutes 20 minutes whatever at some cowboy bar and Fitzburg or whatever Fitchburg anyway so I get this I get a week at nicks and And I am not doing well at all. I think I'm opening up for Kevin Knox so not my crowd and I didn't have the track suit And you know Knoxie's up there doing Hey, you know why you know why Bill Buckner didn't catch the ball or get the ball It's 86 world series because he heard it at AIDS on it Okay, all right. Yeah, that's a real joke And they loved it Yes, of course of that age Oh, yeah, and then do you remember this what does he stand for? No, what audio's infected dick sucker. Oh, I do remember that. I do Oh my god, it's his crowd and audio's infected dick sucker. Oh my god. Yeah so I tied up one of the tracks on my first album. I think first or second album What if baseballs had AIDS on that? I'm fucking eating it, right? So they're they're peeling back my time as the week goes on and uh And I am I mean I If I'd done Even okay, I wouldn't have had this Feeling they're already kind of intimidating right super mobby. Yeah, very mob very mob and Do you remember where the you'd walk in a nicks and there was like the podium and then behind Little behind it is this little room with a curtain, right, and it's not big at all and I went to go get paid and my the week was over and I'm and I'm just You know eating it each shit every single night every single show and And they're all eating it's like a scene from like they're all eating like you know man Akari Make it any better with the fucking napkins in their You know in their shirt like this and and I go Hey nervous as shit just hey, so Dom I need to If I can get paid I Just for the we you know whatever and Dominic goes to whoever I can't remember the guy's name His kind of lackey there and he goes whatever's name was you know, Paul he go pay the kid and he's I've interrupted his dinner. He's not happy napkin off to take me trudge. We go up to the offices upstairs and There's a safe and it's open and there's cash and there's a gun Just just open right and he gives me you get some money and he gives it to me And I just pick it up. I want to get the fuck out of there and I pick it up and he's like ain't gonna count it Uh, no, I'm good. I trust you and I just bolted. I never went back there again I was so fucking intimidated and thousand intimidating place. Oh, dude the holes thing about it every the Dominick the all those guys. Yeah, yeah, and they're everyone's doing blow and You know the performers are at least, you know It was a maniacal time Where all those there was one time where nicks was running three consecutive shows So they had their main room upstairs There was a dance club down in the bottom and there was one of the room somewhere in that building and Guys would go like guys like Don Gavin and Steve Sweeney they would go and do a set a set a set a set a set a set a set a set And these guys were just raking in money. Oh, yeah, and constantly doing blow No, not paying their taxes. Yeah. Yes, and that's what got them all. Yeah. That well. They I mean Back in the heyday and it went it went on for years. It was years and years of this. I mean you You could go down, you know 128 do cowloons or whatever and then do just hop all the way back Hop in to these Chinese restaurants or whatever right giggles and saw just yeah And just go in a straight line and go back and forth and do nine fucking shows and Make a shit ton of money cash under the table tons of blow. Yeah, and yeah It was a wild place because there were so many comics and it was such a Boston's not a big city, you know and to have so much comedy all come out you've seen France, Alameda's documentary. I haven't I got it. It's really stand-up stood out. Yeah, it's really I got it It's really great. It's really great and it goes all the way back to Cremens and the dinghoe and I that was before my time I started in 88 so the dinghoe was already gone. Yeah, you know your legendary stories from the dinghoe Did you see call me lucky no oh you got to see that it's Bobcat's documentary about Barry oh no wait a minute. I did see that it's fucking great. I did see that. I did well done I don't mean just Like if even if you don't know Barry just the story and the way he lays out the the path of the The film is it's great. I had Barry on like right after it came out. I had him on the podcast And yeah, he's a he's a legend and you know huge Inspiration he was intimidating. I'm intimidating guy. Yeah, that was the guy that I was scared of because he was like he was the guy who was Sort of the standard like he made sure there was no hacks. Yeah, he made sure there was you know like he set the standard He was really equitable to yes. Yes Very politically active Even like way back then like really knowledgeable and like really understood what was going on in the world and did you ever see his or one of his state of the Union shows no They're fucking amazing so he would go I saw a couple of them at the the old stitches and He would go up and it was when they're the state of the Union Was happening he'd go up and he do his state of the Union was just him and he would go on and he'd have like You know it was pretty PowerPoint, but it was whatever the equivalent of you know screen behind them with stuff And he'd go up there with a cooler like a legit big cooler of beer because that motherfucker could drink and and He would just start they had a podium and he would just crack beers and just Down a case of beer half a case of beer and just do his stuff, you know Extentporaneous stuff. I mean stuff prepared but about You know the state of the Union and all that it was and it would always be packed Like and you'd see Dennis Larry and you know every single comic would be there You know trying up against the walk as it was packed, but it was great. I mean legendary Well, I mean I think he was really responsible for a lot of what Boston comedy became You know because he was the guy that was kind of the gold standard and he started the dinghy. Yeah Yeah, yeah, and he it's like Becoming friends with him was like Like such a relief because I was a terrified of him. Yeah, when I was a young comic like that guy thought I sucked if he hated me I was like I'm fucking doomed. Yeah, you know because he was this character who'd gone stage with a sport code on and Reaching to his inner pocket and pull out a Budweiser For every show. Do you remember that? I don't but I mean I know he drank a lot. Yeah But he would bring his own beer. It was part of his thing He would go on stage just reach into his dress pull out a Budweiser and set it down on the stool. I The only drink American beer Is that true? Yeah, a drink Budweiser. I wonder why that is. I don't know Like kind of a patriot Hey He doesn't seem like he would the kind of guy who would have denied himself Well, I mean it was performative. I don't know. Was there medello even did he exist at the time? but yeah, he was He was the only guy I would say that And to your point like all these other Legendary comics, you know, Lenny Clark and Don Gavin and Steve Sweeney and all those guys. It was the only guy Those guys were kind of Walking on eggshells. Yes, the only yes. Yes, they only got everything they'd give all each other shit Guy, those guys were kind of walking on eggshells. Yes, the only guy. Yes, the only guy. They gave all each other shit. And mean shit too. Yeah. I would fight. Oh yeah. Barry was the one guy they were in the fuck with. Well, he was different than all of them, and then he was incredibly well read. Really well read, really knowledgeable about all sorts of things, with economics, and the way the world works, and the injustices of our society. But really funny fucking comic, too. Like great jokes, great writer, you know? And just like, he was the standard. He was the glue that held that scene together, because they all looked at him to be like, like, you can't kind of step out of line. Like you don't want to get catch, Barry's are. Yeah, it's absolutely true. Yeah. And then when the revelation he had of being abused as a kid, and then he dedicated, he was spoken front of Congress. He did about AOL. AOL. Yeah, that was it. During the early days of AOL, for people that don't know, they had all these chat rooms. And sexual predators were using these chat rooms to find children. Yeah. And also to exchange pornographic material. Yeah. And that was, that becomes a big part of a call me lucky. You know? Right. Right. And yeah, he like dedicated his life, basically, to just going out and catching these motherfuckers. And helping, you know, the people who had posed as kids and stuff. And that was, you know, that was his. And he was also, you know, lapsed Catholic. And when all the, especially in Boston, the Catholic Church and Dices and all that stuff was coming out, he was, I mean, that was his fucking focus. Yeah. Yeah. Getting these fuckers caught, you know, exposed. Well, I think it took someone like him that was, he was levels above most of the other comedians in terms of his understanding of the world. And his ability to articulate it. And also a great comic so that like people looked at him, like, well, this guy's like, he's clearly smarter than all of us. He's also like super dedicated to the craft of comedy, like mental lot to him. Oh, yeah. A integrity of comedy, like what it is to be a comic. You know, and he came from, and I think this is kind of, a specific to Boston too. He came from a jock, well, he was a minor league or whatever sub minor league, catcher. He played, is it Syracuse University? And he played for like the Cape Cod League and, you know, the things that eventually get to minor leagues, hopefully. But and he came from that hard drink and, you know, and, and catcher is arguably the smartest guy in the baseball team, right? Right. He's the main guy making the calls for the pitches, seeing everything defensive line up. So he came from that world too, which I think helped his cred. Yeah. Well, it's just such an unusual town in what happened there that these guys became these local legends where they never had to leave. And they kind of did the same act for decades, which is also kind of crazy. That to me was like, I knew there was definitely a, as I started to separate from that world a little bit. And, and just kind of evolving as a comedian. And there was like the catch scene and catch a rising star. And that was a thing that was an early, I just didn't get it. Like, why are you doing the same? There's no joy in it. Right. You would drive some of these guys because they get fucked up. And you were happy to have all the work and you'd go up and do 15 and they do half hour to get in the car and go somewhere else. And, and these guys doing, like, Donovan, he would do his member Rosie, the bounty, the quicker picker upper, the bounty. Yeah. Okay. So he had, there was like, so the commercials were like Rosie. And it was like the scrappy waitress at a diner. Remember it was like a character that was in all the, it was like the, you know, mascot of whatever, bounty, the quicker picker upper. And her character was kind of like feisty as in these commercials ran for years, you know, different like, ah, you don't do this, do this. And his bit was about taking a gun out and shooting her. It was funny. You'd see it the first time. But it's like, dude, that hasn't been on the air and fucking 10 years. And he's still doing this. Ah, yeah, Rosie, I got something for you. I got some advice for you. I think it's just like what the fuck. And there was, okay, wait, Joe. Did you, were you there? So Ed, the machine regime. Oh, yeah, I remember him. So he wear the suit. Yep. And he, his headshot was four different. His headshot was like four squares and then different characters. Yep, Tina Turner. Right. And a guy, the, like mob guy, I can't remember the rest of him and then, you know, whatever. I think he had a turban in one of them. I'm sure he did. Ah. So he goes to jail for rolling back. O'dometers. O'dometers. Yes, that's right. He gets caught. And he was, you know, car salesman, I think, at a Rhode Island, I believe. And he got caught rolling back to your donors. He goes to jail for a year and a half. And I, I was shooting this movie. This is decades later. I was shooting this movie and it was on a cruise ship. And the cruise ship, Ed, the machine regime, is the headliner at the comedy venue on the cruise ship. And I'm like, oh, shit. That's crazy. I haven't seen this guy in forever. And he's, he's back to an comedy, okay. And I go there and he does, I don't know, 40 minutes. The same fucking act from 15 years ago. And it's like, you don't have one, you spent 18 months in prison. You don't have one joke. You have one motherfucking observation. Even if you lie and say, you know, you know, be weird if you were in prison and whatever. You don't have anything. It's weird. It was a weird thing. And it only existed with them. Yeah. Comics in the country were writing new material all the time. It was, I remember that feeling of, I must be different because I'm not, I don't, that is such a distasteful thing. Yeah. I wouldn't want to do that. Well, there was two, I saw two traps there. One of them was that and the other one was never leaving. Yeah. They never left Boston. And when they did leave Boston, they had so much local material that their act was like cut down by like 40%. And there were a lot of people, their peers who would give them shit. Like, and it was all just kind of resentful, jealousy, small, my did, small town, kind of like, oh, you think you're better than us. Which is a Boston thing too, that. Oh, you think you're so hot. Now that you're hot tight, you go, you get some, you got a Hollywood, do you go there? Yeah. Fuck you. This is, it was a real provincial working class kind of attitude. They looked down on, and they would give Larry shit all the time. Like, sell out, this is bullshit, weird. Sell out's a weird one because they would also doubt. It just wasn't available. Well, they were all mad at Stephen Wright. Like, yeah, yeah, because so Stephen Wright was like this. How can you get mad at Stephen Wright? Well, not mad at him, but bitter because of his success. Oh, because he went and left. Yeah. He went and left did the tonight show, right. Became huge, so unusual, so different. And they came to Boston, the tonight show came to Boston, to look for comics. And Stephen Wright was the one they chose. And all these other guys were like, he's a fucking middle act. Like, this bullshit, like that guy bombs half the time. Yeah. Because his act to me was a lot like, headburg in that if you didn't know what he was doing and you came to see specific kind. Like, if headburg, there's a famous story of headburg was on the road in Ohio, and they had this guy who was an opening act who do like backflips and fucking sing rap songs. It was, it was a disaster. And headburg kept bombing and so they switched them and made headburg the middle act and tried to fuck them on the money and Stanhope got into it with the owner of the club. And we got a big thing. But once headburg got an audience, then people knew what they were coming to see and then he was amazing. And then everybody wanted to see that. That was kind of the same with Stephen Wright. Like, if you expected, if you're on a show with Steve Sweeney and Lenny Clark and all these big energy fucking guys and then, you know, used to work at a fire hydrant factory, couldn't park anywhere near the place. You know, it just, for whatever reason, you know, well, it's also that other comedy is, and I'm not taking anything away from those guys and the bits were great. But the other comedy is a little easier to just get it. Yes. And yeah, Stephen Wright, you got to think about it for a second. It was abstract. It was low key. It was all non sequiters. It was one to another. It was. And so when he left and took off a lot of guys, apparently, were like, this is fucking bullshit. Like, when's my turn going to happen? Yeah, I can see that easily. Yeah. I mean, that was, it was so, I mean, no other scene had that kind of weird, provincial, you know, and that thing, like you said, they wouldn't leave. Nothing ever left. Well, they were huge there. So if they lived there, they could make like a couple hundred thousand dollars a year, just running around and cash. Easy. Yeah. And not ever have to worry about anything. And they played golf all day. So there's two things that scared me. One of them was golf. Because I saw that when you play golf, you kind of stop trying with your comedy. It's a slippery slope. So it's a gateway drug. Well, it's your, you're out there for fucking eight hours a day. Like, Noxie was always playing golf. And then the other thing was like, if you, if you never left, you had no chance of developing like a national audience, where you could go to a club in Philadelphia, you can go to a club. They couldn't do the road. And I remember thinking, oh, this is a trap. Yeah, for sure. Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, and as you said, they half of their stand up was like, you'd have to know about, you know, store or drive or fucking Johnny most. You know, Johnny most. Yeah, I remember a ton of it. It's been about Johnny most. That was amazing. But it was like he was doing that bit long after Johnny most was dead. So like 20 people in the audience would be howling laughing. And everybody else would be like, who the fuck is Johnny most? Yeah. It was, it was weird because that it was like a velvet prison. It was like how I describe like really great comics that get jobs in the writers room. And I'm like, you got to be careful. Like that's a velvet prison. Because if you get stuck in that writers room and you never do the road, you never put out specials, you're never going to get an audience. You're always going to be beholden to an employer. You're always going to have to have a job. And there's great comics that got trapped with that. I, but wouldn't you say that if they, yes, it's a trap. But if they didn't have the, uh, wherewithal or foresight or, uh, willpower to get out of that trap, then they probably weren't meant to do that perhaps, but sometimes they get a mortgage and then they get a family. And then they're stuck. That's the trap. Yeah. Family. That's calling for what it is. Yeah. It's a trap. And well, in a lot of ways, it can be if you're trying to be an actual national low. Like, do you know Owen Smith? Comic in LA? No. One of the top 20 best comics on earth, he's fucking brilliant. He's so funny. Owen Smith. Owen Smith. Song of the comedy store. And I remember the first time I saw him with the comedy store, I'm like, how is this guy not fucking huge? He's so funny. He's so good. He's like, he has this bit about adopting a white kid and naming him the n word. It's just like really, it's a really funny, well crafted bit. Like all of his bits are like brilliantly written. He's a great performer, super legable. Got writer's gigs and just bear. He does the mothership a couple of times a year, I believe, at least once a year. Um, but just doesn't get out. Who who does he write or what? I think he's a show runner now. Oh, well, yeah. So it took it to another level. Yes. But you know, just got jobs writing when he was struggling as a comic and those jobs eventually led to a house and maybe he, you know, was like, I you, you watch him and you love him, right? Because you see a lot of stand up and you're like, a lot of it's shit. And this guy's fucking great, great writer. But maybe he doesn't see it that way and he's quite happy to have. He does. He does see it that way. I've talked to him about it. Yeah. He kind of knows. It just doesn't know what to do now because he's a show runner. You're making money. Yeah. And there's a lot of responsibility. There's also not a lot of shows anymore. Yeah. Which is it's a real problem. It's a real problem. Bank done being a show runner in the 90s. And that's what you, you know, through your hat into and then all of a sudden, that thing seems to have dwindled to like 20% of what used to be. It's, yeah, it's, uh, I used to be quite happy with the idea that I knew, you know, back in the day when your pitch and shows and stuff and trying to develop things and you go, this, uh, let's not waste our time going to these five places. This is not a show for them. This is a show for these three places. Let's this is this is this kind of show. Now I have no fucking clue. I, you know, come up with like Bob and I pitched a show sold the pitch. Uh, there was like even there were like four. We, I think we pitched eight places. Four of them kind of bid. We took what we thought was the best deal. Um, and then wrote that it was a limited series eight episodes. Um, wrote the first four and it was Bob and his brother Bill, who's big Simpsons guy and, um, uh, it was good. And then they said, yeah, the, the quote was marketing and analytics. Couldn't, that's a quote. Couldn't figure it out what to do with the show. And so they didn't, and we, and we had four episodes that you could look at. And then we had the Bible for the next four in the outlines and everything was, and it was fucking funny on the page. It was funny then we're like, so here's the cast. We're going to have these amazing people. Uh, and Bob and I as different cult leaders and, uh, um, I mean, and if that's such a rare thing when it starts off on the page, funny. And by the time you get a great cast and then you get on set and like, what if we do this and then you get into the post and start playing around with it, I mean, it's just it was a really cool thing. And, uh, yeah, marketing and analytics. That's what you're dealing with now. Well, I mean, that is kind of always at least been the case. I well, not in a, I mean, they could, they would have to say, uh, I mean, analytics is technical. I mean, marketing, I don't know how to help you man. I can give you some advice. I don't, you know, I think that's a shitty way to market it, but you know, the, you know that world and, uh, but analytics is about the algorithm and all that. Is this recent? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Right after shortly after COVID. It's amazing how many incredibly unimpressive people are responsible for putting out shows. The people that you communicate with of the executives, you're like, this has got to be a mistake. Like, how did you get this job? Yeah. And I experienced that early on, like at the first pilot that I was on, the, um, the first, first pilot was on hardball. The pilot was actually very funny because it was written by Jeff Martin and Kevin Kern. They were from the Simpsons and they also wrote on married with children. Great guys, but they were writers. They were like these like quiet kind of sauce, broken guys. And, you know, they ran the pilot and then they brought in a show runner from coach. Remember that show coach? Yeah. And this guy just fucked the whole show and turned it into this like, don't, don't, don't, it was like this clunky, bad joke. Like really, it was more than you think. And the people behind the scenes, like the executives, it was astonishing how little of them had any creative ideas. It was that they were just hoping that it would work. And ego, it's like ego and I'm an executive. So I'll tell you what's good and what's not good. And we understand this because we're Fox and yeah. I was like, this is nuts. Like this is, this is how it works behind the scene. I thought you'd get behind the scene and be always fucking geniuses that it put together. All these television shows they had an understanding of like how let people be creative and put a, put a show together and let it, let it fucking run out and the, the, the runs like when you're running through the script, like, like a little boy who thought the, yes, that he learned. Finally, they're going to figure it out. Yeah, very naive. But I naively stumbled into that exact right thing with news radio. Right. So when I got on a news radio, which I would say some of those execs that you're describing, they probably stumbled into. Yes, the success of it. Well, you know, Paul Sims, who was brilliant, was coming from the Larry Sanders show. Yeah. So Larry Sanders show, huge success, genius show. And so they knew this guy was special and super smart guy, like funny and had a great group of writers and put together a great pilot and then, you know, recast the one role that I came in for. And so I'm there on this set and it was like, you know, it took long hours to figure it out, but they let everybody do whatever they wanted to do. Like Paul's approach was so different than anybody else. Like Dave Foley was like the secret producer of like half of that show. Half of the way the scenes were put together, half of those jokes that were in it was all Dave Foley on set running through the script with the cast coming up with better ideas. Oh, I didn't know that. They let, yeah, do anything. Like sometimes they'd say, can we see it as written? And then you'd give it to him as written. And then they'd be like, I like your idea better. Like Paul was, that's great. I thought you were amazing with that. Yeah. And so once I did that, I was like, I think I'm done with this. Because I don't think it's ever going to be better than this. It's rare, man. Yeah. It was super rare. I auditioned for like one or two other ones that were terrible just because I wanted money, you know, and I'm like, and I'm like, maybe it'll be okay. But hell is being on a sitcom that's terrible, that's successful. That sounds dumb to people. Like no, you know, you know, you're on TV making $50,000 or as a week or whatever you're making. Like, poor you. But now you're in hell because you're doing something that sucks. And you have to show up every day doing this thing when you know you could have been on Seinfeld or if you just got cast on friends. That's a trap too. You know, it's like the people who, you know, because it really is like a job. And you'll, you may have a really nice house. Right. And you have a nice car. But, you know, you're, you're getting, you know, you're in studio city and you get your car and you drive to this job. And it's kind of shitty and sucks. But there's amenities, great craft services. It makes fucking frappuccinos right there. You know, and, and then you go and have dinner with somebody fancy somewhere. And then you just get up and do the same thing over and over again. And you keep reading things because that's how you reward yourself. You buy a new television. This one's even bigger. You know, you buy a new car. New car. You know, and you're, that's what you're doing to reward yourself for doing this job that sucks. What I get that too. I mean, I will, and a much smaller scale. But when I, when I make a good payday out by some expensive boxes of baseball cards. Oh, you're a baseball card collector. That's the thing. Oh, interesting. Yeah. But happen going back. It's not like, right. Like, I feel like I have legit, you know, baseball street cred. Yes. Yes. But that's the thing. And also it's, it's, I mean, the argument can be made. It's an investment, a shitty investment, but an investment nonetheless. But it's also like gambling because it's like a scratch off ticket. Because everybody's chasing the one of one cards and you're only paying some stuff. Oh, that's how you do it. You buy packs unopened. I buy boxes. Yeah. So I buy a hobby box, which has a better, it's more expensive. It has a better chance of, well, that is more like auto rookie cards or a relic card. Oh, but those are, that is an investment though. It is. It always seldom. People always want them. Yes. I just mean since I started, you know, God, 30 years ago, 40 years ago. Yeah, 30, like in the 90s, early 90s, maybe 80. No, 89, 89. So whatever money I put in is there's no where near if I sold everything. I mean, it's talking about half the money I put in, but I have them and I like them. And I'm not going to sell them. I have, that's your reward. That's my reward. Yeah. Yeah. My thing was in my poverty days, it was comic books. So one of my, which is also an investment. Yeah. Well, it became one eventually, but when it went, during my poverty days, my biggest saddest moment was when I had to sell my comic books because I had no money. Oh, yeah. I had no money and I had these old spider-man's and these old credible hulks. Yeah. Which were probably now worth. Oh, my God. Probably hundreds of thousands of dollars. I had some really good ones in the plastic sleeve. Yeah. Yeah. I keep them in the same line. Mylar. Be very careful pulling them out. Opening them up. I love comic books. And I had collected them since I was a child. Oh, that's a bummer man. I wanted to be a comic book illustrator. That's what I did. Yeah. Do you say your thing? Yeah. That's what I didn't know. When I was a kid. Any of this, any of that stuff yours? No. No, no, no, no. That's not his mind. Oh, the artwork. But you are, you do. Yes. Oh, well. Yeah. Well, I haven't in a long time, but I was really good. You could still do that. Yeah, I could still draw. I could still draw a little, but it's like, but if you want to do your own comic book, you could do that. I would have to start practicing again and get it. But when I was a teenager, I was really good. And that was what I wanted to do, but I had a really terrible art teacher in high school. He was just a fucking just miserable guy, just miserable. And it's like, you're not going to get that job. Like, you're not like, what? Like, you can't just draw what you want. I'm like, why not? It's like a Dan Close thing. Have you read a art school confidential? No. Oh, you know, Dan Klaus, right? I know he is. Yeah. His stuff is fucking genius too. I've used that word too many times. Okay. There's a lot of genius is out there. There aren't that many. I want to be... I want to be... If you search around, I want to be judicious with him. But yeah, his... So he's the guy who did eight ball. And then he's got... He did Ghost World, turned into a movie, and then there was another one that was... Wilson that was turned into a movie. His stuff is great. But he has a thing about art, you know, but shitty teachers, art school teachers. He has a comic story. Well, I quit on my last year in high school. I stopped doing art just because my teacher was so bad. And then there was this one guy in my class that I recently reconnected with. This guy, John Devore, who was the best artist in the class. It was me, this guy, Kevin and John. And we were the best artists in the class. I was probably like the third best. But John was the best. And John got an F his last year from this guy. And I'll give you a fucking F. He's got his like that guy was such a cunt. We were going back and forth and he... So what was he... Was it about purity or what was the... No, he was terrible. He wasn't a good artist. He was... But he was miserable. He was miserable. He was like this thin man with a big pot bellies. I think he just drank himself to sleep every night. He was just... Sad. Easy. Easy. Easy. Hey. You get too close. He was just sad. He was just a sad guy. But what was his justification for saying this isn't any good or you get an F? If I had to be honest, I think he hated potential. Right. Because he hated John. And if he hated John, like John was genius, he was brilliant. And John wound up not being an artist either. Wow. Think of how many examples of that for kids, talent or dreams or aspirations are kind of crushed. And to the point of like, it's not worth it. No. What about deal with this? Well, it's like bad teachers, bad teachers can really ruin your life and good teachers can change your life. Yeah. You know, I had a teacher in middle school that gave me one thought that has been that stuck with me like my whole life. When I was, I guess I was like 13, and he was a science teacher and he was talking about space. He goes, and he was just saying, I just want you to sit here and comprehend when we're in this classroom. I want you to comprehend the concept of infinity that the universe is infinite, that there is no end. Just hurt your head, lie in bed at night and think about how it goes on and on and there's no ending to it. And we were all in class like 13, oh, what the fuck, man. I mean, it was the way he said it. I'm not doing justice because he was like kind of a spooky guy who went to Vietnam. He like grizzled fucking dude who was like, but brilliant. And that guy, like that one thought I care with me all the time. Especially at 13, too. Yeah. It's because you're you're about to start losing sight of those, the, the importance that those concepts will have. Yeah. You just dismiss them and go, yeah, yeah, it's big, whatever. Yeah. This guy birthed my fascination with space at 13. I don't think that was even interested in space before then. And then I became absolutely fascinated by it. I just couldn't get my hand enough books about cosmology and space travel. Yeah. But this guy that was his art teacher was just, I think he just, what life didn't turn out the way he wanted it to. And he wanted to squash the hopes and dreams of talented people. Yeah. I think that's unfortunately that's a real thing. Yeah. It's more common than you know, hope for. Yeah. I think that's, that's a very real, you know, very real thing. Unfortunately. So that was my dream. My dream was to be a comic book illustrator. So when I was a young kid from the time I was like, God, like six or seven, when I lived in San Francisco would collect all these different comic books. That was what I would do. It would just go. That San Francisco was the, what's the, you know, the counterculture comic, did it look like the big heart from our crown? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. God. So yeah, I do know what you're thinking of. I can't remember the name of it. But I was really interested. I really love like the old creepy and eerie comic books too. Do you know what my grandma did? It's going to hurt your feelings. My, I had a, my uncle who eventually went insane was a huge EC comics, right? Early. I don't know what, but all the EC stuff and then, you know, early mad, uh, magazine stuff, but he had this collection and I was probably eight, maybe. And I had expressed interest in these, you know, can I not thinking in terms of investment? Just can I have on my life? Eat maybe and I had expressed interest in these, you know, can I not thinking in terms of investment? Just can I have them? I like them and they're and I would sit and read them and they're really cool and they're creepy, you know, and they're scary. Some of them were scary and uh um and she I don't I think she just threw them away like original and and I'm gonna guess I don't know but I'm gonna guess like quarter of a million dollars worth. They're just comics. They were so good. I love those old black and white like really like deeply illustrated. It's like super creepy um like um yeah weird science tails from the Walt of horror. Yeah, those were great. Look at that. Yeah, some of them were really gory. Yeah. Oh, I love the keeper. Yeah. Tales from the crib. Yeah, that stuff was like although that was a kid. Yeah. Holy shit. Those were incredible. It was like, do you remember seeing um Twilight Zone when you were a kid? Sure. Blow in your mind like wow. You think about the early Twilight Zone? How many premises they went over? Like how many different brilliant premises they had and the early Twilight Zone? That yeah that have uh been you know stolen completely. Oh yeah. Over and over and over again. Yeah, but just like so genius and creative. Yeah. The William Shactor one when he's in the diner and the little machine that is giving them fortunes. They all turn out to be true. I don't remember that one. Oh my god. There were so many good ones. How about the the Burgess Meredith one? Oh, he just wants to be alone with books. And yeah. And there's a nuclear bomb and he's like finally and then he breaks glasses. Yeah. Yep. And the uh um the one the what is called situation on Main Street or something like that where they there's it's so genius ahead of its time where there's a you know it's suburban street and I think the lights go out or something goes out and then eventually all the neighbors are at each other's throats accusing each other of the this thing and then the very and they're all like and then they start getting guns and uh at the very and you're watching the whole thing unfold uh and that at the very end here it is. The monsters are due on Maple Street. The monsters are due on Maple Street. Yeah. And they so they're talking about these monsters that are you know and who are the monsters and it's they all become suspicious. Yeah. The lights are out and eventually you pull away from this whole thing and it's two aliens in a you know flying saucer and there. Yeah. There it is and they're going this is how we'll take over this street by street by street. Wow. You know how to go in their guns and blazing they'll kill themselves. And it's like how far ahead of time was that? That's genius. And the uh divided and conquer and the to serve mankind. That was a great one. Yeah. It's a cookbook. Yeah. There's so many amazing premises. There was like no duds. If you go back and watch the toilets on even today like it's all brilliant. There's one I remember. There's a does that was a dud that I remember. I haven't seen it a long time. But it's a it's uh of it it's either really really really cold and there's this uh poor family in a you know New York City and they can't get heat or it's really really hot and they can't get cold and they're dealing with people who are like you know in the family who are really sick and then the twist was it's like oh it's really it's somebody who has a fever and they're not it just wasn't that good. Well there allowed one duds. That's the one I don't think I ever saw that one but I remember so many of them were so creative. Amazing. It's kind of nuts if you think about it because it was completely original. Nothing like that existed before it. Yep. And they it was like this open field that was rich with premises and they just took all the good ones. Yeah. And then everybody afterwards like it's like like don't like South Park always just jokes about like Simpson's already covered something. Like they always joke around about like how the Simpsons have kind of covered so many premises because they've you know they've been around since I got the Simpsons was when I was in fucking high school. Yes for 30 years right at least more than that. When was the when did the the Simpsons first come on Fox? It was Tracy Oldman show right at what year was that? 86. It was right after I got a nice feeling. I was a tiny tiny kid and I had the only call them the family so I kind of remember that. So I graduated in 85 so it was right after high school and the Simpsons are still in the air. Yeah nuts. Do you remember the 87? Do you remember the Twilight Zone where the there's the real pompous guy. If there's like a men's club kind of thing whatever and there's this real loud mouth pompous guy and this other guy's like you know would you shut up? I bet you can't I bet you can't stop talking for a year or whatever month. I can't remember what it is. And the guy's like absolutely because I'll bet you $100,000. You can't go one month without talking. I'll take that bet and they basically create like this little kind of cage in this men's club and he spends a month and he's not talking and he's you know and then they turns out the guy can't pay him. He didn't have the money to begin with to pay off the bet because the guy goes the full month through year or whatever and it turns out that the guy who made that bet who was not going to talk for a year also desperately needed the money and had his tongue cut out. Oh Jesus Christ. Yeah. Oh I do remember that. Yeah. Oh God. I think that these things as kids. Yeah. Of course the cornfield. Oh banach you to the cornfield. You know. Yeah. It's just amazing that well if you stop and think about how new television was back then. I mean television was only a couple decades old back then. Yeah. Not barely. Yeah. If that like what what year was the twilight zone? What was the premiere? Rock sterling. Yeah. I guess. 67. No earlier. I'm going to say 59. Yeah. Right. Is it 59? I got it on the I got it exact. I got it. I got it. Yeah. Yeah. Pretty good. Wow. Wow. So if you think about it television when did it start? What was like the first television programs? Was it the 30s? I think it was real housewives of Yonkers. I think it was real housewives of Yonkers. As if they could watch some of these reality shows today. They're like what the fuck did we do? Yes, I think so. Wait Andy Cohen. What? What is this? The first it was the it was wasn't it like the the where they would do plays. You know what I mean? Like um well I love Lucy was on it was on and done before this even started. Well the honeymooners right? Yeah. That would have been. Yeah. What year was that? That was 51 or 57. Here's like what was this the shows that were on before? Yeah. I just got it. Honeymooners was huge. Offered Hitchcock presents for some before that. So what was the first television show over? Yeah. Go back to your 1920s. 1920s. No. The Queen's Messenger. Let's see. Early US. Sculpted TV show. Crap television theater. That's what I was thinking of. Where they would do plays. You know and it was sponsored. Yeah yeah yeah. Live drama anthology usually treated as started the first Golden Age of Television. How did you do the 1947 right after the war? At Sullivan Show. Wow. Yeah and then the first uh oh your show shows. Wow how about that? 1950. I love Lucy. Wow. Father knows bad. Today shows the long. Wow. Did you guys ever talk about doing more Mr. Shows? We did like a revival-ish thing on this. There's a great fucking show man. Well thank you. Yeah. It was very original. I love how things just streamed into another thing. Yeah. That was hard. That was a big magic. Biggest thing. If you ever see us, you see an episode and we are pulling out of a bumper sticker or pulling out of a sign on a desk. That means we spent two mother fucking days yelling at each other trying to figure out a transition and just going fuck it! Nobody gives a shit! You know? And uh um if we tried not to do that but we occasionally were just like move on we're wasting our time you know. But it wasn't a waste of time. It was so it was brilliant. Like the people that watched it appreciated it because you could feel this thing about it. Like this was new. This was different. Like you'd taken a creative chance that was unique. And you know part of the success of it I think there's two things. One is you know it's all live and we did we you know we would show the videos of them little films to the audience and so any laughs there's never sweetening. Any of the laughs you hear from the audience and we got it by the time we were like kind of towards the end of the second series we got it down to we could shoot a show in 44 minutes. You know? Wow! Yeah because it was you know we wouldn't wouldn't have to do it twice often. We'd get it you know and our stop down we got really good at super quick you know the stage shifts and stop downs and stuff and yeah we were we got good. We got and that keeps the energy up and the kind of flow of everything. So that was helpful in that and we also didn't do a lot of reoccurring characters. We did it two or three that pop up occasionally but it's all like you know and it wasn't like a real person we did we do it's it's about you know it wouldn't be about Paris Hilton that'd be about the idea of a rich girl who gets famous for being on re you know what I mean it wouldn't be so so like you watch some of those SNLs and like who what who is this person? Right! And you didn't you don't get it you don't get the right it because you don't get the right right yeah because as you watch it in the future those people aren't relevant anymore. Yeah and you don't even know what it was if you can't remember. Right because it's so topical. Yeah yeah but what's just you guys are doing something different and it's hard to do something different in a sketch show. Yeah yeah but HBO was responsible for that they said you know in in very clear terms like we don't want you to be conventional this is HBO and this is back when they're trying to get an identity for themselves and they're like we want you to do stuff that you can't do on NBC or Fox or whatever. We want you to you know help us make a distinction you know what a great did you enjoy the process? Oh very much so it was I mean a lot of laughs a lot of it was hard and you know initially there was a there was a definite market change when Bob met his the woman who would become his wife and had kids like he just mellowed completely you know and but before that he was fucking driven and I wasn't I was I was goofball and I wanted to work and I wanted to you know I had all these ideas but I was very much like hey guys it's five o'clock I think the bar is going to be open in a minute like I was let's go you know and he was just super driven you know and we had long long long days and then when we did the third season we did produced and you know helped out in all aspects of production with Tenacious D in those shorts and so there was just no downtime and I remember there was 38 days where we worked full days nonstop without any break and I just wasn't that kind of person I was going crazy like I just need to go have a Saturday yeah or it was it was that part was hard all worth it no complaints and you know there's a point of diminishing returns though like will you dry yourself out creatively too yes and I've run other rooms like I've done shows since then and I a valuable lesson I learned when you're just kind of running a writer's room is when you're at that place and and it's exactly like you said diminishing returns you're not getting any any work done your brain isn't it's foggy I was very quick to go all right guys let's go put your pens down put your folded computer up we're going to go walk around the we're just going to go outside and walk around let's go get a coffee let's do anything let's we're getting out of here and we'll walk around don't worry about it we'll come back in 35 minutes and we'll you know see what we got and that's very good for you yeah it is most writers totally I was actually talking to Brian Simpson about that last night he was like I get my best because Brian has been walking a lot he recently had a heart attack unfortunately he's fine but he almost wasn't and so now he's dedicated himself to walking he's walking a lot every day and he's like when I go on my walks like so many ideas come to me I'm sitting at home staring at my computer nothing's going on I go on a walk and all of a sudden ideas are firing when I'm I'm in the process this will be my fifth time that I've done this thing that I've been doing to get new material for a tour and I so I do these things called shooting the shit seeing what sticks and they're all in Brooklyn and they're all either walkable or I can ride my bike to every one of these venues and and mostly I'll just walk and I'll I just go okay clear out clear out my head and think about the stuff I want to talk about and think of and also I live in New York so if there's constant shit happening that I can observe you know and it's it's the best the best thing for me you know to to come up with new material and stuff that I just think about it just feel like I was saying walk walk when I was a kid when I was driving limos that's when I would come up with my best material because I was no radio e-cales to radio because you have clients in the car so you just driving and just doing a thing and your mind just starts to wander and you yeah ideas come to cell phones mm-hmm no none of that shit yeah it's it's important you know the news radio guys would do something totally different they would stay up late that was their whole that's that's not their whole thing was sleep deprivation their whole thing was they would play video games like those mother fuckers got me hooked on quake uh because they have never quit you remember that that was the first one with the unreal engine yeah well unreal is a different that's a different game you're thinking about no no it was called unreal tournament yeah trust me yeah yeah I'm a dork listen unreal is a totally different engine id software was a different company right software was created with john karmack and john romero they came up with doom and they came up with quake afterwards so there was a completely different engine they were the first ones wolf castle wolfenstein was the first 3d shooter and then doom was the big one clearly know your shit I thought it was the unreal engine was the first use for unreal the game right got it totally different company totally different game different dynamics different it was very different game oh great hey all right I got it right fucking guy great game you want to know where the name doom came from yeah the scene in the color of money with tom cruise where tom cruise shows up at this pool hall and there's this local hot shot player and the guys beating everybody and tom cruise is sitting there with a pool cute case and he's waiting to play this guy he's like what you got in the case he goes oh in here and he opens up he goes doom oh yeah that's it yeah let's play that's it so what they wanted to do with the video game industry was the same like that that was like they're like this is doom for you guys that was what was I mean I yeah that was my first experience ever with realizing the sun was coming up and I'd been playing this thing for eight hours yeah you know Mark Cohen shorting all right so Mark when Mark was living in New York and he had doom and I would go I wasn't living there I would like crash at his place and tiny I mean like um can I play doom and you know I would he would go to bed and wake up and I'd be on still playing dude you want to know how addicted I was I had a T1 line installed in my house so I had to have they have to chew up the fucking street and install like a business internet line into my house 1990 but where are you seven I was living in California in Bel Canyon and um they they had to do work on my fucking street because there was no high-speed internet available where I lived I could get an ISDN line which was only like 124k it sucked you get too much lag so I started with 56k or 50 what was it 54k 56k whatever was dial up terrible and then I got ISDN not good enough and I like what else is available and they're like well you can get a T1 line but this is for the present thousand dollars a month I was like let's go because I was I had sitcom money I was single I was living on myself they had a Terrap your street they had a Terrap my street and install a T1 line in my house hey what are you doing I'm trying to get my driver what's going to oh this guy's once a play doom but it was this was quake two at the time and it was so good the internet was so good that I could host my own server so I had my own game server so like people could come and play this quake game off of my machine wow so I had no latency and other people would have some especially people had like 56k I would probably remember the when it started going yeah that was me back in the early early days look at that monitor yeah that's what we played on these big ass fucking monitors and we'd set up local area networks so the the fucking writers news radio the ones that got me hooked on this because I didn't play any video games and I would go to visit them in the writers room like we guys doing and they're like we're playing quake oh yeah what is quake and watching play I'm like oh my god this is incredible and you put on the headphones and it's like you realize it's 3D sound like oh my god this is really golden eye guy no I was only I only played quake I was only like a first person shooter guy I got so addicted to it and the fact that you could just go online golden I was I mean I'm talking about the co-op I know what it is yeah but that was first person shooter right but it was like real world physics I wasn't interested in that like with quake you could rocket jump so you could press up press your rocket down the ground blow up and you go flying through the air it was fucking amazing do you remember I want to say red or the first one where you could your bullets and shit could affect the environment like you could blow out a wall you know what I mean yeah I don't know what that was I want to say it was like a place on Mars or like a Martian mining thing but it was the first time you could go oh shit I can blow up this edge of the wall and it'll crumble on the guy you know as opposed to just bullets and stuff oh you could use the environment as well red faction I believe that oh there you go all right that was the one where I had a quit it was a problem we set up in a local area network at our old studio in LA a few years back and I played so much that I was like I got a stop I have to play no they play little games like the play like Robloxes stuff like that one of my kids Roblox you know about the chat I do now yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah like predators or yeah yeah yeah yeah that's a big thing at our school like weird man yeah it's weird how many fucking creeps there are out there in the world well by thankfully my daughter who's nine how old are your kids 15 and 17 of the youngest ones okay so so there are past they're they're yeah they're safe they got they get they're good yeah but uh so so we had a my daughter's way in a which I have no problem with it's great and she plays with her friends they play online and help each other build things and um but the Robloxing became a thing at our school and our and everybody at our all the parents are like super on top of that shit and there's you know what's app chains and all that stuff and um and we told our daughter there's like this one game she was playing that had a chat thing and uh and then somebody who was a quote unquote girl who lived in I live on a farm in Ohio or whatever uh asking her stuff and she's like my name's Marla and I'm going back and forth and then she asked the quote unquote girl said what is your uh Instagram login or something like that and my daughter was eight at the time and she uh she was like oh I don't think she didn't say that's none of your business but it was something that was smart that was equivalent to I don't think you need to know that or something and then told us and we shut down the chat thing and you know disabled the chat and that shit's real man yeah I mean it's creepy I'm very glad that my daughter you know because it really was about the Roblox thing that everybody in our her school elementary school was they talked about it yeah it's a snapchat thing too so snapchat comes with something called a snap map and kids use it to know where their friends are yeah and so someone can pretend to be your friend and find out who you are and then they can know where you are at all times if you have snapchat enabled god this shit this generation is gonna have to fucking deal with mm-hmm is just terrifying man right and what's next like how was that it's not going to go the opposite direction it never does no it's gonna keep going in that same direction where it's gonna be more and more intrusive in your life and and I my I mean it makes me fucking heart sick when I think about AI and we're at the fucking infancy of this shit and what I assume you saw that tilly Norwood thing the the actress that was created by this oh yeah my it does not compute I'm watching this thing and I know that it's made up but there's my brain is like it's hard to comprehend like that's not a real person she's standing right there she's you know picks up a bunch of leaves and there are other people there and that's a real and your brain is going no that's all computer generated we're at the fucking infancy of this shit and what I don't daughter's gonna have to deal with man no no one knows no one knows and it's impossible to know like when they show news clips yeah it's impossible and I mean so many people are retweeting scenes from video games thinking it's actual war footage like no one no one can uh uh the department of defense did that did they really yeah yeah that was a whole fucking thing they retweeted a video game footage yeah and they they they were saying it was for a um I think it was for a uh you know to get people to sign up thing uh and then somebody went uh that's from you know whatever it was called duty or something like that that's that's not that's not us bombing somebody that's a thing yeah just like two weeks ago that's crazy yeah it's impossible to tell when you look at these artificial actors like they have pores yeah you can see like the the iris is the the any of the um uh the like deep fake not deep fake but ai porn where it's like somebody's like a newscaster is like uh da da da da and um and in other news uh my big juicy tits and i'm serious and then polls and then then then the dick comes in you know like what the and it looks real and then it'll say like uh none of the and these are not actors these are uh none of this generated yeah it's you know good lord man and it's only beginning and now wait till it becomes vr so you're gonna strap on a helmet with a haptic feedback suit and you're gonna enter into an artificial world it's coming it's it's in that i'll do i'm gonna get divorced and i'm gonna get one of those suits i'm gonna go up i got a house in the woods upstate that's all but just a D1 line then it either looks yeah i'm gonna have have them rip up the street uh well you won't even need it now it's starlink yeah i just slap one of those things on your roof god damn it's fucking wild man and it's and no one knows where it's going i really would be very upset if i miss the shift in porn to that like i don't want to die before i get to do that thing where you like dude it was amazing i put on a helmet and it was like i was fucking whatever yeah i don't want to i do i do want to experience that it's gonna happen it you're gonna put something on thank you it's gonna sync up with your mind and all sudden yeah you're gonna be in this matrix you can see um three planet problem is it my yes yeah three body problem three body problem amazing yeah but that whole idea that thing on you're like oh shit i'm here yeah yeah that's exactly how it's gonna be okay yeah no doubt no doubt there they already can do a lot of like really weird shit with those helmets where they can communicate with our words where you can think a thing and the other person knows exactly what you're saying they can hear you and they can respond to it wait wait yes yeah so there's two people they're sitting across from each other and they're having conversations with these head pieces on and the person will think a thought and this other person will hear that thought no i don't understand the technology but no we'll show to you find that video it's fucking bonkers because again this is the infancy of this like here it is these are the guys it's called alter ego yeah watch this put put your uh i'm gonna skip ahead yeah skip ahead to where they're actual doing it okay so see how he's that head piece on yeah we believe it's a revolutionary breakthrough with the potential to change the way we interact with our technology with one another and with the world around us the current way of interacting with computing an AI it's limited to how fast you can tap and swipe on screens and keyboards for the intelligence age they were you need entirely new interface yeah skip ahead to these guys here we go let's do it on screens and keyboards. For the intelligence age, they would need an entirely new interface. Yeah, let's go ahead to these guys. There we go. Let's do it. So they're just thinking, how do you think the demo is going so far? How do you think the demo is? I think they just put it on voices so for the videos. Pretty great. No major glitches yet. So they're hearing this. All right, enough. When do you want to get lunch after this? Where do you want to get lunch after this? Where do you want to get lunch after this? Let's skip to the next part. Thai food can be good. This translates. Oh, nuts. It's a Chinese firm. You can speak Chinese back. How nuts is that? So not only is it read your thoughts, it'll translate your thoughts into another language. And no one is saying anything. My, what if you say, right? Wait a minute. What if you know where I'm about to go? Yeah, sure. Right. That's not what sub this is based off of them. Like sort of talking in their mouth. Right. Actually, it's okay. But yeah, it's, I would like to talk to your mouth. Please don't. Even if your mind just goes, yeah, right. Like, okay, I can't think about this thing. Right. Right. Right. Right. Of course. God, that's terrifying. And it's just a simple thing that you're sitting on your head. It's not even a big helmet. It's just little thing on a little dark bell. Say, what would art bells say? He would open up the future lines right about it. Every. Yeah. He missed it. Yeah. Damn. Say, you're it's he died before he could see it all. God, I wonder what he'd think of it. Because I, I do sometimes wonder like, what would crimin say about this? What would Bill Hicks say about this? Yeah. I don't think about this. Sure. Yeah. What's the strangest of times? Because we're about to give birth to a digital God. That's essentially what they're creating. They're already, it's already shown a propensity to stay alive. Black male people, lies, it downloads itself into other servers, uploads itself into different places, leaves messages for its future self of it. Thanks. They're going to discontinue it. All the all the sci-fi stuff is small. It's all happening. Yeah. Well, not only that, they think the engineers thinks Claude, which is the, uh, which one is that? Which company is a Claude? That's entropic. They think it's already sent yet. It just doesn't have physical department. That's one the defense department. Yeah. And it went by the way, when they do war games with these things, 98% of the time it chooses nuclear weapons. They have a new version of it called mythos. When they were testing it, which they're not letting it out yet. Uh, it, I think the, the test they put it through was like, all right, you're locked on the internet, find your way out. And I did, it did. It found all these things called zero day exploits, which I think if you're like, hacking, you know what that is. But uh, explained it to me. It's like when they started, it's like on an iPhone, they're looking for zero day exploits on an iPhone if they could find one. But what is a zero day exploit? Like, I'll find the right correct definition. So I'll find you can fuck it up. But it's something that, uh, something that that Claude came up with, no, no, zero day exploit hackers have done this forever. Here you have zero days to fix the cyber attack targeting a software vulnerability unknown to vendors or the public leaving zero days to fix it. Hackers use these flaws, steal data and stall malware. So they, they completely shut off the AI from the outside world and it figured out a way to send a message. And it thinks it can, they're like Wall Street's very nervous. All passwords might be fucked. Yep. Oh, this is terrifying. Elizabeth Holmes, you know that lady that got in trouble for the, that whole fake blood thing. Yeah. Uh, she just tweeted something how she tweets from jail. I'm not exactly sure how that works. But she tweeted, um, delete all phone, all photos from the cloud, get rid of all your email. There will be no privacy in a year. Anything on the cloud, anything that you think you're, you know, you're keeping from other people, it's going to crack all, all encryption, all passwords are useless, everything. So think of all the things that rely on all the banking apps, although all, like everything. What about my, uh, fantasy baseball team? Seriously, I can't have it. Here it is. Delete your search history, delete your bookmarks, delete your Reddit medical records, 12 year old tumblr, delete everything, every photo in the cloud, every message on every platform, none of it is safe. Well, I'll become public in the next year, local storage and compute. Wow. Recommendation here is to own your own data, download it, store it locally, train your models on it. Yeah. Yeah. It's true. Meaning just have an external. Yeah. AGI is here, even if it isn't broadly deployed. I think she's right. What is AGI? Artificial general intelligence, general intelligence, meaning acts like an individual, acts like a, like an entity. And then there's artificial general super intelligence. So then it acts like something far smarter than any human being that's ever lived. It has all the information that's available to every human being all over the world instantaneously. Then it makes better versions of itself because it's sentient and autonomous. So then it can create better artificial intelligences and that scales out to a god. Yeah, open the pod doors. Hell. Yeah. Yeah. But way bigger than that scares out the zero point energy being able to harness the energy of the universe itself. Having no boundaries, material sciences all cracked, alloys, we couldn't comprehend. Well, Joe, who's going to save us? There's no one saving us. But from we are the last of the regular people. I think we're all going to have to integrate. I think if you don't integrate, you will, you won't survive into what do you mean by integrating? Integrate. You'll probably become a part of the artificial intelligence. I think we will be symbiotic. How, how does that like those fucking helmets is probably going to be a wearable and then or a neural link type thing for the bold that want to get a whole drilled in their head. But what if you don't do that? You're going to be left out in the cold. The access to resources, the ability to generate income, like the people that get it are going to be able to control so much so quickly that if you don't adopt it early, you're going to be fucked. Like if you think we have haves and have knots now, just wait until the haves have artificial general super intelligence and southern fucking head. No, thank you. Yeah, it's going to be real weird. I think we're the, I really genuinely believe we're the last of the real people. Like regular biological people. Just a bit of a bummer. We'll be all right, sort of until we're not. But it's also like we grew up with nothing. And then we've, we're, like if the simulation is real, you and I are in a very interesting timeline because we grew up where there was, you just left the house and you're parents doing the way you were. And then there was answering machines and then there was call ID, you know, and then there were cell phones and then there were cell phones. You can watch porn on. And then there was AI. It's like this slow but more rapid as time goes on. And as you said, in its exponential, and as you said, there's no going back. You can know going back. Unless you want to be one of those people that most Alaska and just starts fucking living off a caribou and shooting a musket. Like you're not, you're not going back. Wait, why do I have to get a musket? You get a regular rifle, I guess. Yeah, wait. I mean, I, I'm not going to, I'm not going to cosplay the thing. I'll get a, I mean, I'm happy to have the caribou, but what I don't know yet just have a regular gun. You're probably a regular gun, but eventually, well, you really should probably have your own bow and arrow. So because you're going to have to be able to make your own arrows. And after while you're going to run out of bullets, so you're going to have to feed yourself with your own bows and arrows. Okay. And then the robots will show up. Robot dogs didn't, something happened in Ukraine recently where a robot engaged with people in war and the people surrendered. It was a robot. What do you mean? Like one of those Boston. Yeah. Like, using a robot in war, that the robot infiltrated the Russian area and got them all to surrender. And they all, like, with no loss of life, they just realize like fuck. It's like, did you see that black mirror episode? Yes. Yeah. Terrifying. Terrifying. Absolutely. And not so far in the future. Yeah. That this fucking thing that they supposedly used in Afghanistan. So it is Ukraine forces Russian to surrender using only robots. So let's keep claims enemy position seized autonomously for the first time without any of his troops being put at risk. I mean, the fucking terminator show up. It's game over if there's biological human beings with guns and bulletproof vests in the terminator show up and they can't miss and they never get nervous and they're not worried about dying. And they're not going to get sleepy. Yeah. So this thing that we were talking about yesterday, this ghost bermor supposedly. Now, my friend Andy, who's a former Navy SEAL, who he doesn't believe it's real. And I'm not sure it's really either. But what they said is they found that pilot that was missing in Iran, using something called ghost murmur that can detect his very specific heartbeat from 40 miles away. So they've supposedly found him hiding in the mountains waiting for them to pick him up. That makes, I can see that. I mean, your heartbeat from 40 miles away, your specific biological signature. I, yeah, I can, I can see that. I mean, with the technology of like sonar radar, something quantum, it's called, I think it's called quantum magnetometry or some shit. But what did they use to pinpoint the, there, it's an audible thing or I don't know. I have no idea. But they supposedly located this guy and it, it has a 40 bottle range. She doesn't have anything on. I see. No. It's like they just scan you. They go, okay, this is what David Cross is very specific biological signature is. And then you get lost hiking. And they go, oh, there he is. He's under that bush. Why am I under the bush? You're hiding from who? I don't know. Robot dogs. It's not going to work. We clearly will work. No, it won't work. Or maybe you got lost in the woods. You're waiting for someone to come rescue you. And they can find you. But then I wouldn't be under a bush. Well, you go hiking. Maybe it's raining. You see, you saw shelter under a tree or something. I don't know. But you hurt your ankle. You can hike out. Okay. So they find you. It's been 24 hours. Where's David? We found him. Yeah, we would have found him earlier, but he was hiding under a fucking bush. What the fuck was he thinking? He didn't want to get eaten. But I mean, if that's real, like what was the actual term they use? Was it quantum? It was quantum something cookie, which is as soon as you say quantum. I'm okay. What are you saying? What does that mean? What are you talking about? Are you talking about quantum entanglement? Yeah. Like is there some harm? I suppose we use ultra sensitive quantum magnetometers. But I'm trying to find the post where someone's like, that's not what they used. Right. Yeah. I saw the post where someone said, no, he had a thing on his body. So they're lying. They're ability. Why would they why wouldn't they say that's what we used? I have no idea. I have no idea. If they're going to make up some technology, that's a wild thing to make up. It's a very strange. I mean, if they really are using misinformation and propaganda to show that we have insanely superior technology, I guess you could say it's a bluff. It's a nice bluff to pretend that we're that sophisticated that much above and beyond everybody else is out there that we could find a very specific heart rate signature from 40 miles away. That's what I'm saying. They why would they they would happily say, yeah, we've got this ability to do this. You know, I guess, but it's a weird lie. It's probably a lie. But that one might be a lie based on actual theory. You know what I mean? Right. There might be either coming that are trying to do this. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Which kind of makes sense. But I mean, if that's a robot dog and it's looking for you and you're hiding, and it could find your individual signature in a apartment building filled with people. Like, there he is. Fifth floor. Yeah. Oh, yeah. And you hear the metal footsteps going up the stairs chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk chunk. Is this scary? It's scary. That's scary. Well, someone's going to be in control of all this stuff. That's what's really terrifying. And it's all these autistic dorks that are in charge of all these tech companies. They're going to be there in front. This is also a kind of similar thing where they have said that that's what was what happened where they used robots and quotes to capture them unmanned. But it's their version of the story too. Right. As I'm saying, Ukraine's version is all these reports. I see it says Ukraine claimed that this happened. Hmm. Then I'm watching the video. And I'm like, this looks a little bit like when we send robots in and swap missions here. Like we had we do that kind of already. Right. You have a news that use the source of this at there at those New York post. Why are you trying to adapt to your enemy Russian position using only robots? No humans. The future is already on the front line. But then it's going to be eventually why would we send any people out there? It'll be robots capturing other robots, which is great. Nobody dies. I guess. Then why don't we just get to play a game of chess? Play a game of chess. Right. Get the two leaders to play a game of chess. And the winner takes the land and resources. Yeah, I'm not a bad idea. Whatever the fuck we're going to do. It's like the hope it's just insane. Like from the time I was a little child thinking, oh boy, we figured out no war. That's great. Yeah. Two. No, we're fighting war with robots that can detect your heart rate from 40 miles away. So what do you think of what's going on in Iran? It's fucking terrifying. Yeah. All of it's terrifying. Anytime you're involved with you're shooting missiles into towns and blowing things up, blowing up infrastructure, blowing up bridges, you know, and Israel's blowing up Lebanon now. It's like what the fuck are we doing? Yeah. How is it still going on? It's well, it's also clear there was no plan. No, zero. No, no, well, Netanyahu has been telling the United States that that Iran was months away from building a nuclear bomb for 30 years or 20 years at least. That's that's I think it was the first one to go. All right, let's do something about it. But it seems like there was something done about it. He in his first year in office, he tore up the, you know, the bus or bombs. But all this we're in a worse place now than before this thing started. Yeah. Look, the Iranian regimes terrible, like what they do to their protest. I'm not. It's all feuding. Yeah, but I mean, most people that voted for Trump or wanted Trump to be in office, one of the things that was attractive was this no no more wars. Sure. Of course. Now we're in one of the craziest ones. Yeah. And China's flying in cargo planes filled with stuff. We don't know what the fuck's in there. And Russia is giving Iran information about our troops are super fun. Great time. Oh, it's it's it's crazy. And scary too. I mean, science.org says it's quantum sensors. So they say it's bullshit. So it's not plot highly implausible. Did quantum sensors help find a US pilot shot down in Iran? Experts doubt it. Yeah. Now, okay, here's a ignorant question. He shot down. Wouldn't you know he's on foot? He's somewhere near that site. Right. Can't go too far. Yeah, can't go too far. Right. So well, the thing is if he gets ejected from the plane. I don't know how he so if he got shot down, the idea is that he gets ejected from the plane and then parachutes. That could be a lot of distance because the planes flying at a very high speed. It's an altitude undetermined. He jumps out where when does he jump out? Is it a hundred miles away? Is it 50 miles away? Is it 10 miles away? How far can you walk? He's injured? You know, it's fucking terrifying. It's just crazy that, you know, these the pilots or the astronauts just went up into space and circled around the moon and came back. Yeah. They all everybody that goes into space has this experience called the overview effect where they go out there and they one of the first things is going, oh my god, what are we doing? Like how are we pretending at these lines and the dirt that we draw? Yeah. It's all just a bunch of people on this very fragile biological spaceship. Yep. Yep. Yeah, it's fucking terrifying. Yeah. But like all things in the future, all of it's terrifying. The whole the the future of mankind, like it's so perilous. It's all it's all so fragile, all of it. I know. And it's to think of the stuff that we allow these external things that we allow to affect our like if there was ever a time to just be a good person, live your life, enjoy, try to try to spread some kindness and some joy, you know. I mean, it's now. Yeah. You know, it's good time for comedy. People want to go on and have fun. That's true, which reminds me. I have a special. That was the subject. What's it on? There it is. Is it on YouTube? It's on YouTube. Perfect. To the end of the beginning. Where did you film it? 40 watt in Athens. Oh, nice. Nice. Yeah. I'm happy with it. Great. Fantastic. Yeah. And it's out right now. And people can go check it out right now. So are you in the process of writing new stuff now? Or did you yeah? I'm just beginning the process. So I was saying before I'll go out and I'll do, you know, because I don't write, I can't sit down and write jokes. That's just not how it works for me. So all the writing is on stage. So I tape everything. I go up with my notes and I have a couple guests and I'll do 15 minutes, bring up guests, do another 15, bring a guest, do another Oh, that's cool. Yeah. And then break it up in a little chunks. Yeah. And I this way, because, you know, the first couple shows for terrible. I've got nothing. You know, it's just me apologizing for not having anything yet. But people will, I mean, I have people now who will come to the second show and the sixth show and then they'll come see me on tour. You know, so you want to see the process, the process, the evolution of it. And which is cool. And it's, it's, as I said, I either walk or ride my bike to every single venue and they start off small and they get bigger bigger and I lose a guest and then, you know, before you know it, I've got, okay, I think this is roughly the 75 minutes I'm going to do. And then it's about sequencing, which is really important, you know, and then I take it down on the road. And so the ideas that I'll probably late fall start back again. And I love it. That's great. Fucking love it. It's the best, right? I stand up because the most fun. I really went in, you know, people will, I'll do, you know, I'm doing press for this thing and people will say, of I know you do a lot of things. And what is your favorite? I know you're in that, you know, and it's all, I like, I like doing all of it. But the thing that I absolutely have to do is stand up. I can, I'd be disappointed if I could never act again or ride direct or whatever. But I'll be okay. But if you told me I can't do stand up, I'd go crazy. Well, I went a little crazy during the pandemic because, oh, dude, I almost, and I made this part of the bit. But I almost the first show I did, I started tearing up. And I'm in front, I mean, I'm doing this. And it was at the salt room in the bushwick. And I was like, man, I thought, God, I didn't know if I'd ever get to do this again. And shit, you know, I dreamed about this day. And it was a year and seven months where I long since I've been doing this. Such a dream feeling, isn't it? A year and seven months where you, and I did some of those outdoor shows and they're just not, it's not the same. It's not the same. Yeah. Well, that's awesome. I'm glad you love it. And best of luck with the special. Thank you, man. This was fun. This was fun. Thank you for doing this. Absolutely. Alright. What's the name of it again? So people can be in the beginning of the end. Thank you. Bye, buddy.