the Jerogan experience. I made a video once. I said, this is the best Christmas gift. You could possibly get a kid. Because with it, you can see the same craters on the moon that Galileo saw. Light pollution does not obscure the planets. Light pollution does not make impossible. I'm not advocating for light pollution. I'm just saying right here in the middle of Austin, or in the middle of San Diego, I can see the exact same things that caused Galileo to realize that the sun is the center of the solar system. Using scientific reasoning and evidence based on observation. How good are the telescopes? Like say if you wanted to look at Jupiter, how much can you see? You can see a lot. What you can see is shape. You can see the shape that it's a planet. Do you know what that word planet means or where it derives from? No. So I love that analogy and stop me from nerdy and how too much. But planet means wanderer and Greek. Wanderer. What is it wandering against? The fake stars. So the fact that you have names for things, I always think it's funny like Jewish. And we have a name for people that aren't Jewish. Go in. It's not an insult. It just means non-Jewish. It means nation, actually, Israel is a goi, which is a nation. But we have like 0.2% of the world's population. Like, wow, are you making up names for it? They should make names for you, right? But we have names as astronomers. There's only five things they could see that would move in space. And those were the planets from Mercury, Venus, obviously, they could see Mars and Jupiter and Saturn. But they couldn't see anything else. So they named those things the wanderer. And they wandered against the fixed stars. Now we know the stars do move. And actually, the whole galaxy moves. And potentially, we'll get to this maybe later. Maybe the universe in some sense could be said to be moving in an evaster landscape called the multimers, which we can get to at a certain point. But the planets you can see them. But what's so important is what Galileo saw, the Jamie, if you could show this would be amazing, Galileo and the winter of 1610 in Northern Italy, where he was living. He used a telescope, not any better than this. In fact, this might be better because the glass is better, even though it's Chinese piece of junkie and a lie bought on eBay. But he mapped, he was able to measure Jupiter and see it. And hopefully, we can see on the screen. And he saw it as a disk. So if you want to see planets, you can differentiate them right now by the fact that they do not simulate. They do not sparkle. They do not twinkle twinkle like stars do. Because they're extended objects that we can actually see through the same and different parts of the atmosphere of a column. That's what causes a scinthalation. You know, like a sniper rifle, they correct for it. They use, let's call it adaptive optics. That's to avoid the thermal radiation from the earth. Like you're shooting something or elk or whatever, at great distance, there's thermal radiation close to the ground. And then the air is much cooler. And so you get these boundary layers of the atmosphere that causes differential refraction, which changes the color and the position of where the deer is. And that's not good, right? So they have to correct for that, using what's called adaptive optics. Anyway, but the same phenomenon happens for the planets. They're so big, they're so close to us. They're not bigger than the stars. Stars are massively bigger than any of our planets, including Jupiter, the biggest planet in the solar system. But because they're close to us, they don't appear to be points. And only points will twinkle. So if you want to identify a star versus a plane versus a planet, the planet will be the thing that doesn't move and doesn't twinkle. That's called scintillation. They do not scintillate the same way that stars do. So what Galileo did in January of 1610 is he made a series of observations of the planet Jupiter. You knew exactly where it was. He also invented the tripod. He was the first person that these things that we just take for granted, like, Joe, do you know that they didn't have clocks back then? There was no clock. It's not your time, right? Yeah, it's on the us. But what are you going to do at night? Well, it was the first clock. So Galileo tried to invent the first clock. It was actually part of a precursor to the Nobel Prize. It was something called the Longitude Prize. They offered a prize. I don't know if you've ever done any boating or whatever. But when you're out on the ocean, it's extremely hard to determine what your longitude is. It's easy to find your latitude. You just look for Polaris, the North Star. You measure your elevation. And that's going to complement where you aren't latitudinally on the axis going from South Pole to North Pole. On the Earth. But it was impossible to tell where you are east to west from the prime meridian, unless you had an accurate way of measuring time. So Galileo was one of the first people to try to compete to win this prize, which was worth, you know, like a million dollars back then in those dot days. And he tried a couple different ways to invent time pieces. But the one that he tried to settle on was this use of the planet Jupiter's moons. Jupiter has four moons. I came for that look, Joe. I came for that. It's just, I finally got, I can die happy. I got the look. Jupiter has four moons. And you can see them with this telescope. And I'm going to give this as a gift to you for your little tiny one. You can say it. Yeah. If Jupiter's out, you know where to look. And you kind of use a little bit of how many much powers that one? This one's about 12, 15 power. So you could do it with 15 binoculars? Yeah. Yeah, you'll see what you'll see. These four moons. But I wonder if Jamie, if you could find something that wasn't great. If you look up a starry messenger, starry messenger, Galileo sketch Jupiter. So what Galileo did is he turned the telescope to the moon for the in 1609 and then 1610, there they are, Jamie, on the right with those stars. Look at that illustration of Galileo. That's his hand written. I've seen a friend of mine owns this copy, a first edition of these books. And you're looking at it. And actually, first edition, the actual copy that he wrote. Not only that. Yeah, the first edition, but it has his hand running on it in pencil. Wow. It's insane. Oh my God. That's got to be worth a billion dollars. Oh, it's, it's, it's, Jamie, could you please go back to that? Those illustrations? Have that, this thing. That's the thing written stuff? No, I couldn't tell what this was. It's fine. It's a guy. Imagine having a piece of paper that that guy wrote on. Can you imagine it? So this is, yeah, so this is a depiction of him showing Sogale is a guy at the beard looking down, like Andrew Superman at the guy with the white beard. It's a beautiful chisel beard. That's right. Moscular. So he's showing these Venetian senators and don't, because they were in charge of the military budget. So even back then, there was a scientific military connection that he realized because he, because Galileo was kind of a cat. He had a bunch of mistresses. He had some illegitimate children. How dare you, Galileo? He had a support. Very bumpy pure. Yeah, the support, his brother is kind of a no good nick. But anyway, the sketches and the lower right show the planet as you will see it with this time. It's not all that you know when it comes out. And those four little dots, there was an image, a couple of pages back, Jamie, that showed the planet as a disk. And then there are four stars. And if you go back, I'll point it out to you. Yeah, see that thing in the lower right, Jamie? It's a Pinterest thing. I don't know if that's a, yeah, click on that. So here's a couple of, see it says, it's hard to see. It's January 1610. That's Galileo's handwriting. And Iowness is like Jupiter. Okay. So he had shit handwriting. Oh, I know. Yeah, he always thought people back then just real perfectly with feathers. Who knew how to read it? That's a good point. That's a very good point. He's got like a doctor's handwriting. Exactly. So this is his first major book. And in the upper left, you see the sketch of the moon with these giant craters on it. That was a great idea. Yeah. So if you go back, click on that. That's his sketch. That's his sketch of the moon through this telescope essentially. Okay. Now the interesting thing is see that big crater? That doesn't exist. Real, it doesn't. The one on the top? No, the one on the bottom. That one doesn't exist. It doesn't exist. Now why is it there? He was a smart guy. He wasn't like, he was an artist too. By the way, his father of Vigenzo was a beautiful musician, a well-known musician. He was a sketch, I mean, this is hand-drawn. Why is he a good? Did he put that through? Because Joe. He wanted to convey not only what it looked like, but how it felt. He was conveying. And when you see, you'll feel like it's like that big. But if you actually measure it's about 10 times smaller than that. But also he just made it larger than it really is. He emphasized it. And what's so cool about that? If you want to know, you've had on my friend Sean Carroll. I'm going to talk about the Higgs boson when he was on the first time. If you want to feel what it was like to discover the Higgs boson, you need 10 to 20 billion euros and you need a large hydrogen collider. OK, good luck. I don't know if Spotify is going to hook you up there. But the feeling that Galileo had, you can have that tonight. You can feel what it's like to see things for the first time in human history. Because it's your own history. You're experiencing it for the first time. There's no other scientific tool. Nothing. Even the microscope. It's not the same viscerally. You will be connected to Galileo 400 years ago. Feeling he was terrified. When he saw those pictures of those dots, he realized what he was looking at was not just like some stars that happened to be next to Jupiter. He realized he discovered another solar system, a system in which there was a massive gravitating object Jupiter and around it were orbiting satellites. We're orbiting moons around it today. They're called the Galilean satellites. He actually named them after his benefactor, this patrons, the Medi-Chis, who were the richest people in that part of northern Italy. So he was clever. He was trying to curry fish or maybe this would be like if we named the, whatever, the Higgs boson, we named that after the European, you know, Tae Kula in the IRS. He was kind of a kiss-and, a kiss-off, you know, it's always sick of a fan. But it had to save his life and he needed money and stuff. But when he drew that, he realized the, wait a second, the Bible and all teaching here it to four said there is only one center to the solar system and it's the earth. Not the sun. This is called geocentrism. Everybody believed that. Aristotle, Plato, everybody had believed that for a long time because it said it was natural that heavy things should fall towards a center and the center that everything seemed to fall towards was the center of the earth or the earth itself. Therefore the earth must be the center of the universe. Remember, the solar system was the universe for a long time. And for an equally long time almost, the galaxy was the whole universe. And now there's the universe and maybe the multiverse that we'll talk about. So this was just incredible realization to him. Imagine like you come upon this thing and you realize you're the first person in human history ever to feel that. Does there any documentation of his struggle with trying to convey these ideas to people that had very strong religious beliefs? Yeah. Obviously it turned out to be a catastrophe for him. That's right. But what did he convey in his writing, the frustration that he had? He was, he's such a fascinating person. I always like a prerogative statement that like we don't need English departments, we should just teach like physics and astronomy because some of the great scientists of history. Men and women were tremendous orders. They were tremendous writers and they could convey things through the written word that was pure artistry and mastery. And Galileo would say things like, I do not believe that the same God who has given us senses to understand the world would require that we not use that on butchering the quote, not use them in order to better understand it. He would write things that he had discovered things, you know, only as a way to open a portal into the universe such that minds more astute than mine may be able to walk through this this portal and it was being a little falsely humble. But Newton was the same way Newton would write as a great or so you can learn a lot from scientific writing so therefore if you only had to choose one thing, I would take the books of Galileo. In this geocentric version of the universe that they've, how is it written in the Bible? Like how do they describe? It's actually, you know, the atheist so I call myself a practicing agnostic which I can define later if you like, but you had on my friend Stephen C. Meyer which is, you know, partially the reason that I'm here, I think, but to have the discussion about, you know, the influence of religion on science and he made the claim that without religion we wouldn't have science on the show a couple of weeks ago. In other words, we wouldn't have the tradition that we can, that the world is intelligible. It's not the capricious will of God's, you know, playing with human beings as Greeks and others had identified. So the notion of, you know, how religious scientists could be or how religion impacted him was very clear. He would say he was a very religious person. In fact, two of his daughters were nuns and because of his, you know, I always say like, imagine we're living in a time where someone like Anthony Fauci or, you know, Francis Collins or somebody that they had, they were not only the scientists, the expert scientists saying, but they also control the government. In other words, the powerful force on earth at that time, at least where Galileo was was a Vatican. He never left Italy. He never left Italy didn't exist back then by the way. They were only city states, right, Tuscany and Venice and Rome and so on. But the notion, it was a Catholic, you know, band of jurisdiction and Catholic Church had sway over that part of Italy and Tuscany where he was. He was very religious, but he thought that he could say things like if he proved that something scientifically was true, he didn't understand why that couldn't be part of the religious canon. So he was surprised. In other words, he felt that the signature of God is truth. So if he discovered truth, it wouldn't be a problem for the, it wouldn't be threatened. But I argue back then, it was kind of threatening. Like if you started having a bunch of people say, oh, the Bible's wrong, we've been misled and they're the government, not just scientific authority, they're the government. It could lead, I'm not saying it's good, but it could lead them to want to suppress that, right, because it could lead to insurrections, it could lead to whatever. And rebellions and that could be perceived as very threatening to the state.