Hello world, we're back with everyone's favorite con man Matthew B. Cox on this episode We talked about the current state of media and the true crime genre specifically we talked about John McAfee Bill Cosby Donald Trump you name it we covered it We were exceptionally fired up on this episode. Please enjoy this invigorating episode with Matthew B. Cox Matthew B. Cox in the flesh back with his new book With the fancy new book cover. I just got new Matthew B. Cox's here. I like that one Let me see it everybody says it's better. I this is a sample. I just got that like yesterday So Matthew B. Cox is here with new books new paintings And did you did you get some work on done on the hairline? No, not recently. I don't need to be really cool. It is Arminate yeah, so it doesn't fade cut No, it's not like Botox you gotta get it touch up every now and again the hairline is just Yeah, do it once there's no maintenance required. It's it's definitely grain. It's grain If I come through right you can be just for men, right? I'm not doing that. Oh, that's what I meant. Oh the color Yeah, oh, dude, I'm not doing that like I am going I'm going silver fox silver fox silver fox silver cocks the silver fox or the silver cocks I don't understand why it's like this most like this that I think why the water Why are you striving out? What are you talking about now? You know exactly why you're driven out. Oh, now. This is your favorite podcast Where it started tighten this up. Thank you for the express though Bro, I love your new podcast. You're actually you had a new format on your show your interviewing people just like this You got you got con men coming on there and talking about their stories your interview in them and it's great I think it fits you perfectly. Yeah. It's it's it's it's definitely fun. It's it's fun I mean just yeah, just talking on camera. Mm-hmm. Yeah, it's way better It's the it was very weird watching you do like the straight to camera shit like horrible like Graham stuff in like hey guys This is me today. I'm drinking a Starbucks. It's hard. I mean it's hard to do that like it's hard to It's just so stupid. It's so this is just a conversation just happens to be that I have to wear these things now and yeah I'm saying it's not a big like this isn't a big deal. This is very When dinner talking to yourself I'm taking a chance waiting to kitchen or I'm staring at the camera and It was awkward you could tell it was very unnatural for you. Yeah, it's it's tough Where you getting your guest from the people you already know or Tyler Tyler kids people and then it's also people I know It's people like like guys I was locked up with My buddy Zach and then I was locked up with this guy a Juan and then a buddy of mine New this bank robber who'd rob like 10 banks in an armored car and he was like, bro you got a you got interview this guy and And I've got a bunch of other people like what happens is all these criminals know other criminals Like all you have to do is go hey, do you know anybody out anybody that might be it man? I've never so and so I know someone so and next thing you know You've got five other people and that's what what's happening is I'm getting other people lined up to do Podcast but it's a problem getting people to come in. Oh really? They don't want to travel right well, yeah, what if somebody's in three states away? I can't I'm not you know, I'm not Danny. I'm not a big shot. Yeah, I can't I can't pay 300 bucks for a plain thing and then 150 for a night You know a night at a hotel. I can't do that. That's the struggle, bro. Do it on Skype You know, I don't want to do Skype. You don't want to do Skype. It's Skype is horrible It's it's the worst some people do only Skype and it's so fucking weird I only like I just turn it off if it's on Skype. Yeah, that's it's like a Super rare interview where someone can't come here somebody like fucking snowed in Shawn atwood Shawn atwood. Oh, yes, no, it's clearly not snow I had to make the head to risk it for for concrete. Yeah, thought I could sneak in That'd be great in the first conference. Oh my god. Would you imagine? Or Maccophy Maccophy Maccaffe. How do you say his name? Maccaffe Maccaffe Maccaffe. It's Maccaffe's name Maccaffe Maccaffe McDonald's car. It was Maccaffe to yeah, it's Maccaffe. I'm pretty sure it's Maccaffe. I'd try Maccaffe Oh, I had some people correct me. These guys are the guys in the comments. Oh, yeah, those areas are part Did you do a video? You did like a video like a deep dive explanation on Maccaffe and his story, right? I don't know about deep, but we did have a little bit of a conversation. My buddy, what did you find out about him? What did you do? What'd you do? What'd you say? I mean, I watched, I watched like four videos and you know, I'd already when I was locked up. I read the article that was in Wired magazine. So I ran New Who He was, which is pretty cool because a lot of things happen. People are like, oh, you hear about someone so and I'm like, man, I have no idea who that person is. You know, I don't keep up with any of that stuff. But this I actually, as soon as they said it, I knew who he was. And then I'd watch a couple of videos. I mean, what did I learn? The guy's, my buddy, Zach, he's like 100% positive. Like, oh, he was killed. He was killed. There's no way. He wasn't, he was killed. But look, unlike Epstein, you know, I know you, the Epstein, he was definitely murdered. Unlike Epstein, like this part, like the, the Macafee, and that's, that's bizarre. This guy is literally saying, look, these people are off to get me. They're coming for me. They've sent me messages. I'm, I'm not going to kill myself. I'm not suicidal. I'm perfectly, you know, I'm perfectly sane. I'm not depressed. I mean, he's saying all these tweets. He's sitting out tweets. He's sitting out messages. And then as soon as you find out, okay, he's going to be extradited in the United States with an hour as he's found hung in his cell. And what's your take on it? What do you think happened? Well, I mean, first of all, do you think you killed himself? Do you think what do you think? You know, I hate to say that. I hate to say, oh, he didn't because I don't know. You don't know. It's like, no, this is all especially right. But I mean, I hate to be, I hate those guys. It rushed to judgment. And it's like, you know, it reminds me of, um, yeah, but that's what podcasts are about. They're about being Monday morning quarterback. I know that hate that. They're about they're about this. You're playing in your ideas. Slinging your opinion. You know, it bothers me. It, when I grew up, whatever you say is a fact, Matt, what it's not a fact. But look, look, you know, okay, when I grew up, you guys are, are probably don't remember this. This woman sued McDonald's for because she spilled her coffee. I remember myself and she won like $5 million or something. Yeah, whatever. Cause it burned or whatever. Right. Hello. I'm, uh, I'm fucking, I'm doing a podcast right now on the contrary. All right. What's that? Bozy act. What's up, Bozy act? All right. Let me give you a call back. Bye. I feel like he calls you every time we're doing a podcast. Does it, did he last time? Yeah, I think so. Um, so, so the woman in McDonald's just, this is the, like this is like the reason I feel like this is like the woman in McDonald's, everybody went nuts. The media went nuts. They were like, this is ridiculous. They're giving her all this money. And they made a snap judgment. That was the, that was the, the soundbite was, she drove through the drug, the drive through. Ask for coffee. She spilled it on herself. She sued and got $5 million. Now I don't know if it was three and a half. I don't know if I'm just saying five. Mm hmm. You know, and boom, isn't that so ridiculous? Like how much does she get? $3,900. $3,900. 80 year old woman gets $3 million. Cause she got suffered punitive damage damages for the burns. Right. So here's the thing, it was dangerously hot. It was not just hot, but dangerously hot. What? Here's the thing. So you, you hear that and that's the media, right? And you're like, oh, okay, like that is ridiculous. Now come on, man, you spilled the coffee. What's the problem? Right. Then you go, okay, that, you know, how could a jury find that? Well, because the jury found that because the jury got all the facts you didn't, you don't get that off the news. You don't know what happened. What really happened is McDonald's over the last 10 years had been telling McDonald's, you're boiling your coffee and it will cause, you know, whatever. Third, fourth, fifth degree burns. You know, people are complaining. It's too hot. And McDonald's is saying, you know, we don't care. People like it hot. Easy it. Right. So here's what happens. Easy. It's hot. It's so hot that the, it's so hot. It's so hot that the ship that you're, your cups and everything actually melt. Right. So the tops are popping off. So some woman, they barely put on the top, they hand it to her, it drops in her lap and she has to have skin grafts to do reconstructive surgery on her vagina. Oh, fuck. An 80 year old vagina. And they, yeah, which is already going to be hard, right? To deal with. What's the point? No one's looking down there anyways. Let it fucking leave the burn scars. So anyway, it's better for the settlement if you get the surgery. I got to get surgery. That surgery. Yeah. So now you know that McDonald's is known. This is a problem. They've been told over and over again. They've completely, they've completely disregarded it. This woman gets burned. Now what do you do? You know, now does she deserve to win and a good chunk of money? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And the punitive damages is, it's not necessarily, hey, this is your pain and suffering. What we're saying is what is it? Sound bro. God damn. My phone. But, you guys fucking in here. What does that sound? That's like some old fucking computer. I know it. It's a, it's a telegraph sound. Tell it, like, that's what it is. Yeah. Is that how they communicated with you in prison? So, so that was so that was so I'm saying now you look at it and you go, hey, if you had to have reconstructive surgery on your dick because McDonald's knew the coffee was too hot and that it was melting the lid. They were negligent. Right. They were negligent. Now do you think you deserve anything when then it's like, oh, yeah, yeah, okay. Now I see fucking right. So, you know, from the media, he was found dead. I don't know. But here's what I, what, here's what really freaked me out. So I'm on the internet and everything I'm watching all these videos about him saying, look, if I end up dead, like they find my body, he actually tattoos the whacked. Yeah. And he's like, I was whacked. I was killed. It wasn't suicide. I'm not suicidal. I'm doing fine. I've got friends here. I'm good. So then he ends up getting killed and everything on the, on the internet that where people are just being able to report it, they're saying, look, this is insane. This is crazy. But when I watched ABC News, it was so benign. It was like, McAfee, what a life he lived. He was very controversial. He was implicated in a murder in like a ruber. Something I forget where it was. Belize. He was implicated in a murder. He evaded taxes. He was, he was found, he was indicted for tax evasion. He was looking, he was possibly going to spend the next 30 years in prison for tax evasion. He was caught in Spain. And they were going to extradite him. And this is what he tweeted just before, you know, he was, his body was found. And the tweet was like, I have no more Bitcoin. I have no more money. I, something like, you know, I love my family. I am at peace. His body was found a week later, you know, hours after. So they was painted the picture of me. And I'm thinking of myself. You serious? Did you guys just read like, is that the US press release? You just read? I mean, if you'd even looked on, if you'd even looked on on YouTube or anything else and looked at all this other, you're not even going to mention that he said he wasn't suicidal. He would never kill himself. You're not even going to mention that. Right. They don't, they completely went with like the party. But we all know all that corporate corporatized media, ABC, NBC, Fox, we all know that's owned by the government. They're all in bed. They're not going to go against the government. It's not normally obvious like that. Like it's not that like it was so like, you're literally, it was insane. But everything, it's, but that's the complete opposite on the internet though. Everybody on the fucking internet is saying, oh my God, it's another Epstein. I know that obviously didn't kill himself. If you get, if you have a brain and you've no, you can look up his Twitter account, you can see all his tweets. He is tattooed, see all that shit. Everyone was saying that like, there's no way this guy actually killed himself. Right. I don't even know how, here's the problem. Here's what my problem is. I don't know even know how you kill yourself in a cell like that. It's like, like it's, it's, but he wasn't really in a cell. Was he? He was like, he was live streaming on the internet every day. He was, he was tweeting and and what he was still a fellow that podcasts, not from yeah, bro. He had access to like a podcast there was a podcast he did like a month before that. I think there, there's video of him. It's on Twitter every fucking five minutes. Yeah. I mean, I'm not sure how that like to me, I think it's very possible that he obviously had access to some kind of computer and he's tweeting or maybe a phone. I don't know. Look, Spanish prisons are not at the level he was at. They're not, they're, these are not harsh places. You know what I mean? These are not harsh prisons. Right. And they always make it sound like he's going to do 30 years. You know, he's 75 years old. He's going to do 30 years in prison. What are you? So he's going to, he's probably going to do three or four years in prison. Maybe five years in prison. No, if he goes to the US and he's, he's actually out of the US. He's doing third easily in third just for tax evasion. They'll be fucking crucifixion. They'll need to cross. Right. You're a couple of years. Right. Yeah. Absolutely. You're that much. You'll do a few years. He just, I mean, this is just tax evasion. This guy says straight up. Fuck you. I'm not paying tax. I understand. But here's the difference. They'll say, let's say they say $20 million tax evasion. Do you understand they're saying you didn't pay taxes on $20 million. Okay. So what do I owe you? Six. Okay. Well, if we'll make a deal, I'll pay you the six. I'll do five years in prison. I'm out in three because I can take the drug program. I'm probably two and a half. I'm probably in a halfway house. I do two and a half years. They're going to include the time that he spent while incarcerated already while he was incarcerated in in Spain. So by the time you get here, you're looking at a year and a half to two years and you're out and I pay the six million. So he's not going to do anything. Look, they said I was facing 154 years. Never facing 100. Yeah. If I went to trial and they stacked it. Right. So the massive possible. I mean, yeah, if you can pull up any sort of like recent tax evasion case, like federal tax evasion prison. Because it's from I mean, because I've never been in prison in a met he yeah, he's an activation. We need the internet. So, so, okay, the history of John McAfee is throughout he he throughout the 80s and 90s, right? He was he was living larger. At some point, I think it was in the 90s. He sold his part of a McAfee antivirus to Microsoft. He got a hundred million. Right. When he should have got billions and years later it was worth a ton right, right. And he was a nut. He was a nut. His dad committed suicide. His dad was an alcoholic. He was obviously boozing doing tons of Coke. He was doing all kinds of drugs. The guy was by no means sane. I don't think you can call him sane. If you watch the name of his interview, he's not. He's absolutely nutty. So, and a lot of people say he's a fucking ego maniac on top of it. Yeah, he's definitely his narcissistic. So if you're him and it's and it's and it's 2000 nurses don't kill themselves. I'm never. I'm not killing myself. There's no way. I'm taking out everybody else. I can't. Right. That's a good point. That's a good point. And that is a good thing. Sorry, but go ahead. So I'm saying the guys, he's obviously a fucking ego maniac and he had a problem with drugs, big big problem of drugs and alcohol. And he was a little fucking loopy more than a little loopy. Right. Just judging by his Twitter. So if I'm John McAfee and I am depressed and I am considering suicide, why not just fuck with everybody three and a half years? Three to five. That's a three and a half. Three to five. Okay. I thought it would be way worse. I thought they try to make an example out of you and try to like pin you to 20 years. I mean, if you go to trial, can you get 30 years? Yeah, you can. Right. Nobody takes that trial. Nobody's going to. Look, if you're if you're just blatantly guilty, right? Especially when your other's just saying, I'm not paying fucking taxes. You have no trial days. Yeah. But he did some other scammy shit. He pulled some Bitcoin scams. He tried. He did some Bitcoin pump and dumps where he tried to like ask like like pump the price of Bitcoin. But they had, I don't think that's not, I think he was indicted for tax evasion. That was the only that I didn't talk about. Like they may have superseded. Alex Jones said he was a spy. Alex Jones said that he was a spy for a bunch of other countries and do not consecration. Anyways, what I was getting too about about his personality, his cookiness and his drug abuse, like that. Right. If I'm him and I do want to kill myself, why not fucking go crazy and try to fuck with the work, try to fuck with the internet and just make some sort of crazy legacy for myself and say, Hmm, maybe I do want, if I do want to kill myself, maybe I'll fucking tattoo on myself, whack and make the whole world think when I go out that I got whack by the feds. I mean, yes, like why not just try to troll people and make some sort of legacy out of it? You know what I mean? Why try to fuck with people? Because do the fact like how much did I give a fuck about John McAfee? How much did they really give a fucking guy who committed tax evasion and did some Bitcoin pumping dumps? Maybe he's got some info. I mean, I mean, he, yeah, that was the other thing he said he had all this, uh, was it three terabytes or something, whatever, a megabytes or whatever. That's a info. He had info on corruption and so what? First of all, that that part didn't even like phase me. It's like, oh, come on, stop. Yeah, there's this thing, there's this thing called a like he's like he's Raymond Redington from the blacklist. Like I'm going to expose the component. There's what what's the term? There's a term for people who, uh, who, uh, it's like a, uh, I forget what the fucking word is, but it's basically like a term for like when a suicide bomber, like a suicide bomber comes in and is someone shoots you, you let go of the trigger and you everyone, it's a dead man switch, a dead man switch, yes, a dead man switch. So that's like what he, what he kind of had like a dead man switch. So if he got, like if you got a bullet, if you got killed, the switch would go off and all of the info, all the shit that he would have and everyone would get released, right? Right. Right. Exactly. That's what they say about Epstein too. Like why wouldn't he have a dead man switch? Because he wasn't, he didn't have anything and he killed it himself. Hmm. Epstein, I think I think, I think, no, Epstein, you know, the Epstein had anything to come on. I'm, where is it? I think he killed himself. Epstein, I just can't imagine that you could get into a federal per like a lot of guys are like this. Look, so I've like Zach was telling. We were arguing, um, and it was the argument was he was saying, well, why not just wait till he gets back here, right? And kill him back here because it's easier to get to him in a Spanish prison. And then there's an investigation in a Spanish prison. And how much do they give a crap about some American that died in Spanish prison? You get him back here. How are you going to get into the marshals hold over? It's difficult. This is these things are inside of pens in there. It's not, it's, it's not, it's difficult. What is it? John McVee tweeted before his death that he stored computer files in a Florida condo building that later was scroll down a little bit that later collapsed. What? I've heard this one. Is that real? This is, this, I think this is false news because it's on political fact. That means it's a fact. The name of this website has the word fact in it. Yes. It's clearly true. It's undisputable. Does it mean that conspiracy theory is escalated quickly around the death of technology, entrepreneur John McAfee in a Barcelona prison where he was waiting expedition to the US on tax evasion charges. Spain's El Paris, El Pia El Pius, newspaper reported the Mac fee who developed the first commercial antivirus software. Keep going. Keep going. Oh, Q on. He posted it. Scroll up a little bit and see the Q in on. June 25th Instagram post appeared to link McAfee's death to June 23 with another major news event, the collapse of a condominium building near Miami the next day. What the next day? Huh. Yeah. Did you see the thing at the top? Look, great. Stop, stop, stop. See where it says Q in on. Right. But rumors link to the baseless Q in on conspiracy theory. Whose followers believe what Democrats celebrities were involved in an underground child trafficking race. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Cover it by Q in on. Often. I don't know. You know what the collapse of the building? So it's a Q in on theory that he had the files in that building. Yeah. Listen, listen, okay. So when I was locked up in in in was that the medium? Was I worked at it? Yeah, I was in the medium when I was in the medium at Coleman. So I worked with this guy every day for a year, talk to him at least, you know, five minutes here, you know, like any worker. I worked in the library at one point. So I taught real estate classes. I worked in the library and then another point I taught GED, but for like a year or so, I've worked in the library. So I see this guy all the time. He's like the head librarian. Nice guy. We're always talking. We talked a little about this, a little bit at that politics. What's going on? Because at that time I would watch the news and everything totally normal guy. Everything was super normal. Talk about movies. Everything guys normal. One day I happen to say, so you're still working on your case. He's like, he looked at me and goes, yeah, yeah, but after Oklahoma City, I just don't know. I don't know what I'm going to be able to do. I mean, I can't get the evidence is destroyed. And I went, Oklahoma City and you looked at me and he goes, Timothy McVeigh, and Oklahoma City, you know, the Oklahoma City is a long story. And I went, what does that have to do with your case? Like this guy, I knew this guy had been locked up like 20 years. So like way before Oklahoma City. And he said, the FBI was storing the evidence in my trial at the field office in Oklahoma City. And I said, I thought you're, you were prosecuted out of Orlando. And he's like, I was, but that's where they were storing the files. By the way, that's absolutely not true. That's not where your store, your files are stored. Yeah. Okay. There is no storage in a field office in Oklahoma City. All right. They're stored at the US Attorney's office or at the FBI at the field office where you're being prosecuted out of which he wasn't. You ever been to Oklahoma City? No. Why were they stored? They're exactly exactly. So he was, they, he was, they bombed the, the FBI field office and took the building down to destroy my evidence, his evidence, his evidence. So they killed like 30 some odd kids, a bunch of FBI agents, a whole bunch of other people working in the building. They framed Timothy McVeigh all to destroy your evidence to keep you in prison because you got 30 years, you've already done 20 of it. You got five left. This guy always seemed normal for a year. Well, how do you know, maybe he's, maybe his files were stored there? How do you know, how do you know they weren't insane? They're new. You're said he was normal. Up to the point he said this one thing. He had this, look, you could talk to Frank Armadeo and have a great conversation with it with him until and just happen, you could do it for a year. And then one day you happen upon something and he starts telling you about how he's going to take over the world. Some of these guys have these little tiny little, it's this little dark, dark room somewhere in their head. And one day you're opening up doors and you open that one door and you find out the guys in the fucking nuts. Yeah, that one little, that's the, the cure-on guys, there is a conspiracy, I don't know anything about it, but there is a conspiracy about the Oklahoma City bombing, right, except for the fact that when they talked to Timothy McVeigh, he laid out exactly what he did. He didn't say I was hired, I was framed. He was saying, he's like, yeah, this is what I did. I was, I was, I was, uh, I was, because they fucking brainwashed him with MK Ultra. Okay, let's move on. They brainwashed him insane. They fucking, they fucking brainwashed him now. What are you doing? I'm using a tiny part of Q&M. Oh my god. Listen, I'll, I live in half the guys on YouTube. I'm spitting facts. Okay. Are, are, are you can quote me, you can fact check everything I told you about that. I would tell you about the one guy that had, that told me, this is after Trump had, after Trump had, had lost, he was about to step down. And I, this guy sent me an email, say, look, I have evidence of government corruption and this and this and this and this and so these guys will say this kind of stuff. And if, and if they're persistent enough and they, you know, they sound credible, this guy seemed kind of credible. Like, it's like, it's worth a phone call. It's like, all right, here's my cell number. Shoot me an email or, or me, I'll, I'll talk to you at this time. I talked to him. He was telling me about how Trump was working. Was it, was it working with the military? I forget who he was. Oh, and China. And that they were about to bomb. No, China was going to bomb some facility that was under like Mount Rushmore. And they were going to collapse the entire, um, our entire economy. And we were doing that. And he's like, Trump's been working with him the whole time. And he goes on and on and on. And I'm listening to him. He's just nuts. And I'm listening to him. And I went, bro, you, you do understand that after tomorrow, Trump's no longer president. He's like, that's what they want you to believe, bro. Oh, he's going to, when this happens. Oh, no, he's still president. He's going to be president. Now, bro, I'm pretty sure that the guy was, and honestly, like I didn't at now in these guys call, like when they say crazy shit in the comments section. Now I'm like, email me, bro, we got to get you on the podcast. Yeah, you have. I need to talk to you by crazy. Like, right. Right. Right. This podcast has turned me into a conspiracy. There is a lot. I'll bet. The motherfuckers I get on here are fucking wigging my, are changing my brain. I'm convincing. And you know, you can manipulate facts. You can tweak it here and tweak it here to shift it one way or the other. The media does it all the time. But you get somebody who's really good. You can man. You can really twist, twist up some stories. Yeah. I don't know. I kind of missed Trump now that he's not an office. He was fucking phenomenal entertainment. He was great for media. Great for the internet. There was a headline every single fucking day about him. I'm missing. I truly miss him. Listen, it's sad watching Biden. It really feels bad. Like, I'm pathetic. God, I hope there's no major decisions that have to be made. Like, this is this is bad. It's fucking pathetic, bro. Just watching. Did you watch his coronavirus speech the year day? I can't watch everybody. I'm begging you. Get vaccinated. And now they're saying they're going to come to your doors and vaccinate you. They're going to go door to door. Like the fucking consensus thing. Have you been vaccinated? No, no, he ain't getting vaccinated. Me neither. We're not supposed to get vaccinated. I'm not doing it. They're not implementing those chips in me. Yeah. Hulk Hogan told me all I need to do is save my prayers and take my vitamins. So that's what I'm doing. Was a Hulk Hogan or Joe Rogan? I don't know. I think it was Hulk Hogan. Same thing. Good job. I love your truck. Do you think he's going to be president in 2024? Listen, would that be hilarious? I would love it. I would. Nobody's ever done that before. I fucking I know right. What's for? Are you sure? I don't think anybody's ever been in a term left for a term and then come back for another. No, I don't think it has either. Yeah, we have to look at that. Somebody smarter than us. I'm pretty sure that's true. Yeah. Yeah. The Trump's good. Did you see Tucker, Tucker Carlson said that one of the Trump's did you read? I had three. Go get it. Show it to us. Let me see what that fucker looks like. Well, the one that sold this old. Well, you got two right there. Okay. You wanted me to walk. You wanted me to walk off with the headphones on. Oh, snap. Oh, yeah. Austin will get it. Oh, no. Austin changing the battery. He can get the, get the, get the Trump first. That's what you were playing. And that was the plan. That's like when someone's holding, holding a glass. Look at that. Look at that. It's been your time. Yeah. Yeah. Hold it. Uh, you got to hold on that side of you. What's that basically where your head was before? There you go. Boom. Trump 2024. Are you selling this to your on your website? No, you have to email me or go to my website and get my email. What website? No, you can go to, um, no, no, you go to my YouTube channel. My YouTube channel. There you go. I got to plug the YouTube channel. It's all me would be. What is it? Inside true crime, Matt Cox. Yes. Matt Cox or inside true crime. It'll show up. So explain to me what was your process in creating this picture? What? Explain to me your creative process for this. I used to play it. It looks like it was printed. It is. Fucking printer. No, no, it's a, it's a screen. It's a screen print. Then I go back and I paint it, I paint over the screen print. Then I screen print it again to get the little dots. Ooh, because I like the little dots. What's the word? What's the term for that? The little dots? Um, like, little dots. Um, I don't know. Isn't there an artistic term? Don't you have a fine arts degree? He's just me. I mean, you're just, I don't know. What is it? I don't point a wisdom, but it's not point a wisdom. There you go. There you go. point a wisdom. Um, yeah. Yeah. Uh, it's, it's basically this is, it's called a modified screen print. But it's not pointless. I'm not there. There you go. Point of the list. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, it's basically this is, it's called a modified screen print. It's where you're using, you know, it's like, I love how you did the size too. The size, how you painted the size. Oh, we paint the size. That's, that's fucking dope. Got a play even. There was star in there. Ooh. Brat the star. His mom or grandma would pay top dollar for that thing right there. Mm hmm. So would my dad probably would love it too. People love Trump. People do love Trump. What I was thinking about doing is fun. He's fun. He was fun. That one's cool too. I like that one. It's kind of like a burgundy background. Merlot. Merlot. Merlot. Yeah. Merlot. The Maryland Monroe's. So I've already got three Maryland Monroe. I did like five Maryland Monroe's, three of them are sold already. Would you do a Charles Manson? I could do a Charles Manson. Then you would have the Manson and the Maryland and the Manson. Mm hmm. So it's just so corny. You're going to, you're going to. We can send them to Maryland Manson. You're going to make a great dad. You've got, you always tell us the dad joke. They're corny dad. Yeah. Oh my gosh. So you're selling these things on your website or on your, you just got to email you and you just email me. How much would it go for? I, uh, 285 and that mean, and I mail them to you for that. Oh really? So I include shipping. Then include shipping. And I like a purse. Free shipping. I mean, if somebody were already signed in McConk. Yeah, I signed on. You know, if somebody said, hey, can you sign the back or something? Whatever. I don't care. I even got special boxes that fit them perfectly. It's nice. I got it down. And I've the bubble gum girl one, like I've sold a bunch of those. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Rob Zombie one. And then the, um, I've started selling the, the screamer. The way the guy is screaming. Yeah. I love the one. What about the special one? The really special. Oh my God. All right. So I do get guys. And this is, it is, it is weird. It's really gay. I know he's going to say he's, he's, he's going to be able to do that. He's going to listen there. Listen. Listen. Guys ask me all the time. Bro, I want a portrait. I'm like, a food and they're like, of you. And I'm like, I don't know. You know, I haven't done one. I think you know what I'll do. I'll just do a screen print. I'll screen print them and then I can paint them in and do whatever. And I'll throw some sharks in there. And then that'll be it. I can knock those out and I'll sell them for the same thing. What are you doing? Why are you laughing? Cause it's just funny. Like someone said I was supposed to say. So you say, I want a portrait and then and this is what you come up with. This is what I came up with and Danny hates it. Let's see. We don't hate it. We don't care about things. It's fucking beautiful. I think it's fucking not. You just give your time hilarious. It is fucking comical. Awesome. Got it. But it's great. I love it. I'm not hating on it. It is just. It's interesting. It's interesting. There. So this is Matt's self. Yeah. Oh my. What do you call that that look you're doing right there? What's that face? That's me messing with my iPhone camera. That was it. That's like hey, what's up, baby? Do not make that face in prison. All right. Come on, man. What's going on? How much does that would go? How did you take that photo? It was my iPhone. I put it on a stand and I was taking pictures and that was one of I took a bunch of pictures and I looked at that one. I said I like that when I sent it to a couple of people and they were like, yeah, that's good. I mean, I'm trying to. You said to couple of those out? No, no, just the photo. Oh, I got you. That was it. How much does that one go for? That's at least 500. That's at least 500. That's at least 500. That was a double. That's $4.99 free shipping all day. Anyway. I guess I should have sent it to Danny first. Yeah. Maybe it's going to be a while ago. You were going to make it in an FT. Yeah. Yeah. I can't get enough of that painting. I want to put that on my wall. I can see that in your house. We need to do a concrete. One of these for concrete. I can not get out over and over. And I asked Danny about that. I said, yeah, Danny, I'll do you. No, I don't want to be on it. We didn't want for me. Just do some K's in the background. What's your K's? Who's going to put on it? If not you. What's your K pattern? To put you with the microphone. No, I don't want that. Why is everything gay? I don't know. You're probably a large percentage of your viewers. That's fine. I'm going to get canceled. My podcast. I'm going to get shadow banned because I said the word. What is shadow banned? Is that a real thing? Yeah. I got shadow banned last week. And I'm so you do. What does that mean? They mean they take your shit off search. If you search for it, it doesn't propagate at all in search. Whoa. Yeah. I have a couple of W. Just saying shadow banned probably just got you shadow banned. Well, there. Well, there. This doesn't do well. It's not my fault. Yeah. It sucks. It happened to me. I forget what episode was it on? I did episode a week ago. What was it on? I was the guy that was Tom O'Neill. He wrote a book about Charles Manson. He spent 20 years investigating the Manson murders and basically found all these holes in the white-wood. Why would that be shadow banned? So I think I went a little too crazy with the title. Where you do the title? Well, I didn't have to. I tweeted at YouTube and I asked YouTube. I said, hey, what's the deal? Why is this episode not appearing anywhere on search? You can search for the literal exact title of the episode. And it doesn't appear on search. It gets impossible to find it unless you actually go to the channel, you know, go under videos. You'll see it there. And they said, oh, it probably got flagged in our system, which means it's invisible on search. And then the next morning it was back up. It was visible. So it's a thing they do. I mean, it's a real thing. It's a real thing. So the title of the video was something like the CIA's secret program to brainwash people with how the CIA brainwashed Charles Manson with LSD, basically, with something like that. And I guess that triggered their system and they took it off search. But that's crazy, isn't it? It's fucking crazy that they do that. That they have something that will literally take your shit and make it invisible to people. That's not crazy to me. No. No. Why? Why wouldn't they do that? They own the fucking platform, do whatever they want. Okay. They have people they got to protect. And here's the problem. Yeah, what the CIA. Yeah, probably. You think the CIA doesn't use YouTube's information for fucking intel and stuff. I'm sure they're somebody. I think they 100% can use YouTube's information, but that goes against fucking whatever amendment, the free speech amendment is. That's what I was just going to say. It's like a lot of people would argue, hey, well, it's a good thing. It's a private company. They can do whatever they want. But when you become so large that you become a part of like the social fabric, then you get to that point where you go, okay, well, wait a minute, you're a monopoly now. So people don't really have an alternative that says widely used. This is a massive, massive platform. Like nobody else is there. You say, oh, yeah, you couldn't use Reddit. You can use, no, you can't. It's nothing's like YouTube. It's massive. At that point, you kind of have to start abiding by the constitution. Right. It's like a new concept. No, no, no, you're saying what they're saying is no, it's ours. We own it. No, no, no. You have to start abiding by the constitution at that point. There comes a point where you're so large that you're like a town square. Right. You're a monopoly. Because now you can actually start swaying things. You can start censoring things. But is that real? Do you have to do that? I mean, you do. I think you get to that point. It's kind of like, well, there's no law saying that. No, they're the, you know, that's what I mean. They are monopoly. I mean, yes, yes, and no, look at, look at Microsoft, like back in the 80s when Microsoft came out. They started saying Microsoft started saying, hey, listen, oh, you're a small, you're a small software store that sells software. Great. Yeah, we want to sell your windows. OK, here, here's our windows. So you can sell our windows. But we also need a percentage of everything else you're store selling. What? Yeah. So here's the problem is that they were, they were getting, they were doing that. Well, that that becomes illegal because you become basically, you're almost, it's almost like racketeering. And if they, they're all whole thing was, well, they don't have to sell our product. Yeah, but if they don't, they go under. Right. Because it's the main product that's being sold out there everywhere. So you're basically saying, you can go under or you can give me a portion of your business. And people are doing it while they launch this massive investigation. That's back when they were talking about breaking up Microsoft. Like this thing is too big. We're going to have to break it apart. And, and you know, they fought it and they obviously didn't, but then they stopped doing that also. They said, OK, we'll stop this practice and this practice and this practice and this practice. It's really scary. It's really scary, especially if you're on your own, your independence, somebody who's creating your own stuff. And this is how you pay your bills. It's how you make a living off of making these videos and posting shit on YouTube. Right. But literally you're constantly worried about these boundaries that you have to stay within. Like there's guys, there's YouTube channels. Well, guys aren't like specifically talk about guns and firearms and like the second amendment and all this stuff. And they just take it away. Well, these guys have tons of followers, tons of subscribers, but they're demonetized. So YouTube can choose the type of content to make, they'll make it unprofitable. Like they can literally choose to make certain topics unprofitable for people to talk about, which takes away their incentive to talk about these sort of things on their platform, which is crazy, which influences the culture of everything. Yeah, I'm absolutely agree with that. I mean, look, look, it's the spiderman quote with great power comes great responsibility. Do you remember that? Oh, yeah. OK. So I think that's true. I think that's true. You know, I mean, imagine being fucking Trump, bro, fucking kicked off Twitter, kicked off YouTube, Facebook, everything. What else are we talking about? Wait, oh, wait. Oh, I was gonna say no, it's fucking, I mean, it's, it's, we're not gonna solve it. It's fucking incorrect. It's incredibly scary, bro. Yeah. Yeah. You have to stay very kind of vanilla. And you can't, and the other thing is, is those people, they're not going to talk to you. Like they're not going to, you think that you can just send them an email or make a phone call and say, hey, can we work on this? Can we work something now? Let's, let's, you know, I'll promise to behave from now on and follow your rules. No, they don't, you're, you're done. They could have suspend you for whatever the fuck they please if they don't like what you're talking about or if they think that it could be even by accident that you get flagged for something or like a troll flags your video for something that they don't like. Yeah. Bozy, I got a video taken now when our demonetized or was it taken down or if he, because in the process of it, he talked about how he got a like an upper respiratory infection from wearing masks. And that he went to the doctor and the doctor was like, well, how often, how many masks you have? He's like, I don't know. One or two, he's like, do you have, how often you wash him? He's like, I don't know. Barely ever. He's like, how long have you worn that? It's like, oh, well, and this one for like a week. He's like, they were like, that's a problem. We're getting more and more of these infections. So during the conversation talking about the infection, he's like, I'm sick of these masks. I'm sick of them. Boom. What happened to it? The video? Yeah. I don't know if they got, oh, yeah. They took, no, it was a strike, whatever. It was a strike. They took a strike on his channel for saying that he's sick of the masks. Yeah. Yeah. It was a strike. It wasn't like a copyright strike. It was some other kind of strike. And I said, did you fight it? Did you, because if they watch the videos like, no, man, I was, I don't know what to do. Like, what am I supposed to do? He's like, it doesn't matter. It was a five minute video. And he was like, I don't care. It's fine. But yeah, it was just because he happened in the course of it just said this. And he was really only saying that he was just, you know, up, he's not saying, he's not telling people not to do it. Right. But they struck it immediately. Yeah. It's crazy. They do that to a lot of people. They do it to legitimate doctors that go on YouTube and talk about their studies on the coronavirus. So they talk about their patients who have had COVID and what they think the sign or what their opinion is or what their research says about the science or whatever. And if it goes against like an official, the official narrative. It's done. Right. So there's no, there's no area for conversation about it. There's no area, there's no room for nuance in anything as long as if it's against the official narrative, YouTube will strike you and demonetize you and ruin your ability to profit off of whatever you're talking about. Or even Bany from YouTube. Little correction. It's just a little correction. Mm hmm. It's like having a shock collar on. Yeah. It's crazy. It's a little don't go out of the yard. Mm hmm. The yard that's back. Like don't go out of the yard. You want to get zapped up. Jess said to say hi to Dany and Hatrak. As I said, they just went up. I can't show you because she sent me kind of a, let's see a naughty picture. Um, yeah. Hey Dany. Hey Hatrak. So all right. So Jess is back. Oh yeah. Yeah. She's back for now. We know who knows all that chick drains me. Oh yeah. Yeah. But that was her back and forth. Listen, I saw her the two weeks after or two or three weeks after we broke up. I saw her more than I did for the three months prior to that. When you're together. Oh, she in listening furious when she when something happened and I was like, yeah, well, you know, and she is, look, I understand you're going to be dating. But and I was like, well, I mean, I've already been on, I've already been on a couple of dates and she was like, couple of dates. She's it's been a week. And I was like, it's been like a month. And she's like, are you serious? I mean, she just went nuts. And that at that point, spending the night that night and then that next night. Oh yeah. She wants to make sure you're not going on no more fucking dates. What's going on? I mean, you knew this was going to happen. I mean, you couldn't wait a little bit. What do you know? There's no grace period. Yeah. I mean, we break up on Monday. I'm on a I'm on a come on Tinder on Tuesday. Tuesday. I'm hoping I'm wanting to shit up for Thursday and Friday. Don't get don't get crazy. That must be a lot of work having to go on Tinder and go on those dating sites to try to find bitches. I'm going to find pussy on there. A lot. It's a lot quicker than going to a bar. Yeah. You know, like going to bars, right? No, everybody's his height. Your height. No, I can't deal with guys five foot 10. It's just a advantage. Huge. I can't deal with that. No. You're just going Tinder. Let him know right off the rip. Five to. Yes, exactly. I got that. You just immediately you just you any of the ones that are like, oh, it's got to be. And it's got to be five foot eight or taller. Done. Left. What is your height on Tinder? What did you put your height up? Five seven with a good pair of shoes. That's what is a really safe. That's what I do. I do say five. Hell yeah. Oh, yeah. It doesn't say with a good pair of shoes. No, you can't put that. I just say five seven. But I hear you're in the point. And the thing, like they're not listening. If they're going to end up with me, they're going to be disappointed at some point. I'm telling you, I'm not six two. I'm just working with what I got. So I make up for it with enthusiasm. Yeah, your personality makes up for the height difference, Matt. You have a great personality. My boyfriend maybe five, five three, but he's got a great personality. That's not mean. Well, very charismatic. People love you, Matt. Oh, I was going to say, yeah, I'm like Tom negotiating with these guys for a podcast, to do a podcast, a true crime podcast. You already have a true crime podcast. No, no, like one that's like heavily produced like a one that's on, you know, like wandering or, you know, like a serial type of thing. Exactly. And you can suspect an interviews, but you know, it's done done done right. Where you make negotiating with big tech. No, no, it's a little bit everywhere productions. They're out of L.A. And I've been talking to these, talking to the guys and they're, they're super cool. There's this guy Dan and we so did you sign a shopping agreement? No, we haven't done it. We've just been going back and forth with with the look with his lawyers right now. You know how many motherfuckers I've talked to in the past month who are, who talk, tell me about shopping agreements there and oh, yeah, I got a shopping agreement. That means that I got a shopping agreement. Yeah, I'm going to quit my job next week. I got a shopping agreement. I'm going to be on Netflix. Don't quit your job. My literary agent called me. We're sending an email and then we talked on the phone. Um, yesterday, I think was yesterday. And he was like, look, I've got these guys. They produce this. They produce that. They want to, they want to option the rights to your story. And I was like, wait, my personal story and they're like, yeah, your personal story. They're this. They've got a Netflix thing and Netflix and I'm like, uh-huh, uh-huh. And I could tell he was like, I didn't could tell why I wasn't, you know, all excited about it because because I've been through it over and over, it's like, you know, I've, I talked to maybe three or four of these people a month. And it's always the same thing. We're ready to go. We have a production company. We've got to deal with these people and these people, we're going to, these people are in with this. We have a first look deal with Sony. We've got a first look deal with the Sony. So we've produced this. You can look at my IBM or IMB or whatever the hell that thing is, you know, you could IMDB. IMDB and, you know, you're right. It does look pretty good by the way. Anybody can put one of those up. But you know, yeah, it looks, it looks good and they tell how they're connected with all these different things. And it's huge and it's massive and we're ready to go. I wouldn't be shocked if we weren't in production within 90 days. We've got a meeting scheduled next week. We're ready to go. We just need to go ahead and sign this up, sign the option and we'll go ahead and get, get going. Yeah, I noticed your option says 18 months with an extra six months automatic extension if you need it. Right. Right. Yeah, that standard actually, it's really not standard. And well, I mean, obviously we need that. Why do you need that? You have a meeting next week. You would be shocked if we weren't in production in 90 days. Why am I signing an 18 month agreement? Well, that's just the standard. It's not standard. Stop saying it standard. There's no standard. That's not standard. You are all there. It's always 18 months within extra three months or 18 months within extra nine months. 18's with six weeks. It's always they're trying to get 18 months. But what they really do is this you sign one, you sign one, you sign, you've got a true crime story about fraud. You've got one about murder. This guy's had a some crappy novel that came out, but it's an interesting kind of story. So we've got an option agreement with him for 18 months and they put them on shelf. And then when they get their Netflix meeting, they go in and they pitch. Okay, what is this? Right. Well, they can say we're pitching shark in the housing pool and they're like, man, it's amazing. What else do you have? Well, we also have this. So you're one of a bunch of people that they've got, but they're not really pushing just you. They make it sound like the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the movie about you. What are you talking about? They're, they're always talking to, they're already talking to cast members. Right. They're not sure who's going to play you. Is it going to be someone? So it's, it's all our whole team is ready to go. But I need 18 months. You know, we're talking about a $40 million movie here really. Yeah. But you can't give me 20 grand for my options. Yeah. They sell you, they like to sell you this pipe dream like that. You're going to get some crazy deal and you're something special. But in reality, it's not. It's really like just like the biggest scam brokers. Yeah. They're all just brokers. They're hoping to get you locked in so they can sell it. You notice it's like flipping contracts for real estate. Yeah. Exactly. Sign them up for 90 days and then run around and try and sell the property so you can make the difference. And that's all they're doing. But it's like, you know, look, you don't like like, God me. You just have this word. Okay. You don't screw me. You'll write it. Screw you over that. How this works. Like what are you doing? What are you thinking? It's not going to happen. And so it's so funny because I have signed a few options. But they've always been like 60 day or sorry like 90 days or six months. Yeah. You can negotiate. Right. And then they're always cut out. So I do this cut out and that cut out. And then it's like, look, you've got like you have six months to get me a deal to be the host of a show that talks about true crime. Anything else is off the table. And they're just like, well, what if, well, wait a minute, if you come and there's some some slight alteration, obviously, we'll we'll discuss it at that time. I mean, I'm not stupid. What if we're going to do the, the end of the six months? So you're, you're telling me you're negotiating a multi-million deal and then the six months I go, oh, you're hit. Come on, man, I'm like, I do that. I'm obviously you're in there and go, no, negotiations. What am I going to say? Stop talking to him, talk to me now. Come on, some professional. Obviously, I'm going to give you an extension. You know, you have to trust me. Yeah, those motherfuckers are greedy, bro. They want to lock you up. Absolutely. And this is the thing too, they keep saying, well, you're going to have to trust me. No, no, you're going to have to trust me. Like if you want me to trust you to represent me, you're going to have to trust that I'll give you the extension. And you're going to have to trust that eight, you know, in 18 months is too much. like, stop, you know, most people get so excited. They just sign. And then three months later, they're calling the guys not responding to their calls. Maybe 16 months later, they call you up and go, look, we pitch your story the other day and you're going, who's this? Yeah. You know, oh, remember, you saw in the, yeah, bro, I've left like 16, 20 messages. I've been real busy for a year. It's just ridiculous, man. They're such scumbats. It's such a joke, man. They're so fun. And that's why you fucking slimy and they're so fucking, they're all liars and they're all, remember the first time we went, we went to like, um, the first night I did, uh, did concrete and we went to, um, Waffle House. Oh, he was shit. I listen after listening to him for a 30 minute. Hey, Hollywood, like, eight, the, I'm like, well, I'm trying to get a true crime pond. This is a good telling me. I'm telling you this and he's like, fuck them, man. They're scumbags. They're this, they're that. I'm thinking like, oh, you were going pretty bad. Maybe that scumbags. You were, you were like, you were like, nah, man, listen there. You need to just do it. Forget them. Then they're going to tell you this and tell you this. You need to do it. You're what, and I'm sitting there. Well, you can do it. You can do it, but don't wait for them. Don't wait for it. Right. Do it, you're shit. Because those motherfuckers are the ones, it's so backwards. Those are the people that are on their fucking computers, scouring podcasts for TV show ideas that they can sell. Right. What you can flip to Netflix. You should have listened to Danny that first night. Because here's what happened. I was working with someone that continually kept saying, don't do anything on your own. Because that could ruin the deal that I'm working on right now. I'm working on this. I'm working on that. And he was, what dumb ass told you that I don't want to say his name, but the point is, you know, who is. So the point is, and we are, we're having Zoom meetings and we're having me. They're about to fly me out to LA and I've been out to LA. I've met with, with these with production companies. And so things were happening, but it was always, don't do anything. Don't do anything. Don't do, just, and you know, I'm not even sure about the podcast. You going on that concrete podcast. And you know, you told your whole story. I'm like, well, there's a book out. Why would I? Like, you know, so I'm like, I'm trying to sell my book. I have a book. Yes. You know, why? What? And he's going on and on. And he meant well, but I'm saying you were right. Like the moment I started going, yeah, I'm not waiting anymore. It's just stupid. Danny was telling me, just start doing it. I was like, no, no, no. Like, if I just started at that point, I'd be a year, at least a year, maybe a year and a half I had of where I am right now. Instead of having like 30,000 subscribers on my channel, I'd probably have 100,000 subscribers. I'd probably be paying all my bills and everything. But I didn't get waiting because I kept waiting for like the big Hollywood deal, the big mainstream. It's so, it's so, it's so simple to understand. Do you think Joe Rogan would have got a hundred million dollars from Shopify if he would have been waiting? Yeah, no, obviously. That's a lot of stream example. That's what I said, Spotify, right? I said, Shopify. Shopify. Shopify. I know, I know, to me, to me, to my motto. So, yeah, yeah, absolutely. And it's funny too, because whenever friends are like, I'm going to start a YouTube channel, I might do it. Just do it. Start doing it with your iPhone. Sorry, I do the same, say the same thing here. You just do it, just do it. And they're like, yeah, but I wanted to be good. I'm like, no, don't you understand? Fuck that. This is what you didn't tell me. Do it. Do it as bad as good as you can, even though it's probably going to be pretty bad, because it really doesn't matter because nobody's watching. Nobody's watching it. So, don't worry about it. You got three subscribers. And those are two of them living your house. At least make a couple bucks while you practice. Right, right. Just, yeah, just put them out there. Because it starts the process of getting the subscribers and getting the watch hours. So starting crappy. And then guess what? Leave them up. Because two years from now or four years from now when your channel is doing great and it's making money, you can look back on the very first video. As you put out and go, oh my God. That was terrible. How bad this one was. And you'll laugh about it. It's better to have it out there. Yeah, I'm so embarrassed of our first podcast. They're so fucking awful. So are they still up? I'm still dumb as hell, but I was so much dumber two years ago. It's incredible how dumb I am. I'm going to jump in and it's not that incredible. At the moment, the moment I disagree with it. It amazes me how dumb I am. But yeah, it's so true. I want to stop you. I want to stop you. I want to. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So how do you mean aren't on your first ones? Like you've been doing these three years, right? Almost three years. I think it's about it'll be three years. I think this is like August. Who's the first person? Ben. The first the first two. The first two or three. The first like four podcasts were all with Ben. And we started having guests with Ben. Is that the one that was like in your kitchen or something? It wasn't. No, you want to hear something. Ben had. He bought this fucking mansion in downtown Clearwater that used to be owned by some fucking millionaire Scientologist. And the basement was an auditing room. So you know where they do, you know what auditing is in Scientology, right? Oh, oh, okay. Yeah, yeah, definitely. I know what that is. I thought they were a CPA. No, they had the CPA. They hook you up to the electronic machine. And then you tell all your fucking deepest secrets or whatever. So it was basically like a sound studio. It was all sound pretty. It's already pretty. Yeah, pretty much the idea. And before it was owned by the Scientologist, it was owned by somebody that was related to the pressies. Like one of the pressies daughters. Lisa Marie Pressley. Lisa Marie Pressley. Lisa Marie Pressley. So it was her old house. So she used to have a recording studio downstairs. And then after that, it was an auditing room. And then after that, when Ben moved in, we turned it into a podcast room. That was the first studio. So the first episode of the concrete podcast, we're in a fucking Scientology auditing room. And you had a screen up, right? No, we were just in a tiny little room with a plastic table. Okay. You were thinking when we're in the other room in this building. Oh, okay. Yeah, I liked that setup. Yeah. Do we ever have you in there? No, no, no. But I had watched it and I was like, like I had been watching different ones. I was like, this is a good setup here. Oh, it has a 14. Right. Like, you know, like Tommy, my buddy, Tommy with a MSCS media. Uh huh. It's like, okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. The toys. Yeah. Yeah. When you say that, which is hilarious. So I say it all the time. I was like, Danny was asking about the Indian guy. He said, wait, what's the Indian guy? He's like, he gets all don't tell. Don't tell my said that he's good. I don't want to don't whack me. Don't tell him not to whack me. I don't want to get whacked. He, um, he, his is a total. Joe Rogan rip off. Like I mean, he's got the Joe Rogan Mike. This is all Joe Rogan. This is a Joe Rogan rip off. But he's got the, I mean, the angle it is identical to Joe Rogan's like, it's horrible bro. The big wire. It's horrible. Like, oh, the big Mike's the big Mike on. Everything, everything that he even got the can't and I'm like, why, why don't you just set it the way you like it? Well, I like the way Rogan does it. I'm like, bro, you're just, what are you doing? You're not Rogan. You're not Rogan. Like, do your own thing. It's all kind of the same. You know, he, he, I'm telling him like, lower the camera angles, why are you camera angle? Oh, yeah, but that's how Rogan had. If you look at the first, what are you doing? Yeah. Like a lot of people there. There, there's no more original ideas, Matt. There's nothing. There's no more original ideas. It's true. It's sad, but true. It's sad. It's just, it's all about how good you are hiding your sources. And he is not very good at hiding his sources. No. No. Listen, I've messed with him on when he's on camera. I've yelled that. What do you know? And he's like, I like Joe Rogan. He's not lying about it. He's like, what? Yeah, it is pretty identical, right? Yeah, it is. It is. So is this though? I mean, all podcaster fucking from Joe Rogan. He's the one who started it. That's what everyone's trying today. I was trying to be as successful as he is. And that's why I want to do the cereal for the true crime thing. Yeah. Different cereal. Super different. I love those podcasters too. Yeah. It's just so much work to make them. Right. That's why I'm trying to swing me in a documentary. It's an audio documentary. It really is. That's why I was saying with you, like, that's how I want to do it. And I can't do it on my own. I don't have the time, the equipment. They're like, just sit down with a mic and start doing it. And the problem with those is they're really good, but you can't put out a lot of them. So if your platform is YouTube, then it's not going to be successful. It's not going to be as successful because you don't tell about putting out stuff every week, every day. Really good, but you can't put out a lot of them. So if you're if your platform is YouTube, then it's not going to be six. It's not going to be as successful because you talk all about putting out stuff every week, right? It's 12 a season. Right. We're negotiating for 12 of them. As long as you can do that, are you going to do that alongside your normal podcast on YouTube? Yeah. That's why they can say shut down. You do that. That's a part of the well, I can we can't cover the same material, which is fine. I've covered any my material. So you can't even promote it on your podcast. Like, hey, there's a new episode coming out on this. I don't know. They just want me to just what it's about. No, they want they would want me to do that. What I can't do is I can't say I can't talk about, let's say the chip, the thing I'm researching right now, the chip robberies is called the company. It's the these guys from the try at these Chinese triad members that start robbing computer chip manufacturers, happening back in the late 80s early 90s. So I can't cover that story on my personal podcast. I'm sorry. I can't cover it on their podcast. Like, what if we do four episodes and break it down and we do interviews and everything. And then while that happens, I turn around and go on my podcast and go and then start talking about the exact same thing that it's like what and I totally get that that's not right. I can't even if it's just having like telling the story over the course of two hours. They're like, you know, because when you do it on a podcast like that, you're basically creating intellectual property, which can then be packaged. You got to be able to have a conversation about it touch on the cliff. No, obviously minor, but I can't if it takes if it's six hours to do or it's four hours of, of, for, you know, an hour each episode for four episodes. I can't then sit down and tell this whole story in two hours on my partner. Like, and we talked about it. Oh, yeah, yeah. It's about these guys. And if we had a five minute conversation or a 10 minute conversation, okay. Yeah. Right. But so I get, so I get and I get that that makes sense. I mean, they want me to do podcasts. They're saying, though, we want you to podcast. We watched it promote this and do all this. And keep doing what you're doing because they're like, you're becoming, you're slowly becoming the kind of go to guy for true crime and for, you know, being, you know, cons and fraud and all that. Mm hmm. Same thing with, um, have you seen, did you see the home, home title lock commercial? Yes. Oh, I saw one of the other day on, oh my God, Austin, can you pull that up, please? I, I was kid, you not. I'm standing up front of my house with the front door open. and I'm smoking and I hear that TV's running. And I hear, I'm like, that sounds like fucking mac. I peeked my head in the door and it was like the last couple seconds of this fucking party. Your dear commercial and I saw Matt on there and then it clipped to some of that. And no fucking, I tried to do the picture and send it to you before I came up. Yeah. It's called, it's all, I forget what I was talking about. Title lock. I think it was watching the basketball game or something. It was on a popular channel. Oh, it's, it's on CNN. It was on TV. It was on, it was on, there's a 30 minute. I was watching the basketball game. There's a 30 minute infomercial in the mornings on Saturdays and Sundays that they look like for like two hours. The same thing over and over and again where they do. So it's so funny because it was crazy. You know my mom was the first time I ever saw that you know the first time I saw it was with my mom. I'm eating, I'm eating lunch with my mom. Yeah, this is what I said. I mean breakfast with my mom. Look at that. Hey, do you have this on the screen? All right. Wait a minute. You got first they got that wrong. They must have pulled that right off. Look at that mug. Yeah, that's a bad one. Keep going. Not great. Wait, you can't. And reveal the truth about home title fraud. Yes, the eye calls title. Whoa. God, Dan, that's loud. Can we make a bigger? Is this it? This must be it. Yeah, press play. Game rich. New King Grinch. I've always believed that the real America is the home. It's a sacred place. So funny. And your values. And it's the foundation of your retirement. That's why I want you to know the truth about home title theft. The FBI calls home title theft. One of the fastest growing white color cyber crimes in America. Look at that. Wow. Here's what we're going to. Oh, it's to 26 years. Look at that scoundrel. Look at that beautiful beautiful con man. The waterfall against the United States. It's a beautiful hairline. Look at the old picture glorious hairline. Look at that. Ooh. It's in the Tampa Bay area. How many properties did I falsely buy or acquire multiple names and borrow against? I mean, it's from current 50. First of all, thank you for being honest and sharing with us. How did you be able to take them in the house? Actually, I wonder how more of a company that it's slowly developing. I just learned that it's a still set that are required. And we surprised how easy it was. It's extremely easy. Oh, my God. This is great. Why is that in order for me to take your house? New King rich. Public record. Create a document. Why is he interviewing you? They had transfer to someone else that I'm in control of. And then I can borrow against the house. They always have a big time guy who's who's their their main spokesperson. Okay. They Rudy Giuliani for a couple of years. Really? Yeah. They had a Glenn back. It's devastating. If someone steals your home title, you have to listen. They don't even use like they did like an hour long maybe maybe a two hour conversation with me not between me and Newt Gingrich, but me and like the producers. It was brutal. I mean, I was in rear psychopath form. Just I was just over the top like they're like, so do you feel so do you feel bad for they don't know. I don't feel bad. I'll feel anything. And I mean, I was just totally I don't know. I was in a bad mood. I don't know what happened. I was just totally like psycho path called Jack Don coffee. How much coffee had you had the three at least three vintage. That's three of these. I walked in with one. And I was it was it was just total. So you're rip roaring. Oh, it's great. It was great. And then when it was done, they were like, you know, we'll probably use a little bit of that. I said, you know, I said, little, little harsh. I said, bro, I said, you said, I said, make me sound like a complete scumbag scoundrel con man. Psycho path. I said, I don't care. I said, look, I'm not going for the whole, oh, I'm reformed. I feel bad. I said, no, I'm going for the Joker. I said, so Jokerize me. I said, I don't care. Said, you're not going to make me feel bad. I go, I'm a psychopath. You can't make me feel bad. I don't feel bad. I said, so do it run with it. And they were like, oh, you should have seen. Yeah, right. You should have seen the look on their face. They were like, and I said, what do it? I said, I got no problem. I said, listen, the people that, the people that know me and like me and care about me, they already know who I am. Like, and I'm not looking for any new friends. So if everybody else hates my guts, that's fine. Whatever. Nobody's got to hunt me down and kill me. I'm good. So my point is, you know, I told that they still then they did the commercial. And so the guy called me the producer. And I was like, bro, he's like, did you see it? I was like, man, you didn't really because like, I know it was, you know, someone was really harsh. And I was like, it's fine. I said, are you concerned that he's like, you know, we didn't want to make you look too bad? Cause you're kind of like a spokesperson. Yeah. Like, you know, you know, when I'm to sell some life lock. Yeah, we're trying. We don't want to scare me. I was like, oh, man. So anyway, look, the commercials are doing so well. They called me back. They want me to come back and do another commercial. And they're supposed to be sending me an egg right now. Well, this was actually about a week ago. We talked about, I think it might have been two weeks ago. They said they were going to have a meeting. He goes, and we're trying to figure out how to use you for like the next three years on like an exclusive deal. Nice. And I'm sitting there going. They're like, so we're going to put something together. And I'm thinking, where do I sign? Are you serious? And then I'm like, I mean, if you they want me to call you, make sure you're okay with them. Am I okay with it? Yeah. Yeah. I'm good. I'm good. Let's do this. Absolutely. Run with it. Wouldn't that be hilarious? That's amazing. And I have people sending me text messages saying, bro, I was just watching Fox News just watching CNN. I was just watching this and you suddenly after around, you were there. Yeah. Bro, I talk about it all the time. You are like the biggest success story in this podcast. Like you are the, you were the one person who came in here, nobody knew who the fuck you are. And you literally taken the ball and ran with it. I mean, I so far and this is the thing with all by the way, the guy who have created such success out of coming from nothing, coming on this podcast. This is really for you. Oh, I'm not only like, I'm not talking about the amount of attention you got just from as far as podcast views on my channel. Right. I'm talking about like what you've turned it into after that. Oh, yeah. Listen, listen, I'm going to I'm going to I'm okay. So I think I was supposed to go to Chicago in a couple of weeks and be on somebody's podcast. I've been like all over the, you know, I've been to like Ohio. I've been to California. I've been to Illinois. I've been to Puerto Rico. I've been to like I've been all over the place doing podcast and getting, doing like like I told you about like what I want to Puerto Rico. And they gave me like 1800 bucks to like flying to Puerto Rico and have a lunch with these guys with a couple of fucking billionaires and Puerto Rico. I just wanted to hear my story. And then I leave. And you were basically just like entertainment for the night. I have a billion. And I was telling the guy was like, so I mean, why? And they're like, we know we usually have somebody come and we I saw your stuff. And I said to the other guys and they love your stuff. And we just like it to come just have lunch. I'm like, I can't do that for free. Yeah. No offense. But I got to get paid. Do you imagine they fly mad to fucking Epstein Island just the night they came a million dollars? Would you do it? Yeah. Hell yeah. He's fucking to it. What? Um, so clip that. I want the thumbnail of that to be Matt's face with Epstein Island and Epstein's big dome house in the background. Um, so look, so I'm going to Amsterdam. Oh, yeah. They've watched the I'm going to Amsterdam for four or five days the end of August to be in a there's a six part series called the psychology of a of conaman and there's six part they got one guy from Asia. They've got a guy from Germany, a guy from France, a guy from the UK. Um, guy from someplace like Japan, Japan or something. Um, and they've got and guess who represents the United States of America. Matthew Cox. No fucking way. When I was zooming them and they were like, and I was like, so wait a second. So I go, so you got a guy here guy. I go, so are you saying that I'm representing the United States for like the top con man like that? And they were, you could see that they, they get scared. Like they're like, they're looking like, um, well, um, they were like, I mean, I would have to say yes. And if they have to go, yes, yes, like, let's do it. And they were just like, I said, that's awesome. That's awesome. They're like, oh, that is not the response we typically get. Um, they're going to fly me and they're going to do a battery test. I said, so you're going to try and figure out what makes me a con man. They're like, yes, it's going to be a battery test. There's a psychiatrist. Oh, really? And I'm interesting. And I can't wait to see that. Sign me up. Let's do it. Mm hmm. Um, and they've watched all the stuff on concrete. So it's that then I'm also going to like the, um, it's the association of mortgage brokers. I'm going to that. That's an Alabama association of mayor, mortgage brokers. They're flying me in to do like I'm flying in. And for one day, my flying in. Oh, shit. Sorry. It's flying in the morning. 45 minutes. Tell my story 15 minutes Q and A. Jump back on the plane fly right back out. Wow. What's the flight out there? It's like a 13 hour flight to Alabama. Oh, no. I thought you're talking about fucking, uh, like, talking about, like, Amsterdam. Amsterdam, like 15 hours. Yeah, it probably is pretty bad. It ain't like it's towards the flight. Yeah. I can't. I hope it's not like spirit or something. Hopefully it's not, hopefully it's not a fucking six hour turnaround. Listen, it's not like like it's not like I've never been in a small and comfortable, you know, air. Airplane for 15 hours at a time or 12. Like who put me in a box, small box with my hands, kind of like this. And I'd be like, I could need a sandwich doing that go to the bathroom. I can hope it up a little juice box. I can do everything with my hands like this. True cry, oh, 995. True crime is there's something about true crime. It's like blowing up in the last couple of years. Last like two years I want to say, oh, it's like the last five or 10. It's really been getting big. It is fucking like true crime has become one of the most popular genres right now, not only for podcasts, but for shows like Netflix. Yeah. Yeah. Now they're kind of get a little converted into like the net, like the netflix series. They're like converting like dirty John. All of those. Yeah. Yeah. It's fucking insane. Even like my wife, all she watches is fucking shit about people getting raped and murdered. Women love like they like that they like the really that's all my mom watches. It's like 70% of you either watching the news or she's watching like the ID channel. Yeah. I can't walk in murder. I can't walk on that. It's too fake. Some of the stuff on TV though is just their true stories. They're true stories, but the way they don't fantasize them and drama. Like like there's a UFO thing on history channel about a skin, walking skin, walker ranch. And it's just the way it's produced and the way they can walk her ranch. What's there's a ranch in Utah that has all kind of paranormal phenomena. I'm not gonna happen. All kind of paranormal phenomena that happens with like crazy magnets and fucking up iPhones. Water. Water. We're drinking water out of the cage. I mean, I don't drink beer anyway, but even when I look at it, I hold it up. I pulled it up. I think it's what a smile do a promo for liquid down with the sponsor of the podcast. What? Who is it? Liquid death. Liquid death. It's a water company. What do you think about their water? It tastes good. This tastes like death. Better than the tap. No. Their slogan is murder your thirst. Murder your thirst. Look at that. They sent me a fucking giant stack of water and sparkling water. Nice. It's good. It's good. I don't know what the sparkling water is like, but this is good. Yeah, it's good. It's great. It's a drinking water from the Alps. Yeah. It's like drinking water. No, I'm a water. Beer can. The gun washed out really good. Anyways, the shit that's on TV shows, it's just, it's so over produced in dramatic dramatized dramatized. That's the where I was looking for. And it just makes me just like whenever something's over produced in dramatized like that, it just makes me make me skeptical of it. Yeah, it's like watching American greed. Yeah. Where are our math and con man walked into the office? Yeah. She gets this on another single mother. Yeah. So fuck. Um, what does it say? Oh, true crime. And then women women are like, we are like half a day. It gets better. I got called another thing I got called from a guy who did ever you're seeing. Um, God, it's called a hold on. It's on A and E. It's called, uh, um, 60 days in. I've seen it on the scrolling through, but I've never watched it. Okay. So I've watched a couple episodes because this guy contacted me like a week or so ago, like I never check Instagram. People contact me on Instagram. Like I check it maybe once or twice a month. And they'll be like 30. And so as I'm going through like, you know, accept and, you know, how cool things, you know, and giving a little responses. This one guy says, Hey, if he hadn't put A and E in the name of the show, he would have gotten nothing. Yeah. Like if it was just like, Hey, bro, watch your stuff. You're awesome. You know, give me a call. But instead he was like, I'm so and so from, you know, I'm Tony. His name is Tony from A and E. He has a bunch of guys have reached out. A bunch of my fans have reached out to me and said, I need to interview you. I need to contact you. I've watched your stuff on, on, on YouTube, you know, great stuff. Really want to talk to you about being interviewed and talked to you about A and E and but I was like, it's like a week or so. I was like, Oh God. So I responded. I talked to him the other day. He wants to interview me for some show for A and E. Talk him out possibly trying to do some kind of a cone for the 60 days in Joe. No, for something totally different. But they're, they're like hooked in with him now. You know, he was a big, he was basically the star of that show. Okay. And he's now doing kind of like a spin off show. And so same thing. It's, it's so there's lots of stuff that constantly happening. It's just trying not to get in hooked into that trap where you signed up signing a bunch of stuff and nothing happens. Get your hopes up on it. But imagine if you, if you didn't have a podcast, if you didn't have any sort of other, if you didn't have anything else going on, you'd be like, Oh, yeah, they'd want to, they want to sign you up exclusively for them and you would have nothing out. You know what I mean? Right. Now you have leverage when you start putting out your own shit that you own independently. You have leverage against those people and they know that. Right. And it's funny too, because guys always tell me, like, I always get guys like, Oh, what does Danny pay you for that? What is that? Well, nothing. Bro, you, you do all that for nothing. Like, we have it, you do understand. So then you have to break it down. You understand what's happened? Like, concrete me, put me on, like I was already out and doing stuff. But like, you know, I was already in a couple magazines and I was trying to, but you were still in the halfway house when you came on the show the first time. No, no, I just got out. I wouldn't do it in the halfway house. Oh, that's right. You didn't do it. You were not allowed to. Super scared. Um, and he was even like, come, well, I couldn't, I can't disappear for four hours. Like there's no way to go across. Listen, you're so scared in the halfway house. Like they're, they're knocking people off. Yeah, they're right. They're right back in jail. So, you know, he's like, yeah, come over and this. I'm like, I'll hold it. And then so I got out and then he called me out, I've been out like a month or a few weeks or something you were like, bro. I answered your questions. Yeah. Cause I'd asked him out. Oh, yeah. Podcast. Yeah. I answered your question said you were going to come on. You're not in the thing. I had somebody fault somebody didn't show up. Yeah. Someone rescheduled last minute. I need, I got nothing like in the can. I need to do something. I need to come out. I was like, all right. So I came out. But you know, I, I would explain that. I said, look, Danny put me on a course because of the podcast. Put me on a course and got me exposure that I never would have gotten. I said, oh, you're going to be five hundred books. You know what I'm saying? Or you go to then he'd have been like, screw you, I'll go get, I'll go just have a conversation with anybody for it. For you know, for you know, I'm not going to do it. Okay. So then what were where were I be? I'd be pushing, I'd be pushing books on my own. It has been said that I have had people tell me that I am the Joe Rogan of Florida. Oh God, who the fuck? Yes, do you? I'm like, no. No. It's been said. It's been said. It would be a fact. I'm just saying it could be a fact. Matt, you didn't fuel that comment. Do you? No. No. I've had a guest come on here and say it and I've had I've seen at least one comment that said that. So it could, it could be true who knows. Anyways, you've done great for yourself. You've really taken off. You really, you really, I'm not making a much of money, but a lot of things are happening. Like something's got to hit. There's so much stuff up in the air right now. Like it's so much of me throwing it over the wall. Something's got to stick for sure. Yeah, but it's not about one thing sticking. It's about staying consistent. And that's what you're doing. Right now, no, I'm just staying, I'm staying on it. I'm putting stuff, I'm putting up and the inner. It's snowball effect, right? It's a snowball effect. The first podcast was a spark that with the flame right now. It just keeps growing and growing. And it's all the, it's, and I look, I like doing the podcast. Like I look like one, one, I'm going to interview this chick that it's great. One's great too because he works. Who you talking about? He's the ex con that you just, yeah. He's interviewed the guy from Venezuela, like a kidnapped and then it's way. It was laundered $39 million. He's got a great story. Um, but just so happens, he knows somebody knows a chick that was a high in madam who was bringing girls in. I'm going to say from like Brazil or something. I don't know that it was some South American country. I don't know which one, but she was bringing girls. So they can come in like you can come in for like 90 days to the United States. Yeah. Come hang out whatever on vacation. So they would come in for 90 days. So this girls get, this woman's getting phone calls from women and let's say Brazil. She's Spanish too. And, um, they're calling her and saying, look, I can come to the United States for 90 days. I need to make some money. And she's setting like supermodel hot looking and they're coming in and they're working as high in that squirts. She's, so she's, I don't know what's it, pimping him out. She can't say this. Yeah. I mean, that's the best possible. She's a pimp. She's pimping out. So she's being a madam to these women and they're, they're coming and they're, they're going back there. Like a, like a giz, a giz lane. Like a giz lane, could giz lane Maxwell on a different level. Yeah. That was Epstein's girl. Oh, was it? Oh, no, no, no, no. It was procuring. Yeah, but these are adult women. These are five. They're not kids. Oh, no. No, no, it's not like sex trafficking. What is sex trafficking? Yeah. Kind of. Anyway, look, so this chick comes in, so these girls are coming in for 90 days and then they're going back to like Venezuela or Colombia or Brazil with 50 grand. 50 grand is going back there. It's like going back there with like 400,000. That's right. It's a huge amount of money. You can buy a condo and still have years worth of income. So they're going back there with, and so then those girls go back there. They tell this person this girl next to you know, she's just running them left and right. And he sent me her indictment. I read her indictment. I read her stipulation of facts. I read, I'm like counts with 400,000 accounts with 100,000, 200,000. This girl got paid 80,000. This girl got 60,000. This girl got, I mean, these chicks are coming in and they're just lining them up. I was like, this chick's probably got a pretty good story. This is a pretty interesting story. She did this for years. So she's coming in. I'm going to do her on my podcast on Wednesday. Next Wednesday. Juan's going to come back. Juan's going to do do concrete. She'll be better than mine because you're going to be here too. Oh, yeah. I mean, I'll be, if you, whatever you guys decide, he's, you'll be able to do a better podcast. Like I just sat there and thought he was just going to tell his story. Like I didn't interview him really. Does that make sense? Because I heard him say his story so many times. I thought he was going to just roll it on out. Yeah. But he's like, I haven't told anybody that story in like like, when did he tell you that story in prison? Seven or eight years ago. Okay. So he went to, he went to, he went to an ice facility. He went to, so he had a whole thing after we met. So he hasn't been telling that story. So he was like, yeah, yeah, yeah. So here's what I did. So he, he threw out some stuff and I was like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. What about this? And he was like, oh, yeah, yeah, forgot about it. Yeah. So what happened? Then he tell that story. I go, whoa, whoa, what about the story about how you got the money to pay for your money? That is a good story. Yeah, that's good. Let me tell that one. It was in his good. You know, yeah. Like I felt like it wasn't good. Colby, my, my video editor, he was like, bro, that was amazing. It was a great story. He was great. I was like, but I had an anticipation of what it was in my mind. Right. Yeah, it was different. I mean, you know, it would be great for the prison industrial complex is if the people who owned the prisons, they set up in the prison cells. They set up podcasts. So everyone in prison could have their own podcast, their own YouTube show. And the prisons could make so much fucking money by pimping out these prisoners to have a true crime podcast. That's, that's not so bad. Imagine it. Imagine how much money they could have. They're selling it. Fuck an arrest them all. Fill those prisons up. Now we can have more podcasts, make more, make more podcasts. Money we can have deals with Spotify. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus had escalated quickly. I was going to say there are first of all, they're already filled up. Yeah. There are. You really just need to bring it up. So, okay, prison owners, if you want to make more money, do deals with Spotify, fill the prison cells with microphones and set up podcasts with the prisoners that way they can have their podcasts in prison. And the prisons can do Spotify deals directly and it'll be fucking hands over fist millions. That would happen. Never happen in federal system. They won't let it, they won't let it, they won't let it camera in. They won't let you come in and video an inmate in prison. Not since, not since I was at Diane Sawyer did it or was it Barbara Walters did, she did one for 60 minutes and it was called, it was called Club Fed where they actually went into a prison, a camp and showed the facility and how nice the facility was and people went nuts. Like, you know, because they're showing guys playing tennis, they're showing guys doing fishing, they're doing this, they're doing that. They're like, oh, and she's like, she's going, oh, what'd you have for dinner? He's like, ah, we had this. And then, you know, he's like, oh, we had like, he's saying all these things that sound good. And so they immediately after that whole thing, they went in and they said, the federal, the bureau of prison said, we're never letting into the camera in because they made us look like fools and we're taking away this and this they started, they literally are paving over all the stuff, they're tearing up everything. They just took everything away. Have a who cares anymore? Who cares anymore? Everybody knows, everybody talks about it. Everybody knows all the fucking crazy shit that goes on in prisons. But they were playing, they were still in the ice. It was Club Fed, they were saying it was like, well, it was too nice. It was too nice. Right. So they went in as well. Who cares? Well, it's too late. You don't have to care now because it's not now. So that's practically the state. Exactly. So let the cameras in now, like give them podcasts. I think you should take that on but having dealt with the bureaucracy of federal, the federal prison system I can tell you it's never going to happen. I think it's time for the federal prison system to give into the entertainment system. I think so too. And look as feeble as Biden is, you could probably fall in something. You know, but true crime is profitable. It is. Who's the head of the BOP right now? We need to get him on here. No idea. That'd be great. Can you find out who the head of the bureau of prisons is? We need to reach out to him immediately and get him on here. Do you remember when I told you about the time that I came up with that newsletter about the Puerto Ricans? How I said Trump was one and I talked about that. We laughed because Juan was one of the guys who came up to me. He's like, Matt, Matt, he's like, have you heard anything about this thing, this thing Trump signed and they're sending the Puerto Ricans back to Puerto Rico? I would. I said, okay, bro, I'm going to tell you something. And I told him it was me. Michael Carvigil, the director of the BOP. He's the guy who is the new director after Epstein suicided himself. The old BOP guy got canned after Epstein's. We need to get Michael, maybe we probably have a better chance of getting the old director at the BOP. Can you imagine this guy sitting there like, well, I have nothing to do with it. It's all about optics. It's all about optics, Matt. Fire, what fire me? What are you talking about? Somebody's got it. I wasn't sleeping at the stand. I didn't fix, I didn't break the camera like I was here. I was even more fire. Fire states away. I'm going to see that. He's probably never been there. There's 1300 facilities. I've never even been there. You're fired. It's like, why? Because it'll look good for us. Mm hmm. We're trying to clear us. Everything's about optics. And it's all it matters. It's all it matters is what it looks like to the public. What are you going to put there for the couch? I got a new couch. I'm going to picture the new couch. Why? What's the new couch? Where'd you get it, Grotzdale? What's happening? No, no, I bought it online. I bought it on the internet. It's nice. I don't know if you would call it nice. I don't want to spoil the surprise, but it's a very nice. It's a vintagey couch. Vintage blue velvet couch, Matt Cox. You're going to hate it. You're going to absolutely fush it. I'm begging you to rethink this. Why? This is nice. This is nice. The, the, um, the, the, hey, she liked the drawings of the fishermen with the butts in the heart. See the news with the beach and not even notice that. Can you go grab that for me real quick? We got to show that. I mean, I'm going the head. That's right. It's right. What do you think? Let's analyze this art piece right here. Look at this. With your art studio. What is your, what is your art degree opinion on this artwork? We got a news with a beach in the background. We got the Florida with the 666 and we got the fishermen's asshole with the heart around it. Where's the fishermen's? Right here. Okay. I mean, what? I mean, I think it's, it's drawn well. Yeah. Okay. I'll take that. I'll take that. Luked it. Luked. Okay. Yeah. I figured Luke did it. Okay. I figured Luke did it. Hand drawn. Nice. Yeah. I mean, it's all disturbing. But Luke's an artist. I know. I know. I heard that. Um, is a degree. I know he does. He has an art degree. He's done. That's it for this. I meant to ask you this. What's the difference between a fine arts degree and a liberal arts degree? What's a liberal arts degree? I don't know. I don't know. You really don't know? No, I don't know. Really? Is that what your mom has? My mom has a master's degree in fine art. Fine art. Master's degree. You really don't know? No, I don't know. Really? Is that what your mom has? My mom has a master's degree in fine art Fine art Master's degree. What is your degree? It's just a BA a bachelor. So yeah, I needed four years my mom did eight years. Wow Master's that just means that she has less money than you The National Association of Schools of Art and Design Nasad which accredits bachelor's of fine arts programs and visual arts and design in the United States States that the professional degree BFA focuses on intensive work in the visual arts supported by programs of gentle studies whereas liberal liberal arts genital or general liberal arts degrees focus on art and design Understand liberal Is there a conservative is there a conservative arts degree? I went to a coffee shop today So there's this coffee shop that's in Pinellas Park. That's called conservative grounds, right? You did a Video that was a little documentary on it. Yeah, a little like a little expos a Yeah, a little fine arts piece on it, and it's basically all Trump supporters heavily support back the blue Make America great again coffee shop. It's a make America great. It's a Maga coffee shop And there's a there's a replica of the Oval Office with a statue of Melania and Trump in there and the desk and everything It's fucking great and I don't really go to coffee shops that much. I if I want coffee I get like McDonald's coffee or I make it at home Right, and I went to a coffee shop today like I actually like Google like what's a good coffee shop around here And there was a really decent coffee shop with great Google reviews fucking five stars all the way Right down the street. I went I just like I thought I'm gonna go there and so I can get some you know, Kathy Come let you So I go over there and it's just like Complete polar opposite of conservative grounds conservative grounds is the last coffee shop. I've been yeah And it's just like this girl. She's got like pink hair bull cut total Lesbow and she's just like hi How are you today? What can I get you if you have any questions about the menu, please just don't hesitate to ask and I'm just like wow Just like fucking Great radical next to each other Radical fucking difference in the coffee shops. It's fucking insane. It's just like I didn't want to be there Like I would rather be to some I'd rather be at some fucking gunsling in country coffee shop Then have this fucking get to leave that but the girl but the coffee was great I'm not gonna I'm not gonna sleep on the coffee and who had the better coffee. That's the quest the liberal the Fucking the liberal coffee shop because they put some love into that coffee put some love into it There was definitely some very artistic Care she had loving hands when she made the coffee and there were some kids in the corner Is doing you know working in Photoshop? You know doing their Photoshop work and sending some emails in the corner and it was quiet and it was very nice and beyond Yeah, but it was just I don't know something about it just made me kind of like sneer at it You know what I mean just because it was so over the top so just over the top like Art C-Fart C coffee shop, you know, and I haven't been to a coffee shop in so long the last coffee shop I've been to his conservative ground so I guess that was the reason I was so shocked by it You don't ever go into Starbucks or no never I mean I've driven through I've been to the drive-through Yeah, I'd never go into Starbucks now. I a lot of times. I'll go like if that lines too long I'll pull in and just walk in you know, I'll go it I used to go in more obviously Before the pandemic, you know, I would go in and sit down and drink coffee and Whatever play you know answer emails on my phone or whatever But it isn't it's so like it's that's the normal thing though for coffee shops to be like that like that the coffee shop I went to do I yeah, I think so it's a place to kind of hang out Yeah, they don't why aren't there more conservative coffee shops? I wonder I mean I think that she's like to conservatives not like coffee Tech no, I'm sure Sure drink of the hell out of nowhere. He's drinking it at home and they don't have time to hang out They don't like to sit up. They have jobs. They're too busy making money They're too busy making America great again. No, it's that's why it is the liberal the conservative people They have jobs. They're making a living and the people that are at the liberal coffee shops that I went to today They're living off welfare, right? I did not say I canceled I bet you much whiskey. Oh, yeah It wasn't even funny. I was just trying to be funny But anyways, I thought it was funny take but the coffee was fucking great the girl was super nice. She was a very sweet girl Yeah, she was very she was very you know affectionate and loving when she made my coffee I'll go back. I'll go back. I will go back there for sure and I was wearing a Maryland, Manson T shirt And she made it very she did not like that she made a comment about my Maryland, Manson Church like oh Maryland, Manson shirt, huh? I know you know because he's been canceled. You know that You know you know, I don't know man today. He's a singer. Yeah, and he got he got called out He got called out by one of his ex girlfriend saying that he was abusive in the relationship He's been canceled meaning what do you know what cancel culture is? Oh? We're so now nobody's gonna nobody they Basically, you know what me too is yeah, but it's it's um It's like it's like Well, they call that where you you suddenly everybody decides they're not gonna go to Target what do they call it when you? Yeah, yeah, yeah when you try to cancel when you say that they've done something wrong There's another name for it that that you would typically use its it's where you're against that Target and you're not gonna go there anymore that kind of thing. Yeah, what do they call that it's called cancel culture Well, that's what you're calling it because it's that's the thing they call it now, but it's like Your boycott boycotting. Thank you. Kind of yeah Yeah, yeah, that's your boy got yeah, so it's like boy your boy caught it all right So Marilyn man says being boy caught it right now or canceled because one of his ex-girlfriend said that he was abusive in their sexual Life I love that any woman that says anything you have to automatically believe anything she's yes exactly I wouldn't but a couple of your fucked if you don't right I think a couple other women piled on after her Yeah, they always they all the pile on right. Yeah like Cosby so you like Cosby you exactly you raped 50 women over the course of 30 years none of them ever came I thought I was hundreds with Cosby Yeah, I think it's like 50 something like whatever but it could be more but saying you know that you did this for For the last 30 years. This is what you've done and none of them came forward until one woman said something then they all Rushed in right I was in a party 1979 he drug and raped me to Really I mean that you know it how long did Cosby? How long was Cosby in prison for he just got out? But how long was he in for you know four or five years right no, no was it three three or four years Yeah, three or four years right around three or four. Yeah, so what do you know that you know that the actual like like the story behind His case right now. It's a civil it was a civil case or a criminal case. It wasn't criminal right. It was civil Well, I mean it's what it started it started civil it started civil. It started civil were basically he this woman was suing him and He was decided he was gonna settle all suit and They settled because she said look you gave me whatever it was LSD or you gave me something you know quail Quailudes, yeah, quailudes and which kills me because when they say it like this We were at a party he drug me he raped me. Yeah, so His version of course is we were at a party. I was taking quailudes. I asked her if she wanted some she took some We ended up you know 30 45 minutes later. We end up having sex right so it's no different than we were at a party I was taking some Xanax to check. I was with said hey you got any for me And I said absolutely here have one 45 minutes. We ended up having sex in my car you raped or you drug and raped her like No different than I was having a couple of drinks. I said hey you want to drink sure She had a couple drinks at the moment up having sex in the and the parking lot guess what you draw you you drug And raped her I mean it's like that progression so he ends up so he ends up for the purposes of the of the civil of the civil suit he says They said did you drug and you know did you drug right? Yes, I gave her the quailudes We had sex with this I didn't rape her. I did this I did this I did this I did drug her I did have sex with her. I did this I did that and and I'll say all this provided you're never gonna be able to use this It's a rewrite right of course of course of course then of course that she gets the settlement everything goes through boom Let's put it out there. Mm-hmm now. Let's we're gonna go ahead and we're gonna go ahead and we're gonna use that against you to File criminal charges and we're gonna charge you and you're gonna go to prison and all these other women say You know what time we had paid I was at a party with this guy 20 years ago. He raped me too He and suddenly everybody jumps in the bandwagon next thing. You know this guys this guy's apparently been Raping people, you know every few weeks for the last look for your 40 years and he's 80 something years old and he ends up going to prison and Then of course a judge finally looks at it and says well wait a second you can't you first you can't use this but on top of that He's admitting to something for the purposes of a lawsuit for a civil lawsuit like he's like like Civil lawsuits are all about money. They're all about getting a settlement right right a criminal lawsuit is actually for prison time right because that's what that's That's the way you make it right Like that you and I get into an argument or something and you cost me money somehow you get me fired from my job You do whatever you start you slander me somehow and I get fired and I lose my house I turn around I sue you and then I prove that that's true that what you said was a lie and you got me You know you got me fired and I ended up losing my house I had to start over. Well guess what now you owe me money and that's how you do it because I can come over and club you and I can't throw you in prison Right because it's civil. It's not what you did was wrong, but it's not illegal So you know you handle it civilly and that's what they handled it civilly We handled this civilly because we have a difference of opinion. You're saying I dropped and raped you I'm saying we were at a party and we both got fucked up and we had sex. Yeah You know it's a difference of opinion, but I don't obviously on bill Cosby I don't want this to go any further an 80 year old man You're gonna give you a couple million dollars. That's nothing to me But then it suddenly hits the media everybody jumps on board he ends up going to prison But a judge a refill judge looks at it and says no He would have said I was I flew in on a on I flew in on a UFO Yeah, I flew in in a UFO and I beam you up and heads I would have said anything for the purposes of the lawsuit just to get rid of it Like you can't take that because he's saying that's not what happened What you said it on film what are you talking about? I say of course I did it civil and I was never gonna use it It doesn't matter what I say Trying to get the fuck trying to get this done with I'm an old man. I'm dying but I'd be dead soon for you I'm I'm worth 100 million dollars on a pay civil lawsuits are all about who's got the more money to spend on a lawyer Right that's at the end of the day. That's what it comes down to who's gonna take it the farthest Who's gonna fuck? Sometimes it's it's it's about look it's Somebody's always trying to get money to have more leverage if you have more money whoever has more money has more leverage They can wear like if you're just wrong. You're wrong You know I'm saying sometimes you're wrong. It's hard to eat it's hard to be on an even playing field when one person's Broke and the other one has 60 lawyers on their payroll and they're worth a trillion dollars right hard for me To sue amazon right, but if that person who has the 60 lawyers is also a celebrity with a Reputation to uphold then it's even worse the smaller person hat than they have leverage than the smaller guy has leverage because right They can put their story out there. Right. Well. It can create me. It's like the guy It's like the guy with Nike the guy that just is gonna go two and a half years got The guy that was a story weather's old attorney Stormy Daniels stormy Daniels stormy Stormy Weathers I say Stormy Weathers Stormy Daniels old attorney Which is Avante Something of on tape. What's his name a ponte? No, no a ponte. No a Vante Yeah, the guy who's he was with He was stormy dance Stormy Daniels old lawyer. Yeah, okay. He went to Nike And Michael Evante he went to night. He went to night. I know I know this story I don't know he went to Nike and said look I've got clients that are That are sports guys. You know are sorry That are sports kids that were in sports and that are gonna say that you guys offer to pay him Or pay them and I'm gonna help like I'll he didn't they got him on tape saying he said I want $20 million dollars Or I'm gonna I or your your company's gonna take a 10 billion dollar They were paying kids what that they were either paying kids or I forget the exact thing But basically he was gonna smear he was ready to do what make make their shoes to wear their shoes to wear their products Federal judge on Thursday send it celebrity lawyer turned criminal defendant Michael Evante to 30 months in prison for attempting to store millions of dollars from Nike Wow He rose to fame and stormy Daniels lawyer and was convicted in February 2020. That's that was more than a year ago row of Three counts for threatening to publicly accuse the sports work company of illicitly paying amateur basketball players Unless Nike paid him right Wow, so he and his whole thing was like if I do this. It's gonna cost you guys Your your company will take a 10 billion dollar, you know, nose dive like your stock will this and it's so I want $25 million dollars And so they immediately called the FBI And they recorded him and everything and then boom now he's doing two and a half years Fucking domic. What a dumbass already rich already got a bunch of money. I know it's just a greedy fucking scumbag Right, so I'm saying that his leverage over Nike what because typically I'll bet you'd be shocked how many Big corporations actually do pay out Just to get rid of like nuisance suits like little like we don't want this in the we don't want to be associated with this Or whatever. I mean how many thought they asked for too much? He should have shot the number about half of what he should have Or he should have double or should have made the number way higher. Well, I'm wondering what I'm wondering Call it a FBI after a certain amount. Yeah. Yeah. I'm wondering exactly like what what how much Well, I'll tell you what that they probably felt like he was pretty over the top and we could definitely prove this and this Old sin a message to anybody else Try this. Yeah, like it's worth going to this and he's probably being so overt about it like they're like this this dumbass is Bound to say something wrong or tape like we can easily get this guy He's not doing it like in the guise of the law. He's basically like Exorting right and he sees says on it. He's like what he says something like They said something about well, what about this a million dollars because a million dollars He's that doesn't do anything for me. He said listen He said I'll come out with ease. I'll line up 10 10 guys there. You know 10 whatever basketball players that'll all say this He said 10 he said and he was in your he says something like like your stock will take a 10 million dollar or 10 billion dollar hit He said okay. He said so stop fucking around with me. I mean he's talking cussing each Much a lawyers Your stuff in his office fucking taking shots of whiskey doing line right They're probably sitting at the lawyers who are wired up or like That was beautiful. That was perfect. You're already did god damn. What an idiot clip it like how perfect is that somebody clip that So yeah, but yeah, so Bill Cosby going back to Bill Cosby his lawyer that he used was one of Trump's lawyers He was one of the lawyers Trump to use for his impeachment trial Right I don't know. I'm not sure I'm pretty sure it was yeah, Trump lawyer. Oh look at how quick that was Austin fuck Trump lawyer Bruce caster plays a central role in the bill Cosby going free look at Bill That's not Bill. Yeah, it is that's fucking bill Fucking white guy. No, that's his lawyer. That's Bill's lawyer Bruce. That's what I said Bruce said look at Bill Bill Look at Bruce You're all fucked up to my back by your words are all jumbo. Don't run a back pal lawyer Bruce caster has now gotten two extremely high profile Americans off this year in a much-watched legal proceeding First came president Donald Trump now comes Bill Cosby That's crazy. So um, so what is the reason so Bill He when he went to prison for a few years for this case basically then the judge who looked at this said you can't take This evidence you can't take the shit that went down in the civil lawsuit. You can't take it to a federal Criminal transfer into a criminal lawsuit. So it goes against the rules, right? Well, I mean he was just he's saying that it's it's different first of all Well first of all I use it. We don't we all agree this cannot be used. You cannot you know this this is for the soul purposes of this trial blah blah blah and then they end up and give it to the So obviously rape is a very bad thing. You know, it's not good to rape people. Yeah, especially when we get into it You got hundreds of people you got hundreds of women saying that you raped them, right? Like you should be in fucking prison if you're raping hundreds of people right, but the what are you saying is? There's also statue of limitations You know what I'm saying? So the statue of limitations on almost all of them was up Almost almost all of them But I love that it's all up But they all get to come in when you're sentenced. They all get to line up and talk. Yeah, wait a second her statue of a taste She wasn't I didn't rape her. She said you did we're gonna let that stand let her go right, you know So they get to go in and say you know So are they seeing they fucked up by like it was fucked up? They should not I've locked them up. Yeah, there's no one note what there's did was they said This evidence could not have been used and as a result of that I'm throwing it out with prejudice So you can't use it. You can't bring it back and I'm dismissing the charges with prejudice You cannot re re charge him in so the state can't come in and say oh we're gonna charge him again and without the evidence No, the judge is saying one you're not using it again to you're not charging him again He's gone so here's the thing. What were you saying? So you don't say the whole time he's going through his trial or whatever His the him and his lawyers have to know like you can't be using this evidence. Yeah It's always subject. I mean it's always subjective like and look their stuff where it's clearly you cannot use this evidence And the US Attorney will argue it you're on or but this and biz and sometimes a judge will Well, I'm gonna allow it and then what are you talking about like the defense will say well statute such and such and such I disagree and they'll knowing That you understand that this is going to what this will be appealed and it'll be thrown out and the whole thing I'll be thrown out But the judges know and the US attorneys know they're like yeah, I know but think about it It's gonna the trials this long by time he gets the prison by time he Appeals it by the time he does this it's two years Then even if he gets a new trial, which is probably pretty good It's gonna be six months before we have to be the trial. We'll delay it as much as we can We'll get another three years. He'll do three years before he gets back in front of a jury and he's already lost once So we can probably negotiate with him during that period of time to say look Immediate release, but you have to plead guilty And most guys even if they're innocent say all right fine just let me out like I'll be a felon I don't care. I just let me out like they're so now it's three years. You're traumatized And you see how the system works and you realize how stacked against you it is So you realize right away. Look. I'll do anything just to escape the situation Like I've got 20 years and you're gonna let me out after three I'll take it even though I haven't done anything most of the time when they do stuff like like the innocence project comes in and stuff And they'll say look turns out that all of this evidence All this evidence that you have against this guy You said this is his blood. You said this is his fingerprints. You said this you said guess what not his blood not this not that Most of the time the states will come in and say we're gonna retry him What are you talking about? Your main evidence was the blood was the same and it's not his it's 100% we actually have another person that it may be that died in prison two years ago What are you talking about? They're like no, no, we're gonna retry them. We'll try it again because they're they're like look first of all the guys He's been locked up 10 years He knows how bad it is he knows the the chance that he got this over soon Yeah, what is innocent? He's in prison and the chance he knows that this was a fluke So he knows if we retry him there's a chance he's going back He might still get found guilty and we're gonna use that to try and get him to plead guilty So that he can't sue us for what we did to him right and most guys will say yeah, okay I'll take it like what you didn't rape her you didn't rape him murder that woman You didn't do this you didn't do any of this. It's all 100% true We can prove it now you're still ready to sign something and walk away Why because I thought I was gonna die in prison and and I'm just desperate to just get out right? You just want you the fuck right any you know for all I know I could be I could be killed in here Before I walk out of here Especially now that people have seen me on the news and they know I'm getting out a lot of jealousy in prison People will attack you for no reason a lot of guys like won't tell people when they're getting out Like a lot of guys will be like look don't go around like the last month or two saying yeah, man I'm out of here in a month. I'm out of here in a month because a lot of these guys aren't getting out for 10 years Some of these guys are gonna die in here and you're walking around saying that there's a lot of people that are bipolar They'll flip out on you and attack you. They don't say nothing So you know you know know what's gonna happen these guys are signing just to walk out the door of course once they're outside They turn around there like I should have sued I should have this I shouldn't have done that paper I shouldn't but you were under such a direct Plus wasn't wasn't part of the argument that he's fucking 80 years old like letting this guy out He's an if he's a rape is nothing to worry about he's a fucking 80. He's not a risk. He's not a risk. He's not like a fucking 30 year old guy I was a serial rapist. Plus these women aren't saying that he beat me He beat me bowing me through me in the trumpet. It's hard drove me to Drought me out in the woods rate me and left me for dead. They're saying nice. Let me amicky and Next thing. I know he looked good and he was a famous and rich. So I had sex with him You know they're not saying he beat on me and held me down and you know My eyes were black and blue and my broke my nose and You know, right? You think he knew he was gonna get out on that technicality No, no, I mean I think that Look, I think at his level your lawyers are always Kind of telling you we can do this and we can do that. We got a good chance We got like they're trying and they can keep trying they will keep trying because they're getting paid to try So they're doing that and in his mind. Maybe he never really accepted it But I've known a lot of rich guys That 100% were positive. They were not gonna be found guilty Yeah, and then when they were found guilty like after a year or two like they think oh well They're gonna get it turned over. They're gonna let me back out on bond. Then they find out you're not getting bond What do you mean? Mm-hmm Well, you're gonna have to start the prison sentence and we'll do this. We're gonna do it as quickly as possible How quickly right yeah, like how how long am I gonna be you tell me I have to turn myself in yeah For 20 year sentence or they take them right then yeah, not guilty or you know boom guilty and they're like You know, okay next you know, they're their handcuffs on their own. What's going on? What's going on? That because they're their lawyers We're telling them the whole time right. Oh, it don't worry It's not guilty not guilty didn't even tell them that by the way if it's guilty you're going in like Didn't even work out a deal with a prosecutor like look if it is guilty Can you please recommend that we let them turn himself in like because normally they'll say no Sometimes they might say yes, but it's like no. I knew this guy First name was Bradley last name was Bradley listen Bradley after a few years He was just devastating. I think he did like 10 years on like a 25 year sentence or something and he just It was it was just a brutal brutal sentence that he got and he eventually got it overturned But I mean literally it took like 10 or 11 years before we got it overturned his father served almost his entire sentence His father got like 15 years or something literally was getting out by the time they won the appeal I mean that's how long they can drag it out to Donovan Davis. He's been locked up. That's about five. Hold on. He's been locked up Five Almost six years He's at a camp right now. I mean this guy's six years for seven out of 17 year sentence And and he's been fighting the entire time think about it six years completely innocent right and and absolutely He he hasn't even moved on. This is his appeals and this is a guy who has Concrete evidence proving his innocence right. Oh, and it's getting worse all the time. Yeah absolutely has concrete evidence. It's getting worse all the time and The eye can't there's other stuff going on. I get I'm gonna mention on the body. I'll tell you later Like new stuff. Yeah, like you wouldn't believe the stuff that's happening like corrupt kind of fucking corrupt Like don't get a shadow band. Yeah, like no no no no not like that not like that Just just in general like other things that are People witnesses like there's this one guy. Do you remember the guy? I refer to as Evil grew his he was he was one of the guys one of the guys that was saying that Donovan had lied and Donovan had stolen his money and convinced him to give all this money and this and that and this and that But really that was one of the guys who had brought in a bunch of investors so So let's say I'm I'm forget his name, but basically evil grew said I'm he goes to all of his friends and says give give me money and we need to all invest money in in Capital blue so they all invest money well then of course when it all collapses He and he's put on the stand he says Donovan is the one that came to all of us Well, these guys are actually like Donovan didn't come to us. You came to us Yeah, well and a lot of their money So what ended up happening was this guy actually was running a Ponzi scheme himself He's been reunited for stealing money from people He actually was raising money to get a kickback from capital blue to get these guys to invest this money like there's all They and then when he got on the stand he blatantly lied about all kinds of stuff so that guy that that's a whole thing Something Avon daddy or Roman daddy his name's Rowan daddy Chris Roman daddy He's he's he's right now he's indicted. He's waiting to go to trial So there's all these other things that are happening There's a couple other things I can't tell you about but it's it's like when I tell you what's happening You're gonna be like whoa Good stuff anyway But yeah, yeah, let's listen to this and it's all messed up is look look but six years You've been fighting for six years. You're not even through the process. Yeah, he hasn't even like lot that he just lost his appeal Like for his for a new trial his appeal and isn't for a new trial. He just lost now He's able to fight his what's called your 22.55 You're able to say that basically my lawyers were ineffective and he's got a major great a great case for lawyers being ineffective So but that's another three-year process right he'll spend 10 years before he's fighting before he's exhausted his legal remedies 10 years Before and by the way, is he still paying these lawyers for his own money? Yeah, he's still paying Not these aren't the same lawyers keep fired them right away. I mean keep mind one of us He's got a wife and kids that are wife in the United Orlando that are Wifel can agonizing over this process the whole time. Yeah, it's Christie Christie Davis. I talked to her all the time I've texted her a couple days just a couple days ago just on just new events that are they're happening in his case That's fucked up Look at Pete Pete's been fighting his case for 20 years 20 years they do again Pete Rossini Rossini From the breaking bad story. Yeah, they've been dragged like they could so that's a whole podcast on Pete Yeah, it's called I believe it's if you search for it on YouTube It's called Matthew Cox the Breaking Bad case. There's I thought it was like the real breaking the real breaking bad case Yeah, yeah, it's fucking crazy. Yeah, that's story. Yeah, that one actually that one's got like with the dirty 400,000 yeah, I'm podcast went crazy. He um Yeah, yeah with the dirty FBI agents But I mean look at Pete like literally think about it the whole thing for the US attorneys They're like it doesn't really matter how I get the conviction because once I've got you convicted and I can drag it out 10 years while you're trying to unravel this whole thing What if your sentence is 10 years right fight it? Yeah, go ahead You'll be fighting it when you're in the halfway house and where you're home starting your life over again But if your sentence is 10 years, fight it. Yeah, go ahead. Fight it. You'll be fighting it when you're in the halfway house and where you're home, starting your life over again. You'll still be, I can drag it out that long. You'll serve your whole sentence and you'll still be fighting it. But let's face it, most people when they're basically done, they're not fighting anymore. I'm tired of it. I'm tired of it. It's the legal bills. My lawyers all quit. I'm broke. None of my friends or family will let me borrow money from them anymore. I'm basically doing all the legal work myself. and now I'm in the halfway house and I have to work my job at McDonald's and try and find an apartment. Do I have to? I need to keep fighting this. It's over. It's over. I'm going to lose. I've lost even though, even though I feel I'm innocent and I've done nothing wrong. Fuck it. They're like, they're done. They got me. They beat you. Can't blame them. Right. I mean, that's it. So they're like, I'm out. I just want to go on with my life reconnect with my, you know, three daughters and hopefully my ex-wife won't, you know, well, let me see my 14 year old. You know what I'm saying? It's just ridiculous. Like, I'm not just devastated. How are you doing with all your stuff, with your probation officer, and with your pay-off, your restitution, and dealing with everything after the fact. I love the way you say paying off. It's $6 million. Yeah, you owe us just $6 million. Man. Making payments. Matt, you owe that $6 million to the government that you stole from the government. I didn't know that to the government, by the way. And to the banks, like 85% of those banks have all gone under. So really the money that I'm paying in it is going to the government. Like, they'll choose the good people to the, you stole the $6 million that you stole from the good people. We owe that he owes this to a Merrquest, but they, they're insolvent and they were in a baby. Should we give it back Mr. Prox? Hey, Mack Ox paid 20 this month. Yeah. A Merrcore isn't around anymore. You could keep it this week, Don. Last month, I paid like 420 or something like $420. Oh, listen, someone will pay much like $800. 400 bucks, 600 bucks. Some are like, listen, I've had, here's a, like, link over to it. And I'm like, dead broke. And I'm on an unemployment, unemployment, of course is only paying like $600. Like I'm not making anything. You have to pay your 150. What are you talking about? I got to pay my 150. I made $600 on unemployment. 150, Mr. Cox, or you're going back to prison. And what do you do? Even the heat for f**king were what's left over. Yeah. 150. 150. Yeah, luck off. Thank God I was living at my friend Stacy's house. And she was cooking me meals every day. Like I mean, listen, she didn't. Well, you shouldn't have ripped off those innocent bank executives. Oh, did I tell you this? So the documentary, the, the, what the one in Amsterdam. So the guy sitting here is like, okay, we need to be able to talk to other people. So can you give us some other names that we people, you're still in comms? Okay. This guy's on giving them names of people, right? Like this person, this person, they're like, what about, um, we really would like to talk to people to talk to some victims. I'm like, well, I'm sure there's someone at Bank of America. You could contact, there's still a rounder, um, Sun Trust is still around. Well, we were thinking individual victims of like, well, there's four of them. Oh, single mothers. I'm like, so you're telling me that out of the 60 some odd banks and four individuals, you don't want to talk to who lost the bulk of the money. You want to talk to people to lost the least bit of money that I didn't take money from, but I caused them to actually have to go and hire an attorney for $4,000. You want to talk to that. You don't want to talk to Bank of America who lost two million. Yeah. You want to talk to them. Well, you know, it's more, I'm sure there's an executive you can talk to. Yeah. Like why can't you talk to an executive? Cause there's actually, they don't want to talk to them. Cause an executive won't break down and cry and tell you some sob story. I was so terrified and tormented. I lost sleep, but I didn't even feel it. Right. It's like he's not, he's not affected. His life is not affected. Right. That's why, but that's the bulk of the money. Like that's what that's it. That's what I did. Like they're talking to them. They're like the sob story. We're really looking for someone that will cry. And we want to tell you one of their life for 4000. For you, you hired an attorney and paid him $4,000 on a ruined your life. If I ruined your life, if $4,000 ruined your life, you were hanging on by a breadboard. Honestly, our kid, a bad storm, something else was going to knock him. It was only a matter of time. Sorry. Do I get ice? Does that come off unsympathetic? Not at all. No, I love it. Sorry. I feel beautiful. Feel about, feel bad about that. Matt, I think we've hit, I think we've hit a wall here. How long have we been going Austin? It's only two hours. Two hours. Two hours. That's a good one. What, what are you getting? What are you getting on your 35, 38% 30 or something this long, 32%? What do you want? People, you watch like the watch that made well. I already know. I don't pay attention to that. Oh, we need to check. Yeah, we'll check it after we turn off. Yeah, because never look at that shit. Yeah, because you know, like the shorter ones, people are very, 40 or do some people are very analytical and very into the numbers of their podcasts and stuff. And which is good. I'm sure it helps, you know, like people like you or people like Graham Stephon, they're very into that. You have 10 years of videos cranked out and you're constantly having people watch them. Yeah, that's good. I'm sure it's good. Like I'm just not, I just don't, I never look at it. You don't read the comments either. I almost, I respond to almost all my comments. Unless somebody's done that. I want to start, I was thinking about it last night. I want to start responding to all my comments and just fucking responding to the trolls and just talking shit. I think it'd be fun to do. Don't do that. I'm not doing that. Like to honestly, I want to go start fights and light fires in the comment sessions. Listen, you know what's funny is, um, in the comments section, like some of these people will, well, first of all, they're hilarious. Like a lot of them are hilarious. Yeah, they are. Well, that's what's great about that's what I, that's what I do love. I love the comments. First of all, I'm not, I'm not not in the comments. I don't read them a lot because they're fucking, they're really bad for my fucking, my brain. That makes me not feel good about myself. But they are great because it's like a, it's like a, a creative writing contest. Whoever can come up with like the most fucking articulate, hilarious, comment sentence or whatever. It gets up vote. So the best one rises to the top. Yeah. It's like a contest for whoever can fucking nail it the best. You know what I mean? It's fucking, it's amazing. You know what? Obviously one of the things that happens is this is weird. So I always click, um, like post all comments, you know how you can put to like hold the ones that are negative or hold the ones that are derogatory. Like it actually gives you an option like if somebody cusses or something, they'll like hold it. I always say, um, post them all. You know, I'll carry the algorithm. I don't care if it's what they say. It doesn't matter. Post them. So I get a lot of times where I can on the, on the actual, um, studio, where, when you look at it on your phone, it'll show you the first few lines. And then when I click on it to watch the whole thing, it says comment not found. Right. So, and I'm like, that doesn't make sense. Like I'll click it and so a lot of times it actually still doesn't post it for some reason. Even though I said, like, and some of the comments, like I'm sure that they're okay. Like that, like if the guy said something minor, I can't imagine what he said. It's just AI. You know what I mean? They're just like flag and shit. They say certain things or certain trigger words, a block it for. You know what I mean? There's no way that's, you know, anybody can monitor all those comments. There's flaws in there. I know it. Yeah. Yeah. It's got to be a flaw because some of them are just not. Yeah. Some of them of course some of them are talking to awful. Yeah. Some of them are really like they're pretty, they're pretty vicious. Like I very quickly became hardened to it. But like the first week or two after that first podcast, ready to argue, have a conversation. Listen, I betchered some of those guys so bad they took their comments down. I literally, I probably broke. I'm sorry after thinking about it and what you said, I didn't think about it from that point of view. I have a different perspective now. I'm actually going to, I'm actually going to edit my comment now and take it down. Like, nice. I didn't even know that was, not a Christian accomplice. Only Matt Cox could do some shit like that. Tell you that. All right. Plug your shit, Matt. Tell us about your books. Tell us about your paintings. We're going to buy shit. They didn't know what he's watched this long. Yeah. Yeah. Books. I got books. A couple people here. I got books. I've got buy shark in the housing pool paintings. You can contact me. Danny's going to put my email in the description. Go or just you looked at you like I am or go to my channel at, uh, inside true, our Matt Cox inside true crime. Watch my videos. Like subscribe. You don't do anything. Buy some shit. Yeah. Title lock share. New, new Gingrich title lock. Subscribe. I subscribe. Like subscribe. That's so awesome. Go to my channel. Subscribe. I need, bro, I got 30,000 almost 31,000 subscribers. That's fucking awesome. You're killing it on YouTube, bro. You're killing awesome. So you're, you're, you're, you're, I ruined. You were like, oh, I got 1000s. Yeah. I wasn't. I was thrilled. I didn't know. I had a 1000 for I've been new. He had to tell me what it was. I wanted these little things showing up. He's like, let me see. Give me this. You're like 900 subscribers. Yeah. Yeah. I got a number to have a channel. Yes, you do. Yeah. That's awesome. Yeah. Matt Cox, the biggest true crime podcast on YouTube. Go subscribe to him. Go buy his books and then buy life lock title lock insurance. Goodbye world. How do you guys see it?