The Joe Rogan experience. So what are you telling me, Jamie? Is a UFO yesterday? Yeah. NFL popular quarterback, where it's Cleveland Browns, former member one pick and high as a winner. Yeah, I think he lives in Austin in the offseason, and he saw a potential UFO last night. He says, almost 100% M&I just saw UFO drop straight down the sky on our way home from dinner. We stopped and looked at each other and asked if either of us saw it very bright ball of light going straight down out of the sky towards Lake Travis. Could have been a drone. Could have been some kids. He's a football player? Yeah. Are we going to believe him because he's famous? Yeah. That's the only reason. I just got a lot of attention as well. Well, he's famous, so you listen to his Twitter, I guess. I don't know. Have you ever seen anything crazy? No. No? I don't think crazy. When I'm up in the mountains sometimes camping or whatever, I'll see. I feel like some shooting stars and some stars, you know, fall, which actually now that I'm saying it might be a little bit crazy. So maybe I have seen some shit. I don't know. Everybody wants to think they did, right? I want to think I'm seeing some crazy. But I definitely have it. I thought I did when I was a kid, but now I think I was probably lying. Yeah. You know what I think about it when I was a kid. I was probably full of shit. I probably wanted it, you know, I'm saying like I probably saw like a military jet and I thought and I wanted it to be something cool. Like I remember the first time I ever saw a stealth bomb or we were filming fear of factor and it was over palm and palm down, which is near Edward's Air Force Base. If I didn't know what that was, I would have 100% think that was from another planet. Yeah. You know, when you see the thing black wing flying over heads, like it's pretty badass. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think I would, you know, I think that my brain would just immediately be like, ah, something can explain that. Yeah. You know, yeah. Well, that's the problem with anything like that. It's like it's the idea that you're looking at something from another planet. So it's so outside of what you see every day. You don't know where to put it. It's getting less outside though, right? Right. It's getting less outside, which is like this. What's up with the, because I remember you saying something about it on the podcast. What's up with that bill that passed that said that the, yeah, they have to release whatever information they have to release about. It's a COVID relief bill and inside the COVID relief bill, they gave, I think it was the CIA. They gave the central intelligence agency 180 days or something like that to release all the information that they have about UFOs. Where, where we add on that? I don't know. It's a good question. What day are we on? They don't have to release. Yeah. They do not release that. Oh, this is what we got. We got a blurry picture. Get the fuck out of us. Yeah. Yeah. We're not going to know anything. Yeah. The idea that they're going to tell these senators and all these elected people, what they know, they're not telling them shit. Last, the aliens told them that they have 180 days to tell everyone. Maybe right now you're talking. If Trump didn't tell everybody, we're not going to know. Yeah. Yeah, that's true. I think I remember when Chris Rock was talking about Obama and he was talking about Obama, people were disappointed in Obama's first administration. He said, you got to wait until the second term and that's when you do some really gangster shit. And Obama didn't do any gangster shit in the second term. If Trump got elected again in 2024, because you can only do it twice if you got elected again in 2024, maybe he would tell us. You know, recount the votes. Maybe get on TV and that's the first shitty talks about right away. Here's what I say. Here's what the, uh, okay. Include included as a committee comment on the intelligence authorization act, the committee directs the director of the national intelligence in consultation with the secretary of defense and the heads of such other agencies to submit a report within 180 days of the date of enactment of the act to the congressional intelligence and arm services to committees on UAPs. Why can't they just say UFOs unidentified aerial phenomenon? What's the difference? Unidentified flying object. They got tired of using that. So they changed it to UAP. Why are they going to fuck with us? I don't know, man. UAP words change all the time. They have to catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.