The Joe Rogan experience you were telling me you're a big fucker big big foot gun tell me about this Here's the problem grew up in an area. Yeah, you're in the Pacific Northwest. Yeah, that's Bigfoot country That is I think that's the only reason I'm so into it. Yeah, also here's the thing You got to know about talking about me. It's not ever funny and it's not it's just something I like so much that it ends up me giving you the same arguments you've heard a billion times. Yes, oh, it's gigantic Mythic is came over the airplane. It's a bipedal hominid. It's just you know Uh, and then at the end and everyone my friends have experienced it Harlan Williams just experienced it when I was on his podcast Anytime I talk about Bigfoot it ends up with me just gone Please Joe can you just say it's maybe a possibility like that's always ends up being yeah You said it's I'm out. I remember you one time gone. There's nothing out there Yeah, didn't you say that about Bigfoot? Don't see it That's why I don't believe in it some hunters do not many people that see it are usually loggers hunters Natives people that are out of this. There's another problem another problem is dusk You see things at dusk or at dawn. It's very confusing. Mm-hmm bears walk on two legs all the time I have personally watched bears walk on two legs and if I did no any better and if it was a Dark environment like it was dusk, you know, you like a barely can see I would think it's Bigfoot right yeah, but I do think Bigfoot existed Yes, there's the sum insane number of Native American words for Bigfoot Sasquatch is just one of them. There's a bunch of them There's a bunch of Native American words for this one animal that's fake But all the other words they have are for real animals. They don't have a bunch of dragons They don't have like mythical creatures in Native American mythology But they do have this one giant man thing that definitely existed at some point at 100% Gigantopithecus was a real animal. It was eight to ten feet tall bipedal hominid It was a huge gorilla-looking Primate that died off Somewhere around a hundred thousand years ago, but they don't know a hundred thousand. Yeah, but they don't know for sure to think about it It's like if you only find fossils from a hundred thousand years ago, you could assume that that's That this animal at least live then but you don't know when it went extinct right you might find some new fossil like ten years from now They might find some new site and way to be in it these these are 20,000 years old But these are 30,000 years old or these are 50,000 years old, but we either way a Nam anatomically identical human beings have been around for 500,000 plus years maybe even more So or similar human beings so then we definitely interacted with them. Yeah, or they were around we were around I think there's still around I think there's hundreds maybe thousands of them What I believe I think they're in caves or something or maybe it's you know what the problem with that is what they're too big The amount of food that they would need to eat You'd have to be grazing all day long see if you're Bigfoot posted in the Journal of zoology this month if it's there could it be a bear they're saying it's black bear American black bear Yeah American black bear that stands up, but he's even though it's no the difference between a monkey and a bear no No, no, no, no, no, no first of all, let me tell you something If you're in the woods and you're in a heightened state because you're looking around you don't know what's out there It's a thick wood weird weird woods or weird. Yeah, and you see something you could trick your brain I saw squirrel and for like two or three seconds. I thought it was a wolf Really yeah, yeah Real that's real between here. I'm seeing something moving in between thick trees And I see gray fur. I'm like oh my god. I don't wolf. Yeah, cuz there's wolves out there right it was I'm in Canada I'm like, oh, it's fucking squirrel. What the fuck is wrong with me? What the fuck is wrong with you? Yeah, it's like people see what they want to see yeah and the problem is you get something into someone's head a mythological thing whether it's a UFO or whether it's Bigfoot I Think it's I think the world is way more slippery than we like to think and I think there's states of Consciousness that people can achieve during high anxiety levels Definitely during the use of psychedelic drugs. Yes. Sometimes during weird states in their life like near-death experiences loss of a loved one Extreme emotion a lot going on a lot of anxiety and fear like you would have if you're in the woods sure and then you're on edge You see a light across the sky and light up. It's just a meteorite. All right, but you're in the wrongs Headspace you see that meteorite and you just fucking you just freak you just freak and maybe for a brief moment You can see something that's been there all along. You know defeated. I am right now. I just want you to Tell me like did there's some crazy stuff out there. I've interviewed a lot of Bigfoot people I had one bit joke I used to about Bigfoot here's what you don't find when you go looking for Bigfoot Black people you're more likely to find Bigfoot. They are black people looking for Bigfoot. It's a bunch of unfuckable white guys out camping That is a thing It's a community of people that want to believe something that there's zero evidence for and they're fucking locked in Yeah, they're hitting a tree with a stick going like we're gonna wait for a knockback and it's different Bigfoot researchers hitting a different tree Talking back. Yeah, it's like if you go to public land L-Conting there's a bunch of people elkong you think It's a dude with another guy L-2-man-doo and elkong exactly to each other. That's a red literally happened that it does 100% It's one of those things where I wish it was real I wish if it was Bobcat gold wave believes Yeah, he loves he's all in. Did you ever watch Willow Creek? I didn't piss me off because at the end it just it turns out to be I'm gonna spoil a Willow Creek But at the end it's just a bunch of like hillbillies out there Killing and blaming it on Bigfoot basically that's like the end is like we don't you talking about that you don't There's no big movie. I think that's what the end is that like it's just some crazy people that live in the woods It's not really a Bigfoot. Is that true? I think that's the end of Willow Creek. I Don't remember how it ends because they kind of have this one kind of like Blair witch-like shot And it's just a bunch of you know mountain people which is the scariest thing you'll find in the woods People well, that's that people that want to be off that grid people that documentary Sasquatch Do you ever see that like a documentary series? Yeah, and it turns out just to be the cartel Yeah, it's lame another car trouble like weed people weed people killing a blame in it on a Bigfoot framing it to look like a big foot Yeah, yeah, yeah, they killed somebody and apparently when marijuana was You know when they were growing it up there these hippies started arming themselves Yeah, and then they had rival gang wars with people that would come in and try to steal their crops Sure, so they're starting shooting each other and killing each other. Yeah, that's what that's all about. We're also like you know some cute girl that's like I'm gonna clip weed all summer and make five grand and hang out with other potheads who likely You don't realize how terrible that job is well You're in this gold messy illegal business. Yeah, and the cartels in that business like I had a friend who found a cartel grow operation on a ranch Yeah, they were they were he works on a ranch in California and he was doing his thing out in the ranch and he found some water piping and He followed the water piping and you know was pretty considerable distance and They found this grow up so this guy had diverted water or many guys They didn't see the humans that did it they took their shit and then they'd never caught the guys I don't think but they would set up these camps in like they would go to like national forests Apparently, it's big in northern California where they go deep deep deep in the woods They backpack in and then they have a massive grow up in on public land Yeah, and they just get it till the time it's you know ready to harvest and then they get out of there But if someone interrupts that if they get in the middle of that they'll they'll kill them right like these are cartel guys Yeah, so my friend John Norris he was been on the podcast before he was a game warden and He found a creek that had been redirected and he thought like maybe a farmer had did this like what's going on? Maybe someone put an illegal damn on this they follow it and then they find this crazy Grow up with the cartel and guns and so he winds up instead of just being a game warden now all of sudden He's got a tactical team with attack dogs crazy and they're running in fully armed to flakjack It's on having gunfights with cartel in the woods over weed. Yeah, I Will say that that's like the most frustrating part about the Bigfoot subject is you got guys like who really like? No, I think an ape could like a fam a pot of apes could like live out here and this thing And so you'll start to guys like me I'll be like yeah, this makes good senses and then they'll get like a native American to talk about it He'll be like it's the magic man of the woods He like no and like if he disappears he flies you can stop the rain and you're going Catch dang we were making real good ground here making arguments for it to be an ape I think the native Americans are right. I think that's what it is. I think we're the paranormal woods. Yeah, I do. Yeah, I think it's like Listen if you have listen let's imagine that states of consciousness can interface with other things that are around us all the time That we don't necessarily see now we know that's true if you take psychedelics And we know that psychedelics are produced in the brain I can imagine a moment Where you are in such a state that you could see something that you would not be able to see under normal conditions It doesn't it's not outside the realm of possibility I'm not married to it, but it's not outside the realm of possibility now if that is what we're seeing with UFOs if what we're seeing is our future Is if what we're seeing with those beings is the eventual shape that human beings will take as evolution Progresses we become these genderless little spin league things brain heads. Yeah flying spaceships with our minds that kind of makes sense to me if that makes sense Why would I be able to also see what we used to be or what we could again or what what other things used to live with us? And maybe it's almost like a ghost almost like a memory that you can add a test of a different time line a different dimension where this thing does exist and that's why it's so elusive and it comes and goes because it's not a real material thing It's a construct of the human psyche But these people that are seeing it like they might even literally be seeing footprints. They might literally leave foot It might exist for brief moments Makes that passing in and out of this dimension kind of thing. There's so many wacky stories about it So then you have to apply the wacky stories to human psychology and say okay People are in a heightened state. They're in the woods. They're alone. They're nervous Yeah, his cats out there and fucking bears. Ah, so you're kind of freaking out already Right, you're in this like weird mind six state already where it seems like more things are possible out there Because there's no one to help you right there's no city. There's no hospital Call the cops on a big foot. No fucking cell phone signal and you're out there alone like there's so many possibilities It's terrifying and that To me Makes sense like if there's a mindset that could be achieved. It's a mind state to be achieved Were you interact with things that aren't there all the time like UFOs right that would be when it would happen right? Well, I'm there's tons of like interesting stories that you'll just read about like a thing just walking behind the tree And it's not but if it was a massive Ten foot thing, you know, you'd probably be able to see it come out on the other side of that tree And you see a lot of those kind of re I read a lot of those kind of stories and like I don't know the heck that Yeah, it could be that but it could also be black bears It could be that you're just seeing things so they're freaking out. Yeah bears freak out man You see a bear in the wild it freaks you out and if you see a bear in between trees Oh, yeah, you can just convince yourself that something then your brain plays tricks on you the memory is a slippery bitch Yeah, I know especially under heightened circumstances like that like in the woods your memories weird And it's more exciting to believe that it's real so that's what you want to you know That's a bit my biggest part I think what I'm holding on to so much is they're like I think it's so boring if we just know all the stuff on our planet I don't think we do but that's my point. It's way more exciting to think yeah, there's bigfoots in those Yeah, turdactyls is one of my favorites short wolf wolf man or dog man or mothman or any of these kind of like exciting things I'm I want to believe that you know about that Hobbit man that they found that island of Flores no no, oh man. Yeah, this is good one for you This is a thing that absolutely live lived alongside people and I think they they don't know the the timeline of this fucker either But they think it might have been as recently as like 50,000 30,000 years ago and they were little tiny people three foot tall like almost like ape-like creatures That's a little yeah, see a little baby bitch. Yeah, well like like little hobbits man And they lived on this island and they were like a different branch of the human chain that lived alongside homo sapiens See that you just think you see a juvenile bigfoot or something. Yeah, well There's people that have cited these things in other parts of the world still to this day. They still claim that they exist