We're going to start posting each podcast episode that you see on YouTube a week earlier on Patreon. So feel free to join for early access to all episodes plus we're going to start doing bonus podcast episodes every week. So if you want to join Patreon it's patreon.com slash concrete videos. Next week's episode is already posted there so feel free to go check it out. Hello world! Today my guest is Patrick Bette David. He runs the value-tainment YouTube channel where he teaches the fundamentals of entrepreneurship and personal development. On this one we talk about fake gurus on YouTube, his success and the insurance business, and then creating a media company and much much more. I hope you guys enjoy this podcast with Patrick Bette David. Yo what's going on man? How you doing? Good, how are you? I am good. Where are you based out of? I am based out of St. Petersburg, Florida. How much yourself? I mean Dallas Dallas, Dallas Texas. Very nice. Why not Austin? That's where all that is. Dallas to me is more airport. It's more the hub of capitalism. Austin is more LA and I was escaping LA. Oh okay. It's more capitalism in Austin than there is in or more capitalism in Dallas than there is in Austin. Yes it's by far okay and and and and Kai do me favorite let the Zino to let me know the moment Byron gets him. So I think he just landed. Yeah it's by far more capitalism in Dallas than it is in Austin. By far night and day. How so? Dallas is all business friendly. It's purely business for you go around you say you're an entrepreneur, you're CEO, you're an executive. Dallas treats you good. Dallas has probably six times amount of fortune 500 headquarters as Austin does. Dallas is a complete different market in Austin. Austin has more LA, San Fran. It's slightly a different culture. Interesting. Very interesting. How you say you're saying you're saying mainly the culture is different? Yeah the culture is night night and day. Okay that's very cool. I've never been to either one. I never been to either place. I think you will enjoy both of them. You'll probably have more fun in Austin than you will in Dallas. Okay very nice. Dallas is quite boring man. I'm 42 so I got I got three kids. I'm married. If I was 28 I probably wouldn't be living in Dallas. You got a lot of open farmland over there huh? Yes. I probably can't. Do you have any cows? I do not know. No. I do eat cows plenty of them. Yeah. Yeah. Do you get do you get them locally or what? Do you have do you buy cows from like farms like around where you're are there farmers where you can go buy cows from and eat them? I'm sure there is. I'm not in that business. I'm in the insurance business. It's a complete different business. No no I don't mean as a business. I mean as like to get your food. I was wondering if there was like local farms you could buy. There are plenty of local farms. Yeah there are plenty of local farms that have a lot of pride here. I mean when you drive around you'll see them but when you're in the city the city is like any city you know it's a big city. But if you go 20 miles out it's Texas. If you're in the city you know it's Chicago. It's Miami. It's LA. It's like any other big city. So you're going to stay in Dallas forever or you plan for your business? I don't think I'll be here for probably another less than two years I'll be here and then I'll be out. We're going to go after that. We don't know yet. I don't know. I'm debating. I do like the state you're in almost about a house in Tampa and moved to where you know all those guys right in Tampa Bay. We looked at some nice homes but you know if I do Florida would be more on the other side then it would be on the Tampa side. Okay so tell me your business what do you do yourself? I'm in the advertising business. I mean personally I had a started an ad agency in like 2011 and before that I worked in I worked in the film industry in particular. I worked on like sets of feature movies like I started as a camera assistant and then started being a camera operator. We're done a bunch of like big feature movies for like Warner Brothers did a lot of television production with you know pitching TV pilots the different TV networks and stuff like that and transitioned into advertising doing commercials for big brands like household brands you've heard of as well as some smaller like local mama puck brands and that kind of evolved into just creating my own content here on YouTube and a lot of like the a lot of the TV production work that I did that I pitched around to all the TV networks. I ended up just repackaging it for YouTube and posting it on there and started doing a lot of like little documentary documentaries and then that kind of evolved into doing this kind of stuff where I can do like these things are kind of like documentaries minus the b-roll and music to me so I can do multiple ones a week interview people like you like an interview a crackhead from down the street whoever I want and it's kind of like they're interesting little character studies for me so that's what I do. Good business model and you're in the insurance business. I am. How did you get into that world? I by the way do we start the podcast or not yet? Oh yeah yeah we started. Sorry I didn't tell you. Yeah I just I just started from when we first started. Okay got it yeah so I got into an insurance world when I got out of the military I went to I wanted to be bodybuilder so originally that was gonna be it or I was gonna take and then I met a girl who worked at Morgan Standard Dean with our long story short I started working at Morgan Standard Dean with our day before 9-11 and then got my series 766-21 you know 26 all the licenses at 21 years old and fell in love with the industry so this is what I'm gonna do so I left Morgan I went to Trans America I became an insurance agent for the next seven and a half years and in October of 2009 started the Mount Company PHP with 66 agents and today we have somewhere around 17 to 18,000 insurance agents in 49 states. Wow what kind of insurance do you sell? Life and annuities it's a life any kind of life and annuities for retirement. Man I don't have a very good experience with insurance companies not gonna lie to you I have a pretty pretty bad experience with them I had I had business insurance and you know for my experience insurance companies only try to do two things sell you the policy and then get out of whatever claims that you have. I don't think you're wrong when it comes up to PNC that's PNC it's a complete different model. What does PNC mean? Property and casualty you're talking about property insurance you're not talking about life insurance. Right no yeah I'm talking about specifically actually it was a professional insurance something like that. The reason why there are so many unhappy people like you and I about PNC is because there's so many so many of the words their attorneys use to give them an ounce. Yeah but on life if you have a debt certificate there is no words you're dead. Okay it's very simple so if you buy if I'm million dollar policy and you die and you get into car accident and you die you send the debt certificate we're sending a million out of check even if you just paid $30 on the term policy. Wow interesting. That's a completely different world than what I'm what I'm used to. Night and dates. That's not even this time. Really night and date. That's pretty cool man that's really cool so how did you transition from insurance the insurance world to something like this to making videos and doing interviews and you do a lot of cool stuff. If you're the accidental you know one day I was creating content on the back end so you couldn't see the content we were creating for the company and one of my guys came and said Pat why don't you create content for public and I said I don't really know if there's gonna be a public need for what we're doing. You should just try it out. I said okay let's make a couple videos we made a couple videos. I said if I do that I'm going to commit to two years I did one video a week it was called two minutes with Pat. Two years later you know there was some interest we had a few thousand subs and I said okay let's try to do a little bit more and then we went to 40 thousand subs and then I changed the channel's name from my name to valuetainment and then from valuetainment I grew from 40 thousand subs too I don't know what we have right now but 2.5 2.6 million subs and we interview a lot of different characters you know whether it's a Kobe Bryant the late Kobe Bryant to a Cuban to a Samuel Bogano to a political figure president Bush to magic Johnson to Wayne Gretzky a lot of different people we interview and it turned into what it is today so it was purely accidental now to media company now we have a new site now we have valuetainment Russian with 170 thousand subs now we're doing by Tim and Arabic Spanish Portuguese by Tim and money by Tim and economics by Tim and politics we just started a podcast we got a new site called vtpost.com that we launched I think three four weeks ago so now it's becoming a media company and that would be kind of what I'll do after I replaced myself here with the insurance company replace yourself with the insurance company what do you mean by you mean you're gonna put somebody in your play are you to sell it or what are you gonna do? No you replace so I hire another CEO to run this company. Oh you're still gonna own the company until somebody buys it I was still on the company. Okay cool that sounds like fun. Yeah it's crazy and in the meantime I gotta try to have a good married marriage life you know be a decent parent with three kids and make sure family's happy healthy is happy and you gotta do all of that in 160 hours in a week. Yeah it's a lot it's a lot how many kids you have three? Three of them you know three kids and you're doing all this stuff that's wild. I think yeah the main you're mentioning earlier about moving to florida I I can't believe the difference in the price of houses here in Tampa on the water versus directly across the Gulf of Mexico and Texas on the water it's like night and day the difference in price it's like three times the price here. No no question about it. It's a different place to live where you live than to live in Galveston you know Houston. Yeah and nobody's trying to go party in Galveston. Nobody wakes up and says hey guys what do you want to do this? Well let's go to Galveston unless if you are a local person. My wife is from Galveston you know and but nobody wakes up saying I want to go to Galveston but where you are when I was in the army we would every time we had a fourth of July or Labor Day or Memorial any of those we're going straight all the way down to Panama City we'd go to Snip what is a Spinnakers and Club La Vila I think was at Panama City and we'd go to some of the areas on your side definitely not to Galveston. Yeah yeah there's definitely a it's a huge tourist destination you're very like a transient area kind of like Vegas no one here is actually from here. I'm not surprised. Yeah I'm sure it's a lot like Austin. Yeah Austin is you and I talked about Austin earlier it's a very different Austin is very different. Yeah except there's no there's not many left-wing people here it's it's all they're all hardcore Trump people here. Really where you are. Yeah oh Tampa St. Petersburg oh yeah I mean there's a there's a little center there's probably a very distilled area in St. Petersburg that is like that but other than that no it's all. See what I like is I like both I like all three so when I lived in LA it was all left and so you had 75% left and you you if you even talked about capitalism you were greedy right if I if I went to a different place some states you would go to it's all right and it's also a little bit too much because you needed a little bit of balance on the other side but what I like about that was you know I lived in LA for a while and I went all over place in LA Westwood you know we go everywhere you tell me streets I know streets in LA because I was there for 24 years there's there's in my opinion there's a bigger gay community in Dallas than there was in LA a bigger gay community in Dallas than there was in LA and most people when I say that to them they say what are you talking about us if it come to Dallas I'll take you driving around to area in Dallas and you tell me what you see here it's a night and day on what it is but in Dallas it's fine you know it's because they have center left and right you got a little bit of everything that's here and it kind of works out but when it's too far right or too far left I think it becomes problematic for everybody living there on the description of your channel value attainment it says the the best channel for entrepreneurs what does that mean and how did you did you have that in mind when you when you started it or is that just kind of how it evolved naturally no it was actually originally I mean it was all entrepreneur every content we put up it was only entrepreneur every content was only entrepreneur so if you go on YouTube you go to filters you type in entrepreneur and you go filters views by Tim and pop stuff as a number one channel for the most views so that's the value payment part but at the beginning at the beginning it was purely business how to raise money how to hire how to fire how to recruit how to bring a business partner how do you negotiate with a a multibillion out of company how do you go out there and different ways of raising money how do you deal with angel investors how to send that email to angel investors you know how do you deal with bankruptcy how do you manage running the company and being married and having kids so everything we ever did for by attainment up until 2018 was 100% entrepreneurship in 2018 I did one interview with Michael Francie's the mobster and from there all of a sudden everybody else started showing up hey how about we do this how about we do this interview and all of some we did bodybuilding interviews on bodybuilding interviews we got 15 20 million views on mob interviews we got 30 40 50 million views on you know then it became niches then China took off then the topic of Iran took off then the topic of capitalism took off so then it becomes topics probably kind of like your own channel that you have who's your biggest hit you've ever had in your channel give me the the one topic that's done the best on your channel I think it's this kid who plays fortnight for living okay so so don't go gamers that's one right what is another topic the other most popular one was about a guy who bought a five million dollar Lamborghini and South Beach so if I go to concrete's channel you will kind of see even your own channel that you have a gamer 4.2 million views now are you a big gamer yourself no but I'm good I mean you just friend of mine I thought it was interesting but I mean let's like phenomenal 4.2 million views that that's a that's a great interview right so next you got a guy buys a Lamborghini for four million dollars okay that's the second one third one is a pirate junkie fourth one is he looks familiar he's a UK guy what's he's oh he's the ecstasy guy you got the fourth one you got Michael uh-oh who what is Matthew Cox right okay so for you you got gamers you got cars lifestyle you got pirate junkie which is random you got drugs you got con you got real estate you got a real estate guy there so those are your six that you're pulling from I would probably be doing more gaming if I'm you because you got an audience of gaming so when you start doing shows they become hit and miss like we started doing vlogs when we did vlogs uh I got to tell you my vlogs are probably the worst vlogs you'll ever see on YouTube why is that if you go look at my vlogs it's you know it's there's nothing crazy about the vlogs why why is there nothing crazy about my vlogs vlogs I don't have the most interesting life to the average person to say I can't wait to see what this guy does like I don't have time to go out there and say you know let's go get uh uh 16 cases of Skittles take throw in a bathtub and get two girls who are willing to jump in here and let's throw Nutella on top of it get 70 million views I don't have that kind of time right so some people who do vlogs they're very interesting and they know how to keep attention a lot for vlogs like the Logan Paul's or the Jake Paul's or something they're killing it with vlogs but then the vloggers sometimes try to do what you're doing that doesn't work for them sometimes the content creators which are the how-to business guys try to do things others are doing it doesn't work for them sometimes the motivational guys going to interviews their interviews don't work obviously you're a good interviewer if you got seven eight interviewers over a million views you obviously are good at interviewing people but that's not everybody not everybody's good at interviewing people so it's not uh uh it's not something that works for everybody like I don't know if you've tested the vlogs or not on your own life have you done vlogs before no I'm not interested in doing any of that stuff uh that's that's uh that's an interesting idea that you just mentioned how you said because I have a video that has four million views about a gamer maybe I should do more gaming stuff it's how make up an audience for it how do you feel about making content for your audience versus making content about what speaks to you personally or what you're personally interested in yeah so I do bodybuilding because I want it to be mestrolin people for so it's very easy to be bodybuilding because uh anything from 1990 until mid 2000 I know all the bodybuilders and I'm very good friends with Phil heat where we're pretty much talking every single week good friend of mine I advise him on a couple things that he does so bodybuilding interview for me is very easy mob interviews very easy for me why I watched all the stories I read all the books I know all the things that I came up reading about the things that happened with mob so whatever you do that there's interest in you when you do that interview the audience is gonna feel it whatever you do you got a chase the views or do you chase just what you're interested in even if it doesn't bring in views do you focus more on business the business side of it the numbers all that stuff or do you just you know whatever follow your passion or your dream whatever it is if you're doing it just to have fun you're doing it if you're doing it because you know it's a business model and you're selling stuff through it then that's a different thing if you're doing it because right it's so different for everybody on youtube I mean you got these six year old kids seven year old kids that are unpacking toys you know making 22 million year kids name is Ryan you know it's got this channel that all he does is open up a legal toys or different toys he's a 22 million dollar year earner seven year old kid I mean who's doing it him or his parents his parents there are so many ways to leverage technology today but it's all on which you're solving for and you know many times when you're doing what you're doing you may not even know it for the first two three four five years right five years you may say you know this is going to turn into a bit concrete all of a sudden corrupt 10 million subscribers now you're getting sponsors are coming to you and saying hey what can we do to you do you have no idea what it's going to go from there now you need advisors now you got attorneys now you got agents managers now you got people come up to you saying hey we want to use them different ways what do you think about this now you got opportunities coming your way then you really will be making decisions in a different way next thing you know I'm Pat O'Maud Patrick that David's level well listen everybody has a different the biggest challenge is you know when you look at the game you you said something very interesting here do you solve for views or do you solve for what you want to do what your passion is right I mean originally when you're coming out it's it's unfortunately when you're smaller a lot of times people compare right oh my god look at that guy I mean like when we were first getting started it's like oh we only have a hundred subscribers oh my gosh we suck nobody likes our content this must not be good then you're like well you we got one video got 300 views this is amazing you know and then who are these 300 people that are watching this video then you get a thousand views two thousand views and then the moment you forget what the audience thinks about the content you're creating that's when you start winning the moment you forget that I really don't care if you like it or not I'm enjoying absolutely I really don't care if you like when I went into bodybuilding interviews I got to tell you I got a lot of people that hated the fact that I was doing bodybuilding interviews they said why are you doing bodybuilding interviews this is an entrepreneur website I said I love bodybuilding you try to keep you in your box you got it so so you yourself you have momentum right now you're about to get big momentum all of a sudden you get to five 10 million subs you one of these guys that are bigger channels you know people are going to try to keep you in a box you got to play to what you want to play because that's how you won people over in the first place right absolutely and there's also a lot of people I just did an interview with a guy recently who his name is heavier heard of him his name is coffee zilla I have not so basically he he exposes quote-unquote fake gurus and he exposes people who go online and and basically try to create or falsify a persona of them having extreme wealth like having Ferraris in the background of their shots or whatever and then essentially all they're trying to do is to sell like courses online courses where they can you know get vulnerable people with little to no money who have hit rock bottom who they need to need to find looking for some sort of light to bring them out of the darkness and they find these guys with these flashy cars he's big watches find out how I make $5,000 a day on Amazon and it's super interesting and there's a there's a huge culture of people like that on YouTube I mean he's got a couple hundred thousand subscribers if it's working for him look in in the world some people want to be lawyers right yeah what's a lawyer or lawyer sits there and tries to fight for their defend their client but at the same time expose you if they're going up against you that's their job so to you this person's lawyer is annoying because they're exposing you right but it is there is a need for lawyers as much as we they're lawyers there's a need for lawyers right okay cops you can't stand a cop when he's pulling you over and it's annoying you know especially if the cop is a little bit of a arrogant prick and he thinks he's got the badge he can kind of push you around but look if you're going out the other day I got pulled over by this cop he pulls me over I said what did I what'd you pull me over says what did I pull you over if I said what'd you pull me over for he says first of all you made a U-turn you didn't put the what he turned signal you you were drifting the car then you went and passed a red light and you were speeding and you were about to race the guy next to you and you're lucky I don't have a gun on me I can give you six tickets right I said you know what you're right I do deserve all this stuff right so he comes back he says look just the fact that you were chill I'm giving you one ticket I said cool thank you we had a great 50 minute conversation I left right there is a place for guys like that there is a place for guys like that you know when I was in LA there was a for the cop no for this guy with with coffee Zilla what you're telling me right yeah absolutely there is a place for for for for people like that would they go and say hey look I'm gonna expose now he's he may be right or wrong but he's gonna expose and let the audience make a decision for themselves on what they want to do because you are right there are a lot of people online right now where anybody can go out there and say I'm worth half a billion dollars people gonna believe it this is what you know something interesting you bring him up the number one question I ask people whenever somebody tells you they're rich the number one question is the question I ask you the number one question I ask you was well when we start I said how do you make your money what do you do and you said TV I worked on some big films I ended up doing advertising in 2000 and I think you said 11 yeah and you know I got into advertising I did some big companies I did some local companies great so in my mind you're an advertiser and you're a good interview your your tieries you asked the right question you got a channel that's soon to be over a million subs on your way to 10 million subscribers right okay great but I I went to how did you make your money the number one question a lot of these online gurus that you call when you ask him how do you make your money they don't have an answer to that question the way they made their money is selling courses selling courses so by the way and and if they open up and say that then that's okay meaning if you say how'd you make your money I made my money selling courses I'll click home you know it's versus how'd you make your money why I made my money because I did a real estate deal and I sold this real estate deal for 28 million dollars how do we know you sold it for 28 million how do we not know your shares only 50 thousand dollars but the story is 28 million dollars for example I bought a hotel here for 36 million dollars okay do you know how much of an owner I was on a 36 million out of hotel we bought you didn't buy it with Grant Cardone did you oh no no no no I buy it with so I bought a hotel here for 36 million dollars okay how much of that hotel I owned how much less than a percent so when people said how much does it buddy I don't own the hotel I just am one of the investors in this hotel a very small percentage they said hey you want to put some money into it you know here's 50 grand here's 100 grand but you can spin it and say I have a you know or you know so a lot of that is on the marketing side and look in nobody nowadays walks on water so if anybody wants to go out there and say oh I'm holy I don't do anything wrong sometimes you got to be careful because if you play the card of I'm holy and I'm an angel and you know I don't do anything wrong that can also backfire on you this is why for me in married I tell you what my wife and I say to each other I'll say it all the time when we got married people asked me a question they said oh my gosh you know at my wedding there were people on one side it was all the Harry Middle Eastern folks you know who look like me they're all the same they look the same and then on the other side is all the good looking blue eye green eye people like yourself my wife's family right they're all you know so they're standing on one side they're all standing on one side and they look at each other no one's dancing it's a big wedding we got four and a 450 people there at this wedding then one of my friends gets up he is hammered he's so hammered it's not even fun he's so hammered his wife's next tomb he's floating with other people's wives he's that hammered right there he's that gone okay and he's the kind of guy you want to party with because in a different career he could have been this one from a wetting crashes okay he's like that kind of a personality he's trying to give you visual good looking guy he gets up he says look I'm not gonna lie you guys seem very concerned about this you know wedding whether this is gonna work out or not I am in the same place I don't have a clue whether this is gonna work he's one of my groomsmen he says but I finally figured out what Jennifer and Patrick have in common Jennifer's from Texas Patrick's from Iran he says look both of these guys like weapons of mass destruction and they're like oh you know I think this is gonna work out right everybody starts laughing cracking up and they started dancing I'm giving my final speech and I said well listen a lot of you guys are wondering whether this thing is gonna work out or not you know there's some Vegas odds right now whether it is or not all I can tell you's this I know one thing for fact I know for a fact we can be married for one year we're gonna take a one year at a time so we went one year two years now we've been married for 11 years I'm not gonna put the pressure we're gonna be together forever why would you do that you don't know what happens tomorrow so you know it's sometimes these online folks that play the holy card it's one of the reasons why I was an atheist for 25 years because I grew up in a church that people get up and talk about God and how perfect they are and next thing you know you know they're the ones that are judging you that end up doing the things that they judged you on and you're sitting there saying listen man this is exactly why I don't want to go to church but then you eventually find a community where they say I'm here because I'm also screwed up I don't want to go to church and you remind me that I'm going to hell I know I'm going to hell I just want to know I got a spot in heaven you know that kind of like that mindset of going to play so I do believe there's a great place for guys like this that are doing what they're doing because there are a lot of people online that they simply made their money selling their courses online and they should just come out and say here's how I made my money I made my money selling courses right but the thing is about it if they said that they probably would have settled nearly as many courses and those people are right they want to make money that's why they're in that's why they're doing what they're doing and they need to sell those courses they have that's why then that's why guy like this comes after you right right it's sort of inevitable like this kind of guy is is bound to elevate you got to realize Tony Robbins has been dealing with this his entire life yeah but Tony Robbins is very very different Tony Robbins obviously yeah he's a self-help guy you know he's he wrote all those books on sales and making yourself great you know being a better NLP all that stuff but he also like going to a Tony Robbins event you're going there for the experience it's like it's like going to the super how that stuff. But he also like going to a Tony Robbins event, you're going there for the experience. It's like it's like going to the super. How are you? How are you? I'm 33. Okay. You know how Antonio is he's probably in his 60s, right? He just celebrated 60. You know when he started doing this first event? No, he was 23, 24 years old, right? What's the point? Go talk to somebody his age. Tony used to put up events with 10, 20 people. Tony had to overcome that. It took him two decades. That's what I'm trying to tell you. You're saying he started selling courses? Oh, yeah. Tony was selling. And by the way, this is coming from a guy that's attended his courses, about his books, about everything that he has about his stuff from way back in the days. But he's struggled with that because he was known back in the days as the informal social guy. Middle the night you'd be sitting there watching TV and he says, are you sick and tired of being sick and tired? Is your job not fulfilling your dreams? Have you made promises to your wife of taking her to that one destination and it or your friends that you've not made it happen? It's time to you know, all these kind of messages and it was informal. She, oh my gosh, let me buy this $200 program. Let me buy this $200 program. So he went through that for a long time. But what Tony that gets credit for is Tony recreated himself multiple times. Some of these guys are going to get a lot of shots that's going to be taken out of them. They're going to have to figure out it to recreate themselves. Remember, Rogan was a fear factor guy and prior to that he was an actor and prior to that he was a karate guy. And he was a good looking guy that was coming up. Then all of a sudden he said, let me team up with Dana White. They worked out together. He started doing his kinds of tools today to consider himself a comedian. All the other stuff is secondary, right? So comedy UFC podcast, he's recreated himself. I don't know how many times. So the race when people bring up names to me, the race of content is going to be who can recreate themselves. The most times and stay relevant for decades. The reason why you raise Charles and Stink get the kind of credit and respect that they get. I believe they're the only two that have number one hits in four different decades. Four decades. Think about how much music changes every decade. Imagine staying relevant for four different decades. It's a very difficult thing to do to stay relevant for different decades. A lot of these online guys, they're going to have to overcome these. You know who they are. All these videos that you do on these guys that this guy does on them. Overcome it. Some of them are not going to overcome it. But they're going to have to overcome this phase of people like this going after them saying how you make your money is courses. Right. Yeah. It'd be interesting to see what Tony Robbins would do if he was younger and starting out in this day and age. How he would do it. I think he'd be 10 times bigger. Do you think that I mean, but do you think that he he baited his audience into thinking he was some like big successful guy when he first started like look at me. I'm rich. When he first started doing those course. No, I think Tony's approach. Tony's approach was the story that makes Tony very vulnerable is when he was at his Venice apartment and his friend comes in, he's 38 pounds overweight. He's disappointed. He said rock bottom. I think he was working at Jim Rohn and I don't know whether he was working in the nutritional company with Jim Rohn. And he came from a place. Look, I screwed up my life. Then I went and read books and then I changed my life. And I'm sharing what worked with me for you to you. So that's still a very noble way of bringing the messaging. He's packaging it very well. So it's he's not coming from a place of let me tell you how powerful I am. Those are the people that sometimes get a lot of people that come after them for the right reasons. Now if they can handle it, they're going to be fine. If they cannot handle it, they may need to want to change your positions. For example, for Trump, Trump enjoys people going after him. His entire life. That's his comfort zone. It's not for everybody. Some people get rattled. Some people don't like he loves it. Matter of fact, he will intentionally follow bankruptcy on a business just to get you to write about it. He is a very different kind of guy. But if somebody says I want to be like Trump when I grow up, you can't because you got to have that guy's DNA. If you don't have that guy's DNA, you can't be like him. You got to take a complete different play of a different person's playbook rather than hits. It's not going to work for that personality. But if somebody online has Trump's personality, they're going to be all right. It's amazing how many people you can get to follow you and to worship you if you project this wealthy persona. If you could put a Ferrari in the background of your videos, you can get so many people to follow you. It's such a weird thing. It's really insane like how effective that is for some people. Yeah, it's not forever though. Think about it. Like, you know, like Kardashian, they would say, oh, she's famous because of that video. Right? I've been probably even guilty of saying that. You know, she's famous because that one video she did with Brandi's brother. Right? The porno? Yeah. Yeah. Porn video that went out and everyone said, oh my gosh, who's this girl? And then she was friends with Paris Hilton and all this stuff. Right. Okay. No problem. You look at Kim Kardashian today. How many times has she recreated I mean, they're on the 20th season of Keeping Up with Kardashian. I've never watched an episode, not one time. Have I watched Keeping Up with Kardashians? You know how many people on my office keep up with it? And you sit there and you say at this point, Kim Kardashian at this point has reached same status. You know what? Same status is here's what's saying status. It's not she's a saint. That's not what Saint status is. Saint status is no matter what you say today, no one cares to be. You can say whatever you want about Kim today, no one cares today. She's reached a tipping point. She's an, the only thing she can do is if she does something royally stupid, criminal, something, you know, completely out of line, but she's reached the level right now that she's got millions of haters and she's totally comfortable with it. She still looks good at 40. I don't know how old she is. I'm going to assume she's 38 40. I don't know her exact age, but I'm going to assume she's going to be that age. Kim Kardashian. How old are you? Let's see here. She's getting up here for sure. He's 40 years old. We're three days apart. Okay. I didn't know that. She's October 21st. So your three days apart in age. I had no idea. We're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, I'm 78. She's 80. So we're, we're, uh, three days, but you look at her good for you. She looks amazing. So now somebody could have said to her at 21 years old, your looks alone cannot get you everywhere for the rest of your life. She cannot laugh and say, I'm 40 and I still look good. And I'm still making my billions. And what do you got to say about that? She's like, Bill, she wants to be in the level of Sophia Lorraine and, you know, Marilyn Monroe and Elizabeth Taylor, type of a level. She doesn't care if she gets married eight times. She just wants to get to that kind of a level. So when you talk about the cars, the cars don't work long term. They just don't work long term. They work temporarily. They do not work long term. Well, you know, one of my first videos that it was called Life of an Entrepreneur. Okay. And it was called Life of an Entrepreneur 90 seconds. That's the one that got 35 million views in the first 30 days on Facebook and all my websites shut down in the first 12 hours because first 12 hours, they got 10 million views. And we're on this, uh, what do you call it? The hosting company that trying to get it up. If you look at the life of an entrepreneur, guess what cars in it, a red Ferrari. Okay. So when I posted that video about it, I said, oh, he probably ran at this foreign life. Yeah, there's people think I rented this Ferrari. Okay. I mean, I had it for three years. I had that Ferrari for three years. I sold the Ferrari year ago. I had it for three. I drove it every day. I sold it with 25,000 miles. You sold it last year? I sold the last year. Yes. So for me, when I had my event adore, I drove it every day. I put 10,000 miles on it. I just sold my event adore. I put 20,000 miles on it. I drive my exotics. I don't buy it and put it. Except the next one I'm buying. That one's not going to be driven a lot. But when that comes, that comes. What's the point moral to story? If you go through my pictures on Instagram, I don't know how many pictures you're going to see with cars. Maybe five, maybe six. Does it work? 100%. I will tell you, it 100% works. If you own a Ferrari and you pull up two plates, then you want a network and you pull up in a red Ferrari, you're going to get different kind of attention. Then if you pull up an NS 500, it's just automatic. Everyone's going to look at it. So yes, it's, you know, show, what ever you want to call it. But when Trump goes to speak in North Carolina, and there's a plane in the back, not an Air Force One, but it says Trump. Pretty sick. You know, it's kind of like call this man broke. It's $10,000 an hour to fly that thing. So you think he's broke. If he flies from Florida to New York and back, that's a $60,000 flight just on gas. You think he's broke in $60,000. The average person spends $400 to go from Florida, New York back and forth. It's got spending $60,000 to go on a plane like that. You got to know that people sit there and say, this fricking guy owns a plane and it's got his name on it. So there is an element that it works only. This is the part I was going to with this. He's a great marketer. He's a great marketer. But the reason why it works for him is because of what we talked about with stink and ray Charles. He's been doing this for decades. Yeah. So you can put a picture with a Ferrari. But if that picture doesn't show up five years from now, you may have been a fraud. You can put a picture of your house. But if you rent at that house, everybody wants to know what happened to that house 15 years later. And you've forgotten about it. And I will tell you, there is nothing. There is nothing worse than being forgotten about it. It doesn't matter if your grandfather, if your grandkids and your kids don't want to see you anymore, it's one of the most painful things you'll ever have. If you don't get an invitation to a wedding and your grandfather, I mean, that's like a knife. No pain is going to be more difficult than that. Right. So have you experienced that? Have I experienced on a smaller scale, I experienced on a smaller scale, more on a nightclub scene because I was the guy that was, you know, you wanted to go to the parties with me and, you know, the girls and all that other stuff. And in one moment, I decide to, you know, get my act together and stop being the guy that I was. And I wanted to change some of my habits. I was partying way too much. I was going to Vegas every other weekend. I'm at nightclub six nights a weekend, I'm at nightclubs and, you know, women here, women there. And one day, I just said, I want to drop this habit because I'm broke. My dad had a heart attack. I went to the hospital. And I saw this man at UCLA Medical Center on his death bed last, you know, nearly 40 pounds. And I said to myself, we got to make some changes here. Man, this is not going to happen. I went in my car, sat on my Ford focus. I was the guy that had the nice SUV I take everybody to the club. So I'm on my Ford focus crying like a little baby at 23 years old. I said, your party in every night, your dad's about to die. He works at a 99 sensor. And this man sacrificed everything to bring you to America. And you want to go party every night. But he didn't get your act together. Next day, I came to look on my face changed. I went to work, but I was forgotten about it at the nightclubs. I was forgotten about it. I was no longer the cool guy. It was the square guy. All you want to do is read business book, what a freaking boring guy you are. But that's kind of the cool thing. But it's not though at the beginning when you're going through it. At the beginning when you're going through it, it's not because they're short-term pain. And most people believe it or not. If that was so easy, a lot of people would do it. But most people eventually hate the common people make when they say, you know what, Bobby? Man, I missed the old you. You've changed. Most people cannot handle that compliment. They don't know it's a compliment. They take it as a this. In that moment, you don't know what's going on because you haven't still proven that you're going to be successful. When I was going through the phase, I wasn't, I wasn't that 49,000 hours. So people are like, what are you doing? Come on down. We're missing you. And everybody's asking about you. And it's like, oh, it's pad. So you kind of are forgotten about it. And when that happens, you know, you kind of start thinking about what really matters in your life. And then eventually, you get to the mature stage where you say, we're really that stuff that doesn't matter to me but when you're in the middle of it, you don't know because you don't know if the price is worth it. You don't know if the price is worth it. So Danny, when you're in the middle and you're going through paying the price and you have not get proven to yourself. Meaning nobody yet knows, you don't know if this 80 hours a week you're putting into working is going to work. How many guys you know pay the price of playing football 24 seven and then make it this close to the NFL and they don't make you they're working out of Starbucks. That's a very, so you're right there. You can go smoke weed with that girl and party and do a couple lines because you don't know for a fact, if you're going to get into the NFL and you're tempted, she's the one you always wanted to get together. When now she wants to get together with the end-bringer girl with you, that's some experience. Do you want to really give that up and at one moment, you earn that tipping point. You may not make it in the NFL. So you're kind of like, well, I'm not going to make it anyways. Why am I going to do it? I'm not going to make a build a real business anyways. How do I know I'm going to do it? So it's in those moments where we screw up. So yes, there is nothing more painful than being forgotten about. When it happens, many of these guys that were cool at one point with their Ferrari pictures, they will be forgotten about if there's no substance. Now you said you're born in what? 78, 79? 78 October 18, 78. That's like right when the revolution was happening in Iran, right? Yes. So what's your story with that? What's the story like your family and how you guys came to the United States? You're not painting right there. All the way into the back. Yep. You know who's in the middle? She's looking at that Hulk that thinks huge. Yeah. Who is that? Is that the guy who died? I forget his name. Yeah, that's guys. That's a shabby run. The shot. Okay. Shabby Ron who was a pre revolution. He was the king of Iran, right? So he was he was running Iran. So I was born three months later. He was in exile. They kicked them out because the renewal for oil was coming up with Iran with four Western countries. We're talking France, UK, US. I think it's Germany. It's those four that are together. And if he falls, they're not going to be able to have him strong arm them to negotiate their oil. Because I think it was like a 25 year contract he signed with them and he was about to ask for a lot more money. And they didn't want that. So the coup helped Jimmy Carter and all the other guys that were negotiating with them to have leverage because now our Iran was in shambles and a new regime would have given him decent prices because they'd be desperate because of all the problems they're facing. I don't know if you've ever read the book, economic hit man. It's a business model that's been going on for a long time. And economic hit man, I think so five million copies, it talks about that business model back in the days where they would come there would sit with you that would say, hey, you know, we're going to give you this much money or kids are going to go to Harvard. They're going to do this. They're going to do that America's going to give you protection. But in return, we want you to sell us behind closed doors the resources of your country. Your populace is not going to know about it. And if you don't tell us, we're going to you're going to fall anyways. Are we going to kill you? So that worked, but a lot of different countries, but it didn't work with him because he was too stubborn. But they ended up doing it anyway. So yeah, I was born out of weird time and I lived in Iran for 10 years. Wow. He'll, uh, he'd, uh, Romania died. I think June 2nd or June 3rd of 89. I don't know the exact date. But I think how many that June 2nd or June 3rd of 89. And then we left Iran to Germany on July 15th, uh, June 30 that. Okay. So we went to, uh, Germany on July 15th. I lived at a refugee camp in Germany for less than two years. And then came to the States here on November 28, 1990. And so, yeah, I was, I was 12 years old when I came here. Very, very weird times from Iran to Germany to US. Do you still have any family back there? If you're a guy. I do, but it's more cousins. My, uh, all three of my uncles that were there died. They're all a bit. So I don't have any uncles or on. So when we have, uh, first one first cousin and a few second cousins and that's it. Do you ever, do you ever visit there anymore or no? I cannot because, oh, you cannot. Okay. Why can't you visit? Um, political reasons. I cannot. I cannot visit Iran. Interesting. Well, cool. Man, I appreciate you doing this. Uh, it was, it was great to meet you. I gotta tell you, you're a very good interviewer. Okay. Thank you. You're a very good interviewer. And I hope you doubled down on the amount of people you're interviewing because you, you could, you could really go places with the way you're interviewing people. Do you mean, do you think I should do more of them? I think you, you know how to do this. Well, I think you, you got to really know you, I don't know who's told you or get out interview. Has anybody done? Nobody, nobody's ever told me that you're the first. You're an incredible interviewer. Thank you. You're an incredible interview. I don't know if you studied it. I don't know if you watched other people that don't know if you grew up watching Letterman or Leno or Stassel or Wallace or I don't know who you, if you did any of that stuff, but you, you actually are a very good interviewer and you should keep doing this. Thank you, man. That's a huge compliment. That's a rare compliment. And I appreciate that greatly. Yeah. I don't think I, I think I've said that maybe to two people that have interviewed me you're the second person. Really? If you go watch other people interview me, you probably will never hear me say what I just said to you right now. How many, how many interviews do you do? Like, what is your schedule like with creating content? Well, I don't do that many. I tell my staff and my board that I'm willing to do two interviews a week like interviews like this per week, but me interviewing people some weeks, like this week is a five week. I'm doing five interviews this week. And I'm running. And the reason why I'm doing five interviews this week is because I'm about to go through a very busy season of my company. And if I don't do five interviews this week, I'm going to be very busy in November. November, December is very busy for us. But whatever reason, it's our industry. We're very busy in November, December. Some businesses, they're not, some businesses are for us. It's very busy. And so I'm doing five to give me weeks back to me that makes any sense. So I don't have to kind of put to a week and you know what I'm talking about. So kind of give myself some time back. But I generally will do one or two a week. I like to do two, but I'll generally do one or two weeks. This week alone, it's five. Yeah, I'm interviewing Newt Gingrich. I don't know who I got. I'm interviewing a few political people because we are at the seasonal politics. Yeah. I'm conducting the interviews this week. Very cool, man. That's a lot. So you keep at it. Your, your, you got kids, or you buy yourself? I actually have a one-year-old. Are you married? I am married. Yeah. Okay. Is it, is the baby keeping you busy? The baby's keeping me very busy. Luckily, my wife is able to stay at home and raise him. So, so that's her job. And so that, that frees me up a lot. But I try to spend, I spend a lot of time, I'm there every, every day at 7 p.m. for dinner and bath time. And it's definitely a, it was a life changing event as far as how I schedule my life and how I have to structure everything around my life, basically around that. It's good for you. It's, it's been a learning curve. And I'm, you're used to it. You have three kids, right? Yeah. You know, I had my first at 33 as well. So it's funny. My, my, oh, really? Yeah. So you're, when you had it at 32, so 33 is one, so seven, no. So I had my first at 33. So you're, you're ahead of me on kids. But, you know, if you got one and your wife stays on with the kids, you, you got time to really double down here. So do you have anybody that represents you and sets down and kind of maps out what you're thinking, what you're long from planning on or not at all? My long term planning as far as what are you trying to do with this concrete here? What's your outcome? My outcome is just to keep, I don't really have like a long term plan with it. I'm kind of doing it as I, as it comes to me really, I'm not, I don't have like a five year or a 10 year goal for it. Got it. But you got a very big upside with this alone. I'd say, I would say my goal, if I did have a goal, it would be to transition my everything from my advertising business as far as building advertising and generating campaigns for other brands putting all that time and energy into this would be my goal and have this be able to sustain everything and not have to do that. I know this is a weird plug. I mean, I totally forgot this is a book interview we're doing. This is a great book for you because for you, it's knowing your next five moves because you got a big upside. You don't, you don't even have to put this up in your podcast. But you got a very big upside. I think, I think you ought to, you ought to kind of a think about what you want because you got a little bit of Howard Stern in you. You got a little bit of the weird side of him. You got a little bit of a letterman in you. So you got a big upside. That's cool, man. I'll definitely check that out. I really appreciate that. Really enjoyed it, man. This has been a blast. It was great meeting you, man. And I hope you can keep in touch. Thank you, everybody.