So you're saying that an international health organization could just end the first amendment in the United States. Yes, and in fact, as much as this sounds, I know that it sounds per cost, but it does not sound per cost. The ability to do it is currently under discussion at the international level. And it's almost impossible to exaggerate how troubling what is being discussed is. In fact, I think it is fair to say that we are in the middle of a coup, that we are actually facing the elimination of our national and our personal sovereignty. And that that is the purpose of what is being constructed, that it has been written in such a way that your eyes are supposed to glaze over as you attempt to sort out what is under discussion. And if you do that, then come may of this year, your nation is almost certain to sign on to an agreement that in some utterly vaguely described future circumstance. A public health emergency, which the director general of the World Health Organization, has total liberty to define it in any way that he sees fit. In other words, nothing prevents climate change from being declared a public health emergency that would trigger the provisions of these modifications. And in the case that some emergency, where some pretense of an emergency shows up, the provisions that would kick in are beyond John Drop. So, before you get into it, and I just want to thank you, by the way, for taking the time to go through this proposal because you're absolutely right. It's impenetrable, it's designed to be, to cloak what they're saying rather than eliminate. What's it called? Well, the funny thing is actually I was looking this morning to find out what the current name is and the names have actually been shifted slightly, clearly a feature. It's a shape shifting. Yeah, it is. So, what I would do in order, and it's unclear to me how much that's just simply designed to confuse somebody who tries to sort it out and how much that's designed to, for example, gain the search engine technology that might allow you to crack the changes because to the extent that the name has shifted. So, smart. I call it the World Health Organization Pandemic Preparedness Lamb, right? And what is under discussion are some modifications to the global public health regulations and modifications to an existing treaty. But all of this makes it sound minor and procedural. What has been proposed are, again, the number of things included here is incredible. It's hard even for those of us who have been focused on this track, all of the important things under discussion, and to deduce the meaning of some of the more subtle provisions. But the World Health Organization and its signatory nations will be allowed to define a public health emergency, any basis, that having declared one, they will be entitled to mandate remedies, the remedies that are named include vaccines, the gene therapy technology is literally named in the set of things that the World Health Organization is going to reserve the right to mandate, that it will be in a position to require these things of citizens, to be in a position to dictate our ability to travel, in other words, passports that would be predicated on one having accepted. These technologies are clearly being described. It would have the ability to forbid the use of other medications. This looks like they're preparing for a rerun where they can just simply take iWormect and hydroxychloroquine off the table. They also have reserved the ability to dictate how these measures are discussed. The censorship is described here as well, the right to dictate that of course misinformation is how they're going to describe it. Well, in fact, I want to ask you pause and play a sound about Tedros in which he alluded to this and I want to get your assessment of the heroes. We continue to see misinformation on social media and in mainstream media about the pandemic accord that countries are now negotiating. The claim that the accord will seed power to WHO is quite simply false its values. Countries will decide what the accord says and countries alone and countries will implement the accord in line with their own national laws. The country will seed any sort of dignity to WHO. If any politician, business person or anyone at all is confused about what the pandemic accord is and isn't, we would be more than happy to discuss it and explain it. I think it's more than happy to discuss and explain this information that you're. That is no spreading. That is comforting. Well, on the one hand, I must have had not seen that and it is tremendously good news actually. What it means is that once again we have managed to raise awareness of something in time that there is conceivably a better outcome still available to us. There is nothing to say more accurately. Those were clearly lies and of course, saying that into a camera is supposed to convince you nobody could possibly lie so directly. There must be some truth in what he's saying, which is of course nonsense. Anybody who goes back to an awful as a compendium of various things that people have said into cameras over the course of COVID that they then swear they didn't say once later knows that these folks are very comfortable at saying totally false things into a camera that doesn't cause them to think twice or sweat or anything. But it's great that we have managed to raise enough awareness that Ted Gross is actually addressing our spreading of what it actually is, is mal information. You're aware of this, this extension. Yeah. Oh, it's a beautiful. So I was, I was, I'm so old that I was still stuck in the truth or falsehood binary. Yeah. What mattered was whether it was true or not? No. No, the mal information is actually exactly what you need to know about to see how antiquated that notion is because this is actually the Department of Homeland Security actually issued a memo in which it defined three kinds of like it do not terrorism. Missed dis and mal information, misinformation are errors, disinformation are intentional errors lies and mal information are things that are based in truth but cause you to distrust authority. So mal information is what you commit when you catch them lying. Yes. Exactly. Yeah. It is discussing the lies of your, your government is mal information and therefore kind of terrorism, which I should point out as funny as that is. And as obviously Orwellian is that is it's also terrifying because if you have cracked the history of the spreading tyranny from the beginning of the war on terror, you know that terrorism is not a normal English word the way it once was. terrorism is now a legal designation that causes all of your rights to evaporate. So at the point of the Department of Homeland Security says that you are a guilty of a kind of terrorism for saying truth things that cause you to distrust your government, they are also telling you something about what rights they have to silence you. They are not normal rights. So these things are all terrifying and I do think as much as my jaws open. The the COVID pandemic caused us to become aware of a lot of structures that had been built around us something that former NSA officer William Binney once described as the turn key totalitarian state. The world health organization is above the level of nations and it is going to be in a position if these provisions pass to dictate to nations how they are to treat their own citizens to override their constitutions despite what Tedress is told to be. So that is frightening. It's not inherently about health. What I think has happened is the fact of a possible pandemic causes a loophole in the mind. It's not a loophole in our governance documents. Our Constitution doesn't describe exemptions from your rights during time of a pandemic emergency. You're right simply are what they are and they're not supposed to go anywhere just because there's a disease spreading. But nonetheless, people's willingness to accept the erosion of their rights because of a public health emergency has allowed this tyranny to use it as a Trojan horse. And I think that's also it's something people need to become aware of that there are a number of features of our environment that are basically they are blind spots that we can't see past. Vaccine was one and I know I wasn't an enthusiast about vaccines. I still believe deeply in the elegance of vaccines as they should exist. But I'm now very alarmed at how they are produced and I'm even more alarmed at what has been hall of vaccine that doesn't meet the definition. Right that because many of us believe that vaccines were an extremely elegant low harm high efficacy method of preventing disease when they called the seminar in a technology of vaccine many of us gave it more credibility than we should have if they had called it a gene transfection technology we would have thought wait what public health functions the same way. Public health step back a second your relationship with your doctor your personal health ought to be very important to you. But there are ways in which things that happen at a population level affect your personal health and your doctor's not in position to do anything about right. So somebody dumping pollution into a stream from which you're pulling fish you know you might detect the harm at the population level you might need a regulation at a population level in order to protect you your doctor's not in position. When you have pill to correct it so the idea that public health is actually a place to improve all of our well being is real. But once you decide that there's something above doctors relative to your health then that can be an excuse for all manner of tyranny. Public health has been adopted it's like it's like the sheep's clothing that has allowed the wolf to go after our rights because in theory it's trying to protect us from harms that we have. And it generates such fear it's such a huge scale that it it weakens people's moral immune systems. Absolutely and as you know and as as I know when we raised questions about what was being being delivered to us under the guise of public health. We were demonized as if we had a moral defect it wasn't even a cognitive defect where we were failing to understand the wisdom of these vaccines it was a moral defect where we were failing to protect others who were vulnerable by questioning these things. And so the idea that health is at stake in some vague larger sense that requires us to to override the natural relationship between doctors and patients is itself a coup against medicine by something else. We are living some crazy story in which things that are perfectly obvious are still somehow have not lodged themselves in the official public record. And you know I think that has a lot to do with frankly the death of journalism. Yes a lot of us are doing jobs that we didn't train for Heather and I are doing some journalistic job that we certainly didn't train for we trained to think about biology and you know we do that in front of a camera and so that functions as a kind of. Stand in for journalism but the handful of journalists who still exist. I think without exception are not scientifically trained. You know Matt I begrenkren wild you don't have very many people doing investigative journalism and the ones who are doing it they don't have the skill set that would make this a natural topic to investigate so. We have to boot up some kind of new institution that will allow us to do this job well and presumably that will involve taking a few investigative journalists who remember how to do that job and the few scientists and doctors who are willing to still do their job and you know put us together right podcast isn't the right place to do it. If that's all we got that's all we got but there's got to be a better a better method. So if this is ratified or signed on to by the United States in May six months from now. That sounds like that's it. We don't know. I will say I have very little hope that the US will derail this I have the sense that whatever has captured our government is driving this as well and so in effect. The US wants this change it will in fact you know in the same way that the five eyes nations. I agree to mutually violate the rights of each other citizens because that was not prevented in any of our constitutions. I think the US wants something to force it to violate our constitutional protections and the World Health Organization is going to be that entity that said I have recently been to the Czech Republic and I've been to Romania and I've. heard from other parts of the former Eastern block that there is resistance that people who have faced tyranny in living memory are much less ready to accept these changes and that they are actually beginning to to mount a response. I'm worried that it will be to thin and easily defeated especially if they do not understand that actually the world is depending on them that the traditionally the countries we traditionally think of as part of the West are. I think that the countries that we've been to the West are the best hope we've got that they are in a position to derail this set of provisions and that we are depending on them to do it. I just want to end for a few moments on your on the overview here so you have all these remarkable things converging in a single 12 month period war pestilence political unrest apparently unsolvable political unrest. And you think we're looking at in the West like what is this moment and how does it end well so I have long been interested in questions of good governance and the West and. I'm sad to report that I think the West has actually collapsed and what we are left with is now. And nebulous echo the values of the West still function but they function in a vague way and we have seen that they can evaporate quickly under the right circumstances. I suspect and I really don't know I don't think anybody knows but I suspect that some powerful set of forces has decided that consent of the governed is too dangerous to tolerate and that it has begun to unhook it and we do not know how this works. We can see some of the partners who are involved in this but I don't think we know ultimately who's driving it or where they're going I think many of the notions that we picked up about. nations and who our friends are and who our enemies are are they're now more misleading than they are informative in other words I don't think. the US has an enemy called China I think there are elements within the US that are partnered within with elements within the Chinese Communist Party for practical reasons and so our you know the. the notion that these two parties are competing with each other just distracts us from what's actually taking place but. Let's just put it this way we have a large global population most people have. No useful role through no fault of their own they have not been given a an opportunity in life to find a useful way to contribute and I wonder if. the rent seeking elites that have ordered so much power are not unhooking our rights because effectively they're afraid of some. global French revolution moment as people realize that they've been betrayed and left without good options is that what we're seeing certainly feels like we're facing. an end game where important properties that would once have been preserved by all parties because they might need them one day are now being dispensed with and we're being. you know we're watching our governmental structures in every one of our institutions captured hollowed out turned into a paradoxical inversion of what it was designed to do. that's not an accident whether they you know the thing that worries me most actually. is that whatever is driving this is not composed of diabolical geniuses who at least have some plan for the future but it's being driven by people who actually. do not know what kind of hell they are inviting. yes they're going to create a kind of chaos from which humanity may well not emerge and I get the sense that. unless they have some remarkable plan that is not obvious that they are just simply drunk with power and putting everyone including themselves in tremendous jeopardy by taking apart the structures on which we depend. how do you see my last question how do you see your I mean your you're speaking in in grand terms that three years ago I might have laughed at and not laughing at all and I think you're absolutely right. but you're also choosing as you know a 50ish man your old man to say the stuff out loud and to pursue the truth as you find it and then to talk about it like so how do you why did you decide to do that and how do you think that ends. well you know we are all the products of whatever developmental environment produced us and as I've said on multiple topics where. my family has found itself in very uncomfortable and sometimes dangerous circumstances. because we speak out I don't think I had a choice I just I literally cannot understand how I would sleep at night how I would look at myself in the mirror. if I didn't say what needed to be said and you know I heard of a very good speech by Bobby Kennedy Jr. though neither of us are libertarian he was at the liberty conference in in Memphis and the last thing he said in that speech struck me to my core something I've thought often and said almost never. but there are feets far worse than death and I think for my part I have I have lived an incredible wife. I have I there's plenty I still want to do and I am not eager to leave this planet in the earlier than I have to I have a marvelous family I live a wonderful place and I've got lots of things. I have a bucket list I got lots of things on my bucket list however humanity is depending on. everybody who has a position from which to see what is taking place to grapple with what it might mean. to describe it so that the public understands where their interests are it is depending on us to do what needs to be done if we're to have a chance of delivering. a planet to our children and our grandchildren that is worthy of them if we're going to deliver a system that allows them to live. meaningful healthy lines we have to speak up and I don't know. I don't know how to get people to do that I I'm very hesitant to urge others to put themselves or their families in danger and I know that everybody circumstances are different some people are struggling. simply to feed a family keep a roof over their heads those people obviously have a great deal less liberty with respect to standing up and saying what needs to be said but this is really. it's what we call in game theory a collective action problem. if everybody responds to their personal well being if everybody says that's too dangerous to stand up. you know I'm not suicidal I'm I can't do it then not enough people stand up to change the course of history. whereas if people somehow put aside the obvious danger to their ability to earn and maybe to their lives of saying what needs to be said then. we. rately out number those we are pitted against they are ferociously powerful but. I would also point out this interesting. error so I call the force that we're up against Goliath just so I'm. remember what the battle is Goliath made a terrible mistake and it made it most egregiously during covid which is it took. all of the competent people took all of the courageous people and it. shoved them out of the institutions where they were hanging on and it created in so doing the dream team created every player you could possibly want on your team to fight some historic battle against a terrible evil. all of those people are now at least somewhat awake they've now been picked on by the same enemy and yeah alright we're outgunned it has a tremendous amount of power but but we've got all of the people who know how to think so. I hate to say it or maybe I like to say it but I don't think it's a slam dunk but I like our odds. I don't hear people say this news is full of lies and kind of these motor. I'm 39. I'm the death of Jeffrey Epstein.