Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast my night. All day. Cool. My back. Yeah, let's go. We're back in action. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We were just talking today. So we'll get off. Until Rolo, say this for the air. Because Rolo years ago shit, this had to be like, at least 10 years. 20. 20 years ago? 20 years ago. 20 years ago. 20 years ago, Rolo. Paul Pizzas Tommy Lee wants me. He wants to talk to you about something. I'm like, you're okay. Sure. So we go to see his concert. That was when he was a rock and roll super nova. Yeah, that TV show. That's right. Yeah, the TV show was a long beach. Right. Right. It was good. You and Eddie came. Me and Eddie Bravo came. And then afterwards, first of all, Tommy Lee has the dopest green room. Like he sets his green room up like a fucking after I was party. He's got like tapestries on the wall and candles and lights. Yeah, you're walking like jam. Like this is just a weird beer. Yeah, it doesn't just walk into a cold green room. Like, I'm like, wait. If I go on the road, I just, what's your green room? I'll go hang out in there. It's like it doesn't just walk, but he has it set up. Like everywhere is like calm and relaxing. It's spiritual. And so I meet Tommy and Tommy wants a fight kid rock in the UFC. Yeah. This is true. It's the same people they can do this. It's what PM Anderson's hot. Yeah. This is how it started. This is kind of how it started. That was that way with PM. Yeah. Like, you know, they both were married to her. So Tommy and her always going to be connected because of the kids. So she had split up with kid rock and kid rock was emailing her text and her I guess, you know, still trying to get with her. Tommy is with her. Not together, but you know, they were together that day. And he's she asks him, you know, your friends would him. Can you call him and tell him to stop calling me and shit? And Tommy's like, I don't want to get in the middle. Oh, shit. And she's like, you know, if you know, please, so he winds up hitting, you know, him up and like, look, dude, you know, I don't really want to make this call. blah, blah, blah. Of course, kid rock took the heat. Fuck you, you know, blah, blah. So they're fucking each other back and forth goes away. Now there was some MTV awards thing. Okay. And actually, let me back up first. We were in Vegas for a New Year's thing. And there was this rumor that kid rock was supposed to come with his bodyguard and like, and come the Tommy's room and attack. Oh, so me, my man, chemo, who you know as well. Um, you know, we're sleeping in Tommy's room hoping they show up. And, uh, of course, they go to a different room. They do go to a room, kick a door in nothing totally. Or actually went looking for it. And I don't think they went looking for it. I think it was a big publicity. Yeah, the water. Some autographs and they keep it moving. So I'm saying the Tommy, I go, yo, dude, I go, fuck him. I go, you should fight him on paper view. Imagine how the money that I go. I'll fight his fucking security guy like, well, fuck, and make a whole thing of it. And he goes, man, that's brilliant. Oh, my God. So I go, uh, I go, you know, I'm telling you, I said, you should do, you, I said, look, either you fight him and you beat him up or he punks out and you win it either way. And he's like, he's like, yeah, I like this. So he talks to his management. Of course, it just goes by the wayside. Well, they're having some MTV awards shit. Security's not allowed on the floor there. They had their own like, you know, it was in his casino. They have security for it. While he's sitting in there with Pam, Kid Rock, like, comes up kind of behind him and pokes him in Tommy's season. And he goes to stand up and Kid Rock suckers him there. Yeah. Yeah. What? And I'm home. My phone is getting blown to fuck up. Like, what happened with Tommy? What happened with Tommy? I'm like, I'm fucking no. Like, I'm not with him right now. And, uh, I get a call. I swear it like 30 minutes later and it's Tommy. And he's going, fuck him. He goes, I'm done with that motherfucker. I want to fight him. I want to fucking fight him now. I get used. I want you to train me. I go, he goes, I want to move you out. I go, no. You're moving to me. I go, we're not going to be out here with all your little fucking ass kissers. I said, if you're going to do what you're really going to do. Is he working out at all at the time? No. So, you know, if you only working out, he does is on the drums, which he does murder. So, um, that is a little bit of armpit. Yeah, you definitely, that's like a little bunch of stuff. Yeah, definitely. Yeah, and I can show you a picture of him with a choke on me. And it's legit. Like he did train with Hori and then he told you guys he trained some with Billy blank. So I was just, yeah, really, I talked about this on the podcast. He's a real right. I'm trying to work with that. He was a one of those like Raymond Daniels type, corollary point fighting. Yeah. Okay. He's a time early days. He's a typo guy. But we get to that. All right. Yes. I bring him to Billy blank. I bring him in and, and I told him. I said, look, when we're going to Long Beach, I said, I know Rogan, I can have him come in and you can tell him your idea. And he goes, all right. All right. So I bring Joe in that. He made me, you know, he tells Joe he wants to fight him. Literally. And Tommy said his sanctuary was his management company at the time. I don't know if he still is or not. So they call kid rocks people supposedly and offer this fucking fight on paper view and kid rocks people wound up calling back and basically turn it down saying whoever loses his ruined for, you know, for life, I guess, because looking like a bitch because they both had the rock and roll. I, you know, image thing. So, uh, so that's, you say that in print, that's literally how it, how it stopped. Was that in print? Was that whoever loses this is ruined or was that? No, no, no, that was, that was, that was, that was supposedly the response from kid rocks management to Tommy's management. That is correct. He would be correct. You know, it's a good fight. Like a stuff in butter and forest. Oh my God. Well, that would be different. Then they both be revolution. I don't want to forget who won that fight. Steffin, barter, forest, yeah. Right. First one, I know for one. But I kind of forget because the fight was so good. It was, that was one of the really toss up fights of all time. Yeah. Who fucking knows what they did to the right thing? You contracted both of them. I mean, we actually talked about it in the octon right before he did it. Well, did you really? Yeah. But you should get both these motherfuckers. A bonus. Yeah. It's like we're going to do that. Yeah. Like fuck yeah. It was amazing. I think if it wasn't for the ultimate fighter, it would have died out. Who knows, man, but it was like lightning in a bottle because there was another good fight before that Diego Sanchez. Fuck Kenny Florian up, man. It was the worst beating. But that was Diego Sanchez coming up. Like people got to see Diego fight too many fights. They got to see the later fights. They forgot what a monster Diego was in his prime. And if you're an animal question is grappling. I mean, Marcelo got him. But you know, he was a homewift wanted a best of all time. Just an SEC. Yeah. He was a fucking I don't know. I'm going to listen. Man, you're going to get hits on me times. Agreed. And he was halfway gone before take away. He was always like just open very. He's a true thinker. I remember we had that guy that was training them that you had a little bit of. Yeah. That's a dream of wish. What about that loser? Joshua Fabia. Yeah, it won't be much in his name. Yeah. I can't find out here. The men did. Well, yeah, Diego hanging upside down. You like, I'm going to say yes. Yeah, what videos is saying? The video's insane. But Diego was like super, super open minded. Like he was willing to believe in magic. He was willing. You know what I'm saying? Like he believed in himself so much that Diego was like, and he was also like doing weird stuff. Like he would chew me and spit it out. He would just chew it down, like get all the juices from it. And then spit whatever's left out. He wouldn't swallow the meat. But he was fun to watch. He was a fucking animal. Yes, he was a fucking animal. Yes, he was a fucking animal. Steve Maxwell trained him for the fight with BJ Penn and got him in insane shape. But unfortunately, that was the fight where BJ started. That was when BJ was training with the Marinivicious. He was leaping out of pools. BJ was on the top. Yeah, yeah. There was a time where I would say watch BJ was prime. I'll put that dude up against anybody. BJ is prime. No, I always say he's the best for 55 of all time. He was like in that window, right? In that window? We didn't be mad. He was prime. Yeah, he was a human being. Yeah. But you did a lot better with him than I did. Why would I bring that out? I'm dead. I bet you had a more championship caliber. You did too. You know what I mean? And it got like him relies on you to do a lot. You know, but BJ was just, I was just too fight. The Kenny four, not I'm sorry, Sean shirt flight. The Sean shirt fight was prime BJ. Yeah. Yeah. And then what about what about Joe. That's another one too. Yeah. But Diego was like more than a highly ranked. Remember. Yeah. Rec out. Well, I mean, what is a beast? Matt, look what he did. The man he was. He was like, yeah, it was a beast. Matt, he was just like, you're coming up to my way class. Yeah, that type of thing. It was very useful. He was doing fight people at two. I fought Leo to Machida 200 pounds. That's crazy. Yeah. He was a good guy. That fucking animal and did real good. Yeah. Scary on the feet. Yeah. A natural 55 or who fought as low as 45. Remember, he went down the 45. Yeah. Yeah. But BJ was a monster. He was well rounded too before guys were super well rounded. Like he threw hands well. If he just cast a will to go through those more in of its camps, every fight, he would have been unstoppable. Yeah. BJ would, you know, he would just lose his focus a little bit. I watched a YouTube documentary about like the rise and trajectory and then the later years. It was really well done. But it was all just talking about how there's just prime BJ and that's when he was training with the marinavages and incredible conditioning and he could just go fight and not worry about his conditioning. Do you think he wasn't laziness, right? What do you think it was? A lot of friends, a lot of cars. Yeah, yeah. King and I see the fact that he was the king of a white. Yeah. He was the king everywhere he would go. People like it's beige. I mean, it was a king and Vegas, man. In those prime years when he was the champ, he was a huge star. But I'm sure he's a huge star in Hilo. Probably hanging out with the boys all the time. How did a good time? Plus his family like had influence there. Right? It had like money and money. It didn't come from poverty. But it's just like, it just was real hard to maintain those kind of camps. Those camps are insane. He was also super, super talented. So it's like he didn't have to work as hard to still beat up people. Like in practice. He definitely came easy. His flexibility and like that's true. Oh my goodness. I remember when I fought him and we were doing a rules meeting. This is the time where like we could ask questions. Like they did everybody in the rules meeting. And I'm in the rules meeting and Frank Shamrock was in his corner. And Frank's like, are we allowed in guard, kick him in the head? And I'm like, what the hell? Like he was talking about his flexibility just wrapping around. the back of my head and kicking me in the head from there. And I was like, what the hell is this guy insane? Right. How the hell is he going to be able to kick me in the head from there? But apparently BJ had that flexibility to be able to do that. But his feet on his head. He could do double lotus without using his hands. So it's crazy. Like sit back and just fucking completely crop up lotus. Yeah. Like interlocked with no hands. That's insane. Not his flexibility is bananas. And he worked on it. It wasn't just like a natural gip. But how smart was he to figure out if you could use your legs like you could use your arms? There's so much fucking stronger. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's nuts, man. What are you saying? He put his own fucking leg by his head with no hands. That's crazy flexing. Building. Man. I'd say he was going to kick you while you were north south. Yeah. I'm like, is that a- Is he going to do that? That is nuts. But is that legal? No. There's a lot of goofy rules, right? Like that's- I don't think it would be cool to stop people in the head and soccer kick them. But yeah. At least knees to the head. Yeah. Did I have the opal here with that? Because if you're shooting on a single and you're holding on to it and your head's right there, that's a stupid place to be in real life. Yeah. Right? Right. Which is real life. A real fight. Why wouldn't the guy need you in the head? You're grabbing his knee. You're all hand right here. All he has to do is knee you in the face. He can't do it. Yes. Because you're on your knees. And let's be fair, like a knee when somebody's on the feet is worse than that. Yes. You know what I'm saying? That's not as bad. Yeah. That's not as bad. If you're on the phone, I need you in the head. That's still not as bad as if me just knee and you right in the face. Yes. Especially if you're called the Michael venom page fight. The one that's on the right is all. Oh, yeah. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Oh, yeah. The most amount of power you can generate is gotta be a knee. A flying knee. Why guys coming here? What are you guys like shooting in on here? It's the only thing I'm not a fan of is the jab, fuck the kick to the knee. I grew to a big fan of that. A big kick like a guy. You know, it's something that happens if you hit it right when you're a little did it. Td. Yeah. But this is, yeah, Modesto's. My opinion there is it's just something that if you hit it right, it's an injury's coming in and not a good one. You can't tap. It's not like a knee bar or something. So I kind of think if you can't kick a guy in the side of the knee for that reason, why should you be able to, if you kick in the knee, you should be able to kick in the nuts. I need a way. What are we doing here? What are we doing here? We're pretending like where cop and I can kick you in the nuts. There's some good cups out there. Oh, let's get a steal one. It's crazy. Like why do we have some weird rules like that? Yeah, it's crazy because like every time somebody gets kicked in nuts, you say it. You always say it. Why don't you get a steal cup? Yeah. The fact that no one has a steal cup to me after all this time. I believe it. And it's ultimate. And it's code in in in in in grappling to it. It was somebody. I got you back. I'm laying on. Yeah. Remember a mere rim of rent of already. Yeah. Yeah. That's a long time ago. I trained with him at a legends and he mounted me and he put his cup in my solar solar pluck assist. Like I was ready to tap from his dick. Yeah. All right. Imagine imagine my two 65. You know, I always work when I train you know. And that's a lever for an arm. Oh man. You're already there. I'm going to slide your elbow past that. You know, it's a weird fucking look when the guys wear the whole spandex and they have that steal cup. So they got like a. Dakin it. The shirney card. Yeah. That's a little remarrow. You remember that shirney card or coffee. Eddie fucking talked about it for the entire fight. It was a king of cage fight and shirney was fighting and he had a giant couple. And that's where Eddie just compensated about the size of the company was hilarious. Right. And they type one day. They had ones you put on over your pants. So you put you to have your key pants on and then you put these ones on over it and it had like this big strap and go right up to your tank. Like right literally to your asshole. And then go all the way up like this and strap it in. But it was way better. It was way better because he has a little wax and cup. No it was a type. It was just for tug one though. It was just literally designed to wear it outside. So you kick it out. And that's my realize like oh you can never wear regular cups. Like regular cups move too much. It's just sitting there and sometimes your nut gets caught between the cup and your leg when you get hit there. That's way worse. And I think maybe the UFC should make that mandatory. 100% like why would you get to wear a mouthpiece? Why would you wear compression shorts? Yeah. For sure. Where those like the diamond MMA ones? That's a cup I have. I like that. Yeah. And if you don't want to wear steel, that's fine. Right. You don't want to have dental floss up your asshole. Right. It's uncomfortable but that's I would think if I was advising someone I'd say get a fucking steel cup before they outlaw it. Because they should have a long time ago. You should have to wear that though. I mean it would eliminate all the nut shots. If you're smart you would wear a steel cup 100%. When he kicks you in the nuts it hurt them. If it hurts you. It protects you from everything. It's uncomfortable. That's all it is. It's just uncomfortable. So I mean so it's fighting. Yeah. So it's fighting. So it's getting kicked in the nuts. Yeah. Dude I can't believe it's legal. I really like it's like one of the how do you have steel in there? Who's that? You see that? I'll punch it. You do. Do you see word every fight you had? Yeah. Dude, you imagine a guy diving on a double and you hip into it. Oh man. You're slamming his face with your dick. Your dick is a really madder. Your dick's covered in metal. And that's legal. Yeah. You have to patch on your knuckles. Yeah. You're depassionate knuckles. You got an armor plate over your cock. How would I would definitely wear that if I was fighting? Yeah. I'm selling them. Yeah. I'm just not selling them on my website. Because it's like there's no way that should be legal. Yeah. Like how is that legal? I don't know. I just fucking maddle your brick and metal into the equation. A foot can hit metal and knee can do that and no one does it? It's not. Well if you guys do it, we were talking about different guys who've done it that are currently doing it. And I know DC did it but there's a few guys who still do it. We were talking about it on one of the broadcast. I don't remember which guy he was pointing out. There's a few guys. Kenny Florian always wore a steal cup. But the fact did not ever go down from Delacrat and yeah for sure. They're not even sure where they were. Yeah. Dang. Yeah. You're a Delacrat. I start talking Ty. No. I never think it's fluent Ty. Does he really? He's got the ease of a guinea from Boston. When he talks, he can talk to Ty people. It freaks them out. Really? Oh yeah man. He spent a lot of time in Thailand. Some bad sports take center stage this Saturday with the new draft Kings predictions app now available in California, Florida, Texas and more. You can make real money predictions on Saturday's biggest fights. There's always something to predict. Pick a topic. Make a prediction. Well, the main event. Go the distance. Will there be a knockout which fighter will win? Lock in your prediction before the fight or jump in live as the action unfolds. In momentum shifts, you can stay with your position or adjust based on what you're seeing in real time. Download the Draft Kings predictions app today with code, Rogan new predictions, customers trade $5 and get 50 in predictions dollars with promo code Rogan. Don't just feel it predicted with Draft Kings predictions. The crown is yours. Draft Kings predictions is a CFTC registered introducing broker. The event contract trading involves substantial risk of loss. One per new customer often required non with drawable predictions dollars expire in one year. In April 26, 2026, market availability varies eligibility restrictions apply. See terms at dkng.co slash predictions promo. Well, he's my man. I go to Boston to stay with him. Yeah, his wife always cooks for me. What a great true brother. He's a maniac. I love that too. The ultimate fighter for we didn't have assigned coaches and he would just work with us like anytime we needed him. Yeah. And he would want to tackle him in fucking mouth domain. You know what I mean? Yeah, he was awesome as well. Yeah, he's great Mark. He's a really good coach too. You know, who was really impressive working with him was Kevin James. You know, Kevin James, you know, you think of him as the King of Queens. He worked with Mark a lot and Kevin's been my friend for years. But I really hadn't seen him hit paths. I saw him hit paths with Delagrati. I was like, what the fuck dude? I'm like, that's good. Like this looks good. No, he's like, Mark, might you look good. He's a good coach man. He's a really solid coach. He gave long old black eye. And he's fought one time with long ago, Kevin James. Did he run? He was walking around like fucking peaty from the little razz. He's a deceptively fast dude. Yeah, he's athletic. You know, pretty big dude. When I first met him, he was jacked. Like he was his big as he got at one point in time. But he's always kind of seesawed back and forth. But he was a karate guy. He was always doing karate when he was young. Are you super athletic? There he is. It doesn't look as good there. Yeah, it looks like he's a good guy. Maybe. That's what he was just getting into it, honestly. But he had he had Delagrati staying with him a while and Delagrati was training him. Yeah, I saw him in kill cliff. Just like blending in with the guys. Like he wasn't like standing out. He was just it kill cliff. Just training and yeah, blending in with the guys. Yeah, he's a great guy. I've known him forever. I just seen him in either Becky or the raft of Becky. Oh yeah. That's right. That's right. He plays a psycho. And the girl in it is great. It's like a little psycho girl. That's a fun movie. It's fun. Yeah, I think it's the first one called Becky. And he plays a villain. He plays the other guy that did it was Joel McCale. Oh, very good. Joel McCale played the second psycho and one of the other movies. I forget what was out of the first or the second one. I think he's in the second one. The raft of Becky. Kevin was awesome. He's a good movie. Kevin played a good psycho. Hey, did you ever see the night of the Seven Kingdoms? No, I haven't seen that yet. I'm going to watch it though because I'm in the middle of finishing the first season of game, the first year, the first all-game of Thrones. Oh, yeah. Well, you're doing it over? Yeah, yeah. Oh, you've seen it already. But I haven't seen it since like 2015 or 11. I'm wearing some money. It's fucking amazing. I forgot to say something. It's fucking awesome. This, you don't even have to watch any of the game of Thrones, because this takes place 90 years before the first events of the game. Sir Duncan, the tall. And it is so good, so well done. And it's based on the novel. I'm a f***ing nerd. I read the graphic novel of it by George or Martin. And I read it back in the day. And it was, it's so great. And you know how to have like trial by combat. Yeah. And this one ought to give everything away, but he just guy gets into it and has to a trial by seven. So it's seven on seven nights. And it's like one of those things. He's a hedge night. It's fucking really good. What I like about it is, do you have watched the house of the dragon? Yes. It's a lot of cool shit. Yeah. But it's pretty cool. It's not like the root four. They're a bunch of pricks. Right. One's worse than the other. I mean, back in Game of Thrones, John Snow. Right. Right. Ned Staw, can I do it? Even some guys that are, you know, even just great characters, some guys that are on like the hound, who's like the anti hero. But with this one, it's just a f***ing good solid dude trying to do the right thing. And by trying to do the right thing, he gets into some trouble. And it's just, it gives you like, it's like being righteous and have like real heroics. Like, you know what I mean? Like some shits that's missing nowadays, because it's all about getting a f***ing message in there or making such a diverse, which I love though. Oh, no. It's really funny, but I'm not a d*** game of Thrones. Game of Thrones was like a feminist series. If you really think about it. I mean, really, what is that? But without any fanfare, like no, bring it up, no one paid attention to it. But the baddest people on that show were the women. Cersei Lannister was the baddest bitch in the world. Area Stark, f***ing killed everybody. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Santa Stark had to get the rule. That sh**, Brianna of Tarr fucked everybody up, including the hound. Yeah, I was really, really, really, like a fan in this dragon. Yes, and you got Daenerys. Yeah. If we knew dragons, who's the baddest motherf***er on Earth, you literally can't burn her. And she's been three dragons. Yeah. It's a feminist series. I didn't realize that. It is. It's a completely feminist series, but without, but never even crosses your mind. Because it's so good you don't care. It's not like dumb. You have a voice. You have a watch that thing. No, I did. Oh, right, yeah. And House of Dragons is the same. We're frankly, because some of these like Star Wars movies where it's all women generals and you're like, No, no, no, no, no, no, no. Shut the fuck up. And all the meta scared of them. They all get out of the room. Like, this is fiction, right? This is nonsense. Even though that's obviously fiction too, it's way better. A lady that has dragons. The hottest bitch around, she's got dragons. Yeah, yeah, yeah. She's a bunch of killers. Yeah. She brings them into her bed. Well, we could do a good job of making a barbarians. When I did such a good job of making them flawed, you don't even realize that they are the baddest mother fucks in the world. But they're so, but they're flawed in a way where it's like, it makes them human. Yeah. I mean, look at Cersei Lannister. All of her kids gone. That bitch survives. She's got a giant demon that watches over. Yeah. Like, she's a love with her brother. She fucks her brother. She's a brother. She had the, well, I don't spoil her, Lyrk. But she had that, the priest that tortured her where she was in the cell. Let me finally go on her. Yeah. And she's like, I'm ready to meet my maker. She's like, oh, you're not going to die today. Oh, man. And then the, she was shot. She was taking off the phone. Oh, man. Oh, man. That was so hard. Oh, my God. Oh, dude. That was such a horrifying scene. It was such a great show though. Is there a better like world? The other thing in the first, you didn't know. No, no one was safe on that show. You never knew. The, the biggest character could just get fucks in merch it like the next episode. The page of Pedro Pascal that played that. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. He was gonna kill Prince of Dora. First of all, I never thought they would kill him. Like that guy's an important character. He's bringing all this new life to the show. Yeah. And also, do you see the mountains? You know, the hills and the guys I've lost. Yeah. That was so crazy. Holy fuck. That was like one of the most disturbing murder scenes you've ever seen in your life. And he was doing great. He was taking a shit on him. He got too cocky. Yeah, man. He worked them over. Duddy had him. You raped. Oh, you murdered. You killed our children. I'm shit like that. You get repeating it. Yeah. And it was strutting around when the mountains on his back. They are. Yeah. What a crazy show. Such a good show. But one of the greatest shows of all time. I'm telling you, you got to text me after you watched the night of the Seven Kingdoms. Because it's all that. You could do it as soon as we're done with this. It's quick. Like season seven. Six. And each episode's like 30 minutes. Right. Run through it. The house of track is never really dragged me in. It was interesting. Yeah. I like that. But it wasn't the same thing. Definitely not. I think this, the new one is, in my opinion, better. I thought the circuit. Yeah. What I was so nice is that this part's in it that just get you going like, fuck yeah. Yeah. I'm looking forward to doing it. I hope they lengthen it a little bit. You know what I'm saying? Six half hour episodes. But I love the relationship between the kid and the. Don't. Yeah. I mean, they're several people. That was the whole show. That was the whole show. One thing I did love about house of dragons when they were trying to figure out who could ride a dragon. I was going to blow out those people. They were down there. I'm telling you. Yeah. Snacks. He has some target. Yeah. And a lot of Targaryens fucked a lot of regular people. So they were searching for a Targaryen. Yeah. But just taking people out of the pub and just push them in front of the track. That was crazy. She first asked one of the kings gone. They're like, you know, we tracked you back to whatever. And they're like, oh, it's a great honor. No, I want to do it. Yeah. Everybody. I wish one motherfucker. Yeah. I see what's done. That scene was nuts. Dude, the red wedding fucking. Oh, crazy. Oh, yeah. I couldn't believe it was happening. No, I was happy. Like, just get the respect. Because we're taking everything. How do you happen? And this can't be happening. Did you hate the ending as much as I did? I did not enjoy it. It felt to me like they had to tie it up and like, that I'm nice to ever though. You know, I would have been almost better if it was like no country for old men style in the end. I think all shows should be like that because life continues. Yeah, afterwards. You don't have to tie it in. I'm not 12. Yeah. Yeah. Once it got past the books, it took a hit. Yeah. Well, that guy's a genius. I mean, the world that guy created in the complexity of all the characters like Tyrion Lannister and Tywin Lannister. And I mean, Tyrion Rens should. Yeah. Man, I mean, that guy was so fucking good. They're already doing the Swan Sword, which is the second book of Game of Thrones of the Duncan eggtails. Oh, nice. Awesome. That's his right. That too. That's his. Yeah. He did three books. It was a night of the Seven Kingdoms, which they just did. Yeah, that's a Swan Sword. And then it's the mystery night. I don't know anything, but I know a lot of Game of Thrones shit. Don't ask me about Game of Thrones and Star Wars. There's a man. You're about to go to the world so fucked up. You're way better off with that stuff in your head. That's why I do it, man. Such an escape, man. Just a sit home and watch TV. That's all I do. It's an unwatch TV. Speaking of Star Wars, I got a text I didn't know where from George. St. Pierre. He loves it as much as me. Oh, yeah. It was just about the new Darth Maul animated series. My brother, we I said got. Yeah. And then he gave me back a report. He told me so far so good. Yeah. I told you. My brother's like, yeah. Small animated series my brother. We got yo, and he gave me back a report. He told me I told you my brother my brother's like I know Matt's in the Star Wars telling watch the new Darth Maul You know Jamie said it's fun. I died. I love George. He's the best I have the hardest time convincing people who he is it's hilarious What do you mean when people when he comes to the mothership and people that don't anything about MMA? They're like what is your friend? I go that The face of me 100% like no for real. I go yeah 100% and everybody's list of one of the greatest of all time Seems so sweet and friendly Man that's the problem with MMA is that like you have to convince people about how bad somebody was and it wasn't that long ago I mean it wasn't that long ago that George St. Pierre was the fucking greatest of all time now And now but the fans are so new that you they don't get it. They don't go back and watch it They had to watch like go back and watch the John Fitch fight. Oh man prime GSP He was terrifying Incredible gas tank great flow between grappling and striking but you're very creative She put that shit together to best it's why he had such success taking everybody down like his He would set it up his level change and he always he ran through every take down it was never Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah He was gonna run you across the cage George was phenomenal and then I think Farasa hobby was a big part of that too. Farasa hobby's a bad mother. Yeah. He smart. You ever watches YouTube breakdowns? Sometimes yeah, yeah, yeah, he's incredible. He's incredible. He's incredible. That's stute He's so knowledgeable of the game of every aspect of it You know brother is doing well. Yeah, brother's fight at the White House He's an inshaunal mallee and I think people are sleeping on him Well, listen he keeps winning. Yeah, he keeps working winning that the one fight that he had that was kind of a Little controversial was Aldo Remember Aldo, yeah, I don't know. Yeah for sure. I'm not sure he won that They do because I think they're not being Generous enough with the 10 aits in the 10 sevens. You know do it enough. No, no, no There's when a guy just tunes you up for like a Minute and a half of the round and you almost go unconscious. You know like that that means a lot I hate the fact that they don't use it enough all because like Dana was like oh, I don't like it and now the judges are just like Now we can't do it because listen the scoring system sucks because we stole it from boxing. It's not Yes, it doesn't have enough points for sure It should be like you should get like a certain amount of points for different things But it would be really hard to calculate because there would be have to be subjective like a prayer it hits you It's way harder than if someone's like, you know Paul Craig right? Yeah, no disrespect But you know, I'm saying the consequences are very different so if he hits you with a left hook It's different that a prayer it's you the left hook so that's subjective But in terms of like what happens in the fight you should be counting in submission attempts You should be counting in takedown terms like who is more aggressive? Who is more defensive who who's who who implemented their strategy? I have like a hundred points to work with absolutely as they got ten points. Why are we only using two of them? It's nine and a ten why it's not gonna make any sense because there's ten nine grounds that it'll like Could be anybody in this ten nine rounds whether he dominated that's what I see like you have CBJJ uses that and it works better for that because They're very liberal with the ten eights and ten sevens They're like if it's if it's close to 10 nine if it's one side it's automatically a ten eight So they make a lot of sense that doesn't make more sense, but even in BJJ I would say you'd need more points You need like it's like the difference between a 70 30 round where guys dominating you 70% of the time and 51 49 round is fucking huge. Yeah Reflected in the score cards at all. Yeah, so like you could win a ten nine round the first round where it's like you're Barely ahead like maybe I'll give it to you and then the second round that dude Fucks you up and he gets a ten nine round cuz you didn't go down. Yeah But he's head kicking you and you're blocking it you're getting teeped your legs getting kicked all the time It's still a ten nine round. That's something that's nuts. No, just cuz you didn't go unconscious just cuz you didn't get knocked down I think it's My 80 days kicking in but we're talking about the close calls it close scoring. I thought aljo I thought he should have got that nod against fucking I thought you too. I think there was a the guy got on the one watch question The end like a minute 30 left and I was winning that hole first round aljo is a nightmare for a grappling expert He could be undefeated up here He's a nightmare because if your whole thing is grappling with people and you got to grapple with aljo you got problems. Yeah That dude gets your back. He's got He's been him and down ten ten eight round like he was just on his back Dominated him in that second round and they don't and no how is that not a ten eight round? He's fighting you so Salon all soon. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You subs allow and that's on the 25th of April But I mean out but I think you know if it hits the ground I think there's levels to this. Yeah, just did a huncho over yawn in the second fight was that like the best anybody's ever done with yawn Yes, straight down. Right. Here's control. Yeah. It's just so good when it hits the floor That's the difference to him in mara. Rob keep getting you down and up down up right aljo. It's the floor He just needs back exposure. He's one of those some guys they can't jump up on the back It's not good for them. They're gonna get tired Dude all day long he'll just go up there lock that shit on If he doesn't get you that's his round like bro the sandhanging fight was Mastering his grappling so good. He doesn't get proper credit. No, this is back take some of the best in the sport period Nice guy. He does everything right I know with the neck that was I think that was the first everybody against them those people were wrong He's not what had been fucked up and look what happened in the second place I mean he should have validated the entire thing by one hip and his ass in the second fight But they were he decided they're he got going at you're he had a good fucking disc replaced It was real. It was a real fucking injury. He should be he could be on he could be a two-time chain a double division Chain I mean he's in my mind. He's undefeated at 145. Look what he did the Calvin cater Which was a kid is a beast, but it was very impressive No, if you're not just first fight seeing him you'd be like, oh, that guy doesn't belong here Which he obviously does he's a beast, but Aljo is masterful. He's known it is. He's good at not getting it So it's like he's not giving you that back and forth because and Longo says you've seen 20% of what he could do stand up Instended up like I'd ask him something what is he's like he could put his foot wherever he wants it Wait about a kick or something. He's raised just really really talented man. I hope he gets a shot He if he takes out a you know Youself I hope he they give him a shot again because I think he could be a two-time chair He will listen to he's still a bad motherfucker. Look he's a nightmare for everybody Especially if he gets a hold of you, yeah, I mean People look at the one fight loot losses. They look at the Sean O'Malley fight like Sean caught him perfect That's just how you know he his head wasn't really in that because he didn't even want to be there No, why didn't you want to be there? He they made it made him fight that fight he didn't want to fight Yeah, yeah Why they had did like a whole documentary on it where it was like they they kind of twisted his arm to like you gotta do this And they were injured. I think he was injured quick turnaround He's a chance he didn't feel he should be forced into You know when he felt the number he thought they he thought the pay-per-view numbers was gonna make up for it He thought he's gonna get all this money from it because he was like all right. I'll do it Sean O'Malley's gonna bring in a numbers that he said when it was over He saw the number. He was like if I knew the numbers was gonna be like this. I don't think I did it really yeah So it didn't do well It didn't do as well as he thought he was gonna do based on Sean O'Malley's presence listen man, and it takes a lot to get people to pay for something today There's too much of a way to seal it It's paramount thing is genius in that regard. Yeah, is it all you do is have that app? We a lot of people have already anyway. Yeah, this genius But to make people pay every time to watch fights like there's so much to watch today Well, that's what I was the one thing that my people at ESPN told me it was like it's a big difference between being popular and Then having people pay to watch you fight. Yeah, you can be popular, but ain't nobody paying you to pay you to fight So it's a big difference. It's a giant difference. Yeah. Yeah, it's a giant difference. I like that. It's on power Now let's say Dan though. Yeah, save your ton of money. I pay values to pay for every one of them Just Netflix thing is nice too. It's good to see that there's like someone who's willing to throw a lot of money at MMA in another large arena, you know like Netflix You know Gee diverse I think round one submission around the yeah, unless she wants to try to just stand up with her, which I doubt I hope not I don't know what Jean has been doing You know, I don't know how long she went without MMA training at all You know, she was recently a little heavy She got great. She got great. She got great. She's still like 43 years old Yes, no, but the question is like what was she doing in those was she still training some that would be my real question Because if you just put it all down and you walk away for 17 years. I gotta go I mean, but with the with the weight loss I was the great gain that she had there was no way She was trained. I'm saying anything. That's what I'm saying. I like she's back in shape And she obviously is buxing her is to do that, but how long like you're saying was she down and she had developed a grappling defense to one of the best female grab blues ever now rhin is Early hope is a key go to show you go on on her and I just we treat you a poor garden sweeper or On Luxor Propostress you know, I think there's too many this to do door check her arm bars Remember that cats and ganofite cat Yeah Cat's roar. That is the craziest. I remember arm bar like instant. Hey, what a stupid strategy that was Blacked out on the one so crazy No, but I was such a sick transition. No, but I saw a video a geno hitting pads with John Wood It was kind of recent it did not look good. How recent was it? I don't know. I don't know But it didn't look good. I was just a it's hard to tell But this is older. She's a big girl. Yeah, maybe she can stop her from taking her down or something But also it's also what were they doing? Were they just work on slow motion shit? Were they just trying to get a movement or were they getting in a hard-knit workout? I mean either way like just like mechanically it didn't look great Mechanically so I mean, but it could have been it's like one of them things were like this could be like her her comeback Session and she's just trying to get warmed up, but who knows? I mean, you know who knows? Maybe she's who knows you just never hoped So yeah, I hope it's better than that round one submission Let me probably probably right. I mean come on. I met you know if you had poly market Make some money on that It's gonna be a lot of bets on that. It's uh It's it's exciting though that that Netflix is doing it. That's my like I like that there's another place people can go It'll raise but how sustainable is this though? That's my biggest question whoever's putting the money up for this is gonna lose Or something you make up money back right, but here's the thing. It's Netflix Right, so Netflix has an insane amount of money and they keep raking it in like every month people are paying whatever They're paying it's as high as like what 19 bucks for ad free. What is it? How much is a Netflix count? Oh? I think it just went up right? Yeah, they think Money's just coming in every month. They just got to give people exciting things to want to watch and they'll keep making more money Right because more people use Netflix like it would seem like they're gonna lose their ass But they're not because they have a completely different business model obviously. I'm not a businessman 899 to 26 99 per month. I'm a tear. I'm in fact. I'm a terrible businessman But I would imagine you'll just make money by giving people awesome shit so they keep tuning into Netflix So in that sense they're not gonna lose any money because yeah A lot of MMA fans would probably subscribe to Netflix just so they can watch that fight right So who's on the card now? It's like football in yeah versus in Ghana. Yeah Mike Perry versus nate Diaz right? Oh And Robles to Spain Yeah, that's fine. Yeah, and a junior Los Santos that one. Yeah, I want it's like who's it? Robelles to spiny that a tall karate combat dude. He's a ticwan dough black belt from Cuba But for his junior yeah, how's junior? He's 50 now is he? He's close, but he's in good shape. I actually did a wheat spoke at a high school a couple of months ago. I'm glad to hear that I mean at least these guys get an outlet that makes so much money Harry a drown them or eyes as a you know, that's a Well, I have to probably go to school them, but I mean it's they got some they're giving guys some opportunity So you got to like this Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely It'll be a big show a lot of people tune in Diaz and Perry's gonna be fucking bananas. That'll be really fun to watch Yeah, that's I mean that'll be worth the price of this imagine if that was 10 years ago The GL LA went to fucking came true Just stole all their talent bro Diaz versus Perry guaranteed dog fight Guaranteed dog fight that will not I think the jitter jitter is gonna be too much I kind of think that to a kind of thing make might just drag them deeper, right? I think you know, we're gonna see you know, we're gonna. Oh five rounds five rounds. That's crazy five rounds It's crazy. I wonder why they agreed on that Interesting. Yeah, why do you think they didn't realize is the Gina fight five rounds or is it three rounds? Three when they first and now it's the Gina five by five for everything, but they've Well, so it says five by five right there. Yeah, just for those two though. This one does not down No, and I can't imagine There does it says it real hard to see it. Yeah five by five right? Special him. Yeah, okay Well, Lorenz Larkin back in the day I remember he fought Neil Magni was hitting him with the oblique kicks to the chest And I was like I do not think I've ever seen anybody throw it that way. You ever see that fight? No, I don't know I would have like he tuned Neil Magni up. Yeah Lorenz Larkin was a bad mother. I do remember that like he had So good. Oh, he was so his striking was it a leap. Yeah, and he would he when he fought Neil Magni He you know Neil Magni's a tough fucking dude Incredible incredible discipline and endurance like that dudes never had a shape and he was just getting tuned look at this Oh, I mean he's throwing an oblique kick to the ribs That one there. He just hit his arm and knocked him down with it But earlier before that he caught him on the rib cage Look at that bro. That's crazy Give him a spot a cam. That's the second look at it, but right here. You're seeing him. He's blasting him with this Kid, but nobody throws like that. That's a crazy position to put your hips in Is crazy. Well, he's he was sharp. How did this one end? He stopped him. Oh, did he? Yeah Oh shit. Yeah, Lorenz was all over a man. It was a Like one of the prime performances that I've seen of him fight He had a good little run. Yeah, great run, but in during that run and this was like he came from Bellator, right? Yeah Yeah, and when he came over from Bellator, he was still like red hot. Yeah, red hot Yeah, two guys that were in Bellator, which is a pit bull and Aaron Pico Ready to fight in this weekend. Yeah, man. How much time do you think a guy like Pico's supposed to take off after Lorelon we were just talking about that because I love his offense, man He's a little region bull animal and strong powerful Bidget Scott caught and he got caught perfect when he was just perfect That's been a I think he got stopped more than once would have been knocked out like that. Yeah You don't want to go through you with the kid from kill Cliff At a bird. Yeah, Adam Burke. Yeah, he got him with a friend. Yeah, yeah Yeah, you don't want too many of those that's right, but they'll but those put him out, man Like you just see him just go boom. Yeah, the Macy barber one the other That was just one of the greatest finishes in women's. I'm a no doubt I wanted to reach out to Macy because I felt so bad. I want to reach out to the doctor I'm like, I'm like somebody the cameraman, please get off this or somebody talked to the doctor because I don't know what the fuck He was just over like man, this is fucked up Exactly what was going on he probably has no experience in combat sports right here and realize that she got knocked out and while she was Out cold she got strangled she transitioned so face like she's out there She's already and then she gets strangled like that's never happened before what's crazy is she was Like kind of still reacting and then when they put her on her back she just it was She went limp as she was trying to sit up. She went limp. He see right there Like she was trying to get up and then as the guy has his arm around her She goes limp See there's like there's a sea level cane and then there's South Paul Alexa when she fights out Paul She is dangerous than his confused doctor. She is This before Crazy right he's a guy crazy. She's just well, she's kind of coming to Blaking that was just holy shit Why in the speed that she took her back That's not him back choke on me one shot while she was out still cracked her again Got her back and choked her all like a lightning bolt. Oh Super but that's the same combination. She hit Valentina with when she finished her I feel like yeah Then it's what I said left hand boom took her back took her while it took her longer, but look at this So she's in trouble. Bam right there out cold and then strangled I don't think that combination of out cold and then strangled has ever happened before no because I mean she seemed watch this punch here That's a cold right and then boom sick. That's crazy crazy Wow, he's tough man Backwards in front of you after knocked out. Yeah, well here So here's a thing she gets up and when she gets up I think she faints like I think she tries to get up just went and then he Mike puts his arm around there and she's out I think she fainted that's scary Just scary and she also had some problems before we're with seizures. Yeah She had to slide it out fight with Aaron Blanchfield In the locker room, so they let they still allow her to fight even though she's had seizures. That's pretty crazy It depends on what's causing the seizure. Yeah, they know it's a medication that she was on they get her off the medication like this I don't know what causes seizures. Well, that's just not gonna help the seizures, but it certainly wouldn't make me enthusiastic about fighting Yeah, it would have to fuck with your motivation. Oh if you already haven't seizures I wouldn't want to do it. I yeah now after that. I wouldn't want to do it anytime you fight That's a possibility. Yep, and he I mean look at a guy who never once looked That took anything remotely like that like a Kamara Usman and even in a fight where he's just doing so great and then that's the closest thing I seen to that Which he got stopped with that Edkick. Yeah, and you know that's a possibility anytime you make that walk That's why you got that fucking little feeling You know before you walk out there The Kamara one was nuts too because John Anick was just saying because DC was like a lot of people would quit in this situation and John Anick said something along the lines of but that is not the cloth from I know and then I Mean that was like the most perfect timing ever ever like a movie like if you saw that in movie like shut up Because I just I just came in and was like yeah I think he's broke and then DC was Santa and then John intervened with he's not come from that cloth and Kick it was nuts. What is that new nuts Russell Croes do in a new MMA movies? Yeah, is that good? Is that supposed to be the UFC? No, I think one of the yeah one of the did you did it with one of the yeah, yeah Yeah, what did that's gonna be yeah, but I mean like the who's the fighters like my age? I'm like yo Come back To our one of the title of his 40s, you know, yeah, man one has some wild striking fights man Some of the absolute best stand-up fights in the world are happening on one. I watch it all the time I never know when that shit. Yeah, where do you watch this fucking cat out of Dagestan? Do you guys know? I'm talking about also Dula among guys that live bro this dude is I think he's 135 pounds. I think that's what he fights at and he's like six foot one and There's a laser beam striker I've just fogs people up like literally might be the best striker in the world Is it just cake boxer? Yeah, and he's getting in there with more time he's getting in there with world more Ticampans and K on them like three time world lupini Muay Thai champions damn in Peni Stadium guys. This guy is a fuck any strain killer dude any's from Dagestan any can wrestle damn You got it. Let's see if he can find like a highlight reel of his chaos because this is just like get on YouTube Finally shot was this dude. I watched this cat every time he fights. I just can't he's so fucking accurate And he's so slick hold is he he's 22. Oh damn. Yeah, man I'm telling you this 22 year old cat from Dagestan might be the best striker on earth right now This dude is so impressive and I'm telling you he's doing this to do to our world champions Oh He's taking out world champion kickboxers world champion boy Thai fighters they're putting him in there with these fucking assassins and he's making them all go night night But you got to see it in real speed like like you see his real movements. It's so impressive Is he would have been in M. Oh, I don't know where he's trying to nada, but he's from Dagestan Bro, he looks like Zebit. Yes. Yeah, like a like a little bit more robust to beat But it's like it's different like Zebit had more of a you know He had an incredible style, but it was almost like more type one doughish This guy's pure muy tie, but he just fucks people up I hear it too. Oh, he's been spinning heel kicks everything knees the body But it's it's the combinations the way he's throwing them he just finds these openings on people With this precision that you're like mother fucker man. It keeps the pressure Pressure on two he's a flat line of folks one after another flat line of people man, bro He's very fucking impressive and again very impressive against world championship caliber muy tie fighters These are not scrubs that he's fighting to am and once putting these fights on all the time And I was trying to tell Dana this I was like if you guys had like UFC striking do you know fucking exciting that would be if just muy tie with MMA gloves on Well, they should do that. They don't be jay now 100% They're missing out on a giant opportunity because how many people boo would a fight goes to the girl? These guys never go to the ground right it's just all And kickboxing is so much more brutal than Ethan boxing way more brutal. Yeah It just didn't get a fair shake in America. I know it's not that it's not exciting It's the most exciting aspect that UFC other than a great submission like Alexa Grozso after a knock on us like the Right, yeah This episode is brought to you by visible. Let's be honest Wireless can feel like a world of traps Expensive bills tacked on fees and promises that just don't hold up you start to feel stuck Don't fall for the trap Escape to visible the ultimate wireless hack get unlimited data and hotspot powered by Verizon one line for just $25 a month taxes and fees included Get great coverage and a reliable connection with visible plus for a limited time New members can get the visible plan for just $20 a month for one year using code fresh start Refresh your wireless with visible switch today at visible.com terms apply limited time offers subject to change See visible.com for plan features and network management details. I could people bitch about Comzone. I could watch him do that to Drake. It's all day long. I don't give a shit. I that's masterful masterful get him off You get up people like oh, that's a shame and he doesn't take chances to get he's not like he's not trying to be to shit out of him He's getting them tied up and he's beating them up and he's just he's working him over I mean, what do you want him to stand up in the in a crucifix? Yeah, I mean as drinking says problem like the streets need to get him. Yeah, yeah 100% and I don't I don't believe in stand-ups at all period I think the only time you stand up is someone fouls if someone does a foul and then you have to stand up take a point away from him Maybe you stand him up. Yeah, you can't you shouldn't reward a guy for having like a shit defense If the dude on the bottom is the one that failed put him back where they were Right right right. Yeah, definitely but other than that why you've letting people stand up Why guy had to work so hard to get him to the ground? That's maybe he's taking a break for a couple seconds to catch his breath. Yeah, you know like with the fuck do you want? Yeah, I think figure out how to get up. Yeah bottom people just have to be better also You know what how to fix that here's how you fix that knees to the head to a down to pop absolutely Then it's like a fix that's a lot of the yeah wrestlers then wrestlers become super fucking dangerous And we call him in one the grand pre- I enjoyed the rock was amazing. I thought it was acting like like you didn't think it was the rock You know I haven't seen it yet. I thought it was Mark Kerr like you even got a forehead thing Yeah, you got like rubber put on his forehead or whatever the fuck you give it a little like yeah make a more Neanderthal Pro mag Give it a little Frankenstein for his almost Seeing by scene it was almost like the same pretty much the same exact thing as the documentary It was really good the documentary. It's it's like the same shots the same story Mm-hmm. So if you've seen the documentary was which was great. Yeah, saying her was a great guest I had him in the podcast. He was fun. It was yeah, it was really cool. Yes You know, okay. Yeah, it was really fun. It just a real intelligent like easy to talk like where did he live now? Like it Yeah, yeah, Arizona Well, I saw him in early UFC's when I was a backstage interviewer He submitted Dan Boebish with his chin to his eye. I remember that Yeah, I remember he came on the scene The UFC scene when it with the old Ranger Scott needed a face Yeah, that cover rip rules as well. We're about to find 40 high esteem is something like that the crime My favorite Mark Carfite was against Fabio, Georgia down in Brazil. Oh, that was crazy That's right guys name. Yeah, man. That's that's my shit. I Fabio fan and like I mean if you can't have respect for that guy after that beating He took it. You never never fucking thought about quitting crazy. Yeah, that's it. Everything who said yes to that Yeah, right let me pull you guys aside Explain physics I need to introduce you to steroids Physics is steroids and like no you're not fighting Mark If you look at the time that's when you just you still had the mystique about it's true You know true back when they weren't But that kind of kill but like that's when it like the beginning of the end of like the guard started for MMA It was like that because like those big wrestlers was just like oh you mean all I got to is block his head There was do you remember when Mario's sparing fought e-gores and no Yeah, yeah, so the Mario sparrow is like one of the first jujitsu black belts to lose in MMA That's right. Yes, we all thought jujitsu Well for invincible right and Mario's power was elite. He was a really good black belt. Yeah, and so he fought Zenovia and Zenovia have stopped him. I remember that. Yeah, and Mario was doing everything right mounting him correctly Dude, but then he would just do one of those weird like super big bridges and that is because he had endurance And he was able to just withstand his attack he He ended up cutting them or something towards the end. Yeah, it was a big cut They stopped her from a car. Right speaking of all school guys guess who was it? You have seen last week. Marillo Bustamage Also for 45 bitty foot on Eric's time Eric's 45 members I thought a really beat Chuck Lidell too honestly, I know he might have yeah Somebody I was he was a bad motherfucker American. If I remember that, I thought I thought it was a really big Chuck Liddell too. Honestly, I'm not funny. He might have. Yeah. Somebody was a bad motherfucker. It was really good boxing and it's a change. It's a really good boxing. One of the first guys from like that, cross him, Gracie team along with good. Good. Research too. Like he had good take downs. Yeah. But you just did that too. But that's my point. So he's at the UFC just cornering Jose Delano and like no one knows who he is. And I'm like, yo, I need to give a lesson on this guy. Like he's one of my favorite fighters of all time. Yeah. But no one knows who he is. That's crazy. Is this a legend? But you know, there's so many people now that's like time just goes on. Yeah. What a bunch of killers Carlson had. What a day man. What a day man. I really did. His school in 96 when all that was going down. When right before Vtor got into the area of Oreo, or Carlo Barretto. Yeah. Yeah. Sir Joe Cohen. He had a bunch of beasts, man. And they would, we'd watch them all train together. Mario, Mario, Barry was telling us a story about how we, when he was just starting out in Jujitsu, he made his girlfriend sit there and he just put her in trying left to try and like, she kept complaining. Watching TV just practicing triangles on his. We were lucky to, we were talking last night about how fortunate we were to come up when we did, you know, and like even back at, at Hensos, and you had Henso, you had high in coming through, you had half coming through, you had Matt, you had Ricardo, you had Sean Alvarez, like, we had a ton of killers, you know, and back then it was, I always joke about the tap out shit, but if you saw somebody in airport in the 90s, would a tap out shirt on you were like, you know, where are you, you know, that now that it went to like JC fucking pennies, which is cool because it was. Yeah, yeah, yeah, now it's 21. But it was pretty well. I had some tap out charts. Everybody did. Right. Those guys were fun. Yeah, definitely. It's a weird time. That time of MMA, if you go back to like, like, even when like you and I first met, those like, when yet, what year was that? 2001 we met crazy. That's crazy. You weren't a commentator yet, but I will Kelly Delante and you gave me a nice shout out. I remember we need more that jungle Jiu Jitsu like Matt serena tore that box. I'm like, oh, they shut it up. Yeah, that's funny. And I thought that was 2001 because I mailed you a shirt. Yeah, thank you. And then you called me Academy. And I'm like, oh, what's up? That was funny, man. No, it's crazy. But you did you are so physical then like it was a physical thing. Now it's so intellectual and like these nerds think they don't need autistic kids. Yeah. Yeah. And I didn't think they own it. And it's like, yo, what are you talking about? They're talking about technique. Yeah, it's like they're talking chess moves. Yeah. You don't know the name. And there's like, you don't know that. It's like, dude, I know that's like, what's the, um, what when you go for the, uh, they came what they call it the K guard. Yeah, shit man, but you know, it's the nineties man. Right. And first I'm like, oh, what's the deal? You don't know the K guard? And they show it. Oh, yeah, it's never called it the fucking K. But it's funny, you bring up Marilla Bustamante. We talked about Fabio Gishel back then. And I know Jiu Jitsu evolved. But if you take those guys, you put them in the Abu Dhabi submission tournament. You put them in the BJJ, I BJJF and you put them in an MMA fight. Did you chit shoes the same? They carry over. Yeah. And they may not win, but it's a competitive and they have a other way. Right. Yeah. I have it across the board. Yeah. Someone else should look to just use the scissor ring or just use the legs. You know what I mean? Yeah. That that can transfer over. here's what fucks my head up. If you gun to my head said to me, who do you think has the best Jiu Jitsu in MMA right now? My head would go Charles Oliver. I was getting right out of my back. But is law market chef finished him on the ground? So how can I say that? Right. So it fucks my head up because I'm like, if you think about like a elite expressions of Jiu Jitsu in the ground, like one of the most dangerous guys off his back all over all of our so dangerous everywhere, if he gets on top of you, you're fucked. I mean, it was just that Max Holloway's defense is so tight and he's so tough that he didn't get finished. Right. Right. The show was that he was able to just manhandle him and take him down. I mean, Max, nobody took Max down like that. He manhandled him. It was bananas. But I think Max is a guy that is like he confided 45. I think it was really hard when he went up to 55 and then went down to 45. But at 45 in his prime, it was a perfect weight class for him when Holloway was fighting at 45. He was killing himself. Like he fought like, he just was fatigued, easier. But then when he went up to 55, then he became Charles Oliver. You know, it was really all at 55 where he made his mark. He tried that shit though with Iliya. He did try to take him down and he tried. Yeah, Iliya. Iliya is a realist idiot. He is a phenomenal. He's another one. He's another one. He's another level. He's super well rounded and people haven't really even seen that yet. He's on on a level where I can't wait for his next fights. When he's fighting, I'm like, what is he going to do now? Yeah. Because I think he's getting better. I think it's not just, I think the dude is like their approach to it. There's a documentary on YouTube. But they're talking about how they break down all their fight camps and what they're doing and the different stuff that they train in. Like these dudes are on another level. I mean, when you think about like if a fight between like Iliya and Islam where to happen, like think about like the magnitude of that of like not only just like star power but just in terms of skill. Oh my god. Breaking that down in terms of skill. Oh my god. Like two of the best skilled fighters of all time of all time. Yeah. That would be an insane fight. And I just really would like it if it happened to be at 55. Like Iliya, yeah. Yeah. But if 55 would be better. Because Islam at 170 is probably walking around a buck, 96. Yeah. Fuck it. Jacked. I think Armin should be spoken about to do it in person. Yeah. Look how he hunted. He said a pretty good fight with Islam back when he, how many years ago? It was like 21. Yeah. He was, I mean scrambles. I do have to say if the scoring was correct, I think. I think Aloe Vera would beat him in that fight because Aloe Vera threatened him with submissions. That is true. A couple times true. A couple times. Like that to me is more valuable than holding a guy down. Did Armin threaten he had an arm choke with him when the mano? He was kind of on a run more often than we remember. Like it. And most? Yeah. In terms of like inside the guard. Oh, hell of a barrier. Like he was kind of, you know, he was on the run. It's dangerous in there man. It's not like everybody else's. Like there's only a few guys like him and, you know, Paul Craig, bro, Paul Craig could latch on a fucking triangle. Like that guy is beaten world champions. You think about it. He beat you all. Broke his own. I'm on collab. I've stopped him with like one second deal in the third round with a triangle. He might have one of the best. What was that one dude from back in the day that won all his fights by triangle? Dustin. No English guy. Yeah. Um, I know exactly what you're talking about. Oh, my God. It's a try. I mean, the skinny English guy. Yes. He like was all trying. He has been trying to do it. Yeah. Yeah. There's one move. If you can get you to the ground. Yeah. And let's just legs around. You were a fox bill. Okay. Possass. Yeah. Possass. Possass. Possass. Paul. Paul. Paul. Possass. Yeah. He was a beast. You get you in that triangle. You're fucked. And for various year, we're doomed. Another one, right? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, he was that he triangleed fadore. I remember it was fadore. I always tell people if you want to look at that one of all time greats and headway, don't look at all losses and shit. Stop right here in the prime. Who is tapped out more legends than from Bresio verdum? Minutaro fadore. I mean, that is crazy. Just those two came for last guess. Yeah. Yeah. He's tapped out all the legends. Yeah. True. And they weren't past the prime either. Fadore was surely in his 100% with a reason watching that live thinking, oh my God. Oh my God. He ran right into it. He ran right into that. He jumped into it. Brilliant. His jujitsu was like scary off his back. Yeah. Fadore had no respect for the guard. It's just, you know, it was just fed it to him. Yeah. Man, you can't do that with a guy like that as a different level. And plus he hit Kobe in the head with a boomerang. Remember that? He's not going wrong with that. He's on point. He's on his way. That was my favorite video of all time. Because he hit him with the boom right in the bag and he's reaching out for the bag. Yeah. You got to give him some points for that. At all the people that I thought I was definitely going to see in the White House lawn, it was going to be a Kobe coming in fight. I was like, how would he jingon have a Kobe covington fight at the White House? And I don't know. He's like super supportive of Trump or as Trump hats everywhere. Right. And he's not a fight. He didn't get him. They didn't hook him up. How did I not happen? I wanted to fight him. Yeah, but that's a different way class. Bone nickel's a big dude. He's at 85. He's at 85. That's a, you know, Kobe's not a big 70. Is he set the fight? He's a great size for 70. Yeah. No. I don't watch. I'm in it. I'm going to match you. Yeah. That's going to be interesting. Yeah. I think Chris little big for him. Yeah. I think that should go well for what who was Joaquin fighting next? Bradshaw. Bradshaw, Brady. Is that in my amp? No, that's in James and Jersey. Right. Yeah. That's right. I'll be out here for a little Brady shout out. Joaquin was on a tear until tomorrow about a hold of a moment. That's shout out to Brady. That's one of his shirts. As the two guys that are like most worthy for shot at the welterweight title, I mean, you, you got to think Ian Gary, but you also got to think tomorrow because he doesn't have much time left and he's a legend. Right. One of the greatest welterweights of all time. And then he just beats Joaquin Buckley like that. I mean, Joaquin. And Bongster. Buckley was on the first rise. No wonder boy. That wonder boy. He needs to shit out of Kobe. Yeah. Brought out of the world. Be the shit out of him. Joaquin doesn't get tired either, which is crazy. Look, you look at his physique. Yeah, you like that. You got to get ticed out. He keeps that gas going for three fucking rounds full clip. Yeah, believe it. I'm not the question. I'm right. We're watching them for a month. Who wants now? No, she wasn't Brady. I dig. Yeah. The whole turtle shell. Yeah. That pack is super postress. Yeah. He's staying at that weight. Right. Yeah. He's not going down. What about Oldberg and Jerry this weekend? You know what, man? If you're looking at it on paper, if you like, if you just watch their movements, Oldberg is really fast. He's really accurate. And he's slick and he's a big tall motherfucker with great skills. Yuri creates chaos. And in that chaos, you don't know exactly how someone's going to respond when the guy's still there when you crack him and he's all over you and he's doing wild shit. He's got a fucking ponytail at the top of his head. He's a maniac. But he's not faking it. Oh, no, he believes everything he says. That's how that dude really lives. He really does hit trees in the woods. He goes out there with a mucky water. He does all the hard style Japanese shit. And, you know, he spends time in the woods by himself alone. He does, uh, he swims under the ice. Yeah, I saw it. I actually saw a video like, fuck that dude. I mean, you have to find with a whole isn't it? You gotta come back. We had some people in there too, just in case he didn't that quick. Listen, man, just look at that dude. His ancestors came over on a boat. They had fucking swords. They hopped off and started slicing all of them guys. That dude is a mother fucking Viking. Whatever he is, that war, those warrior jeans like that's in that, that dude takes you to hell. He just can't do it. He's got his way. That's it. That style just doesn't work with Pereira. So, what's your one? One. Does he walk into one here? Because he's going to get hit. Callio beat the living shit out of him for two rounds. And then over ran out of gas. Oh, that's a big guy too. Callio's not a big, you know, if you look, if you look at him in comparison to some of the other guys who are in that way class, he to make it in five. Here's one of people sleeping on Merzacon. Yeah. I believe in palos. You almost sold me on that yesterday. But Merzacon of man undefeated undefeated. Let me tell you, 37 and fought nobody. I'm riding him. He put rocket sleep though. Yeah. He put, he's sleeping the first round. Dude, he's slick. He does shit in there. I'm like, he calls himself the professional. And that's like, he seems like a hit man like some Russian hit man. Yeah, it comes to fucking kill people. He believes in his power. That's a fact. It's not just his power man. It's his skills. When I look at him, I'm like, this is a smart guy. Like he moves like a smart guy. Everything's calculated. Everything's technical. He's really hard to hit clean. He's a, he's a slick character. And he does shit too. Like he overreaches, but he overreaches, I think on purpose to get reads off you. If he senses the guys moving away, he'll come in with big shots. It doesn't it to try to get, to get you to react and then counter like that, that right hook that he had him with was almost like a jab that he dropped rocket's with. Yeah. Just saw them. It's saw this movement that rocket's kept doing over and over. And over again. Bang came in with like a straight right jab. Almost like a hook jab. Palos got a chin. Look at that. Watch that again. Look how slick this is. Boom. He's a killer man. We don't know what Polo Constas is going to look like at 205 though. He's number four to that. Well, it did my once my debut date for 85. Oh yeah. Yeah. He forced Marvin Vittroy. He was like, not as tight as a 205. Yeah. Remember that is he fucked his mind up, I think. He definitely did. I mean, but he looked the best he's looked his last fight. Like he cop a law if he just ran through him. Dude, you go back to when he was when he was walking people down like walk down. Yeah. Well, yeah. I remember when he saluted. Uh, you all remember the fight as my favorite product. Yeah. That's a great fight. But nobody walks down. You about a romantic kid. There's that photo, that one photo of him had kicking you out. And you know, all's faces like all distorted. And you're like, how did he take that shot? This is neck. You know, his neck is fused. Yeah. That's some way. Yeah. One. Thanks. But does it move? It's connected to his skull. That's crazy. Yeah. And then nuts. He said in these comp. Look at that photo. That photo bonkers. Imagine how tough you got to be to be to be your Elvomer. And take that to the head when you know your neck has been through an insane operation. We have metal connecting the fucking spine of your neck to your head. Sorry. They implanted monster traps to hold his head. He's a freak. Yeah. He's athletic freak. And you see, just fought there in the specimen. Yeah. 49. Yeah. And a lot of people disputed the decision. They thought he should have won. Yeah. In Russia. Yeah. You know, over Mariel. In Russia. I don't know. I don't know. He doesn't. He looks great. Yeah. I don't know how he does it. If you told me there's 32, I believe you. He's all right. RAF as well. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You would be pat down. And then he came back and he came back. But he lost the next one. Yeah. I was wrestled on legit. Yeah. Dude, the guy that I'm most impressed with in that is Armin. Oh, I can't believe I could do a wrestler. Yeah. Who's the duty tech fault? Georgia. Georgia. No, no. The Lance. Oh, Lance Palmer. That's a Lance Palmer. Yeah. The Lance. Yeah. Robert. He legit wrestler. Sure. He wants to like, oh, he's never wrestled at my level. He's never wrestled guys at my level. They arm and go up there and tech falls. Right. I'm sure. Yeah. But even Georgia. Like you watch those videos that he does. Yeah. It's like $100 to $3,000 or whatever it is. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Armin is a fucking bad man. Dude, he's a bad man. I know it. Yeah. If you wanted to fight for I think you're in your entire area at 55. That's a very interesting question. Very interesting. I sure. Because he's hard to hit. He's very slick and tactical, super flexible. Like you receive those weird like mobility exercises he does with twists and shit with twigs. Yeah. Yeah. Crazy flexibility. He's definitely in his prime. He can't waste his life away right now. I had button people. Yeah. Just do the right thing because you're in your prime right now. It's not less forever. He's already been right already. Be champ if he could want to keep it together outside of the 100s. You know what I mean? Like if the who knows what would happen in the all of our fight, it was a proper fight, a five rounder. You know, he's staying busy though. It's not like he's on the cast. He's doing those things. He's doing those things. Yeah. He put smoke. I have the sleep. Yeah. I saw that was a little too much. That was a lot. Yeah. He kept it on 25. Yeah. But like he kept it. Whenever they keep it on, when the guys already sleeping for too long, it's like, yeah, what are you, what's going on here? You know, you got to know the fuck's happening? Maybe some unkind words were exchanged. That's kind of my fault process. That's not a good show. I'm sure that happened. I'm okay. I have a hothead. Yeah. He's been known to say he can kick out of the UFC for what happened with him. I heard he was just like mean to people, like mean to the staff. That's what I heard he was just like mean to the staff. Oh, I wasn't even told, I was talking about when he did it to a streamer. I'm not talking about that fight. Oh, we're talking about it. No, no, no. I'm talking about him doing it to like it just putting somebody to sleep, but friends, the guys with his other, I don't think he's told it. He was with him on a couch and he put the guy to sleep. It's just a regular Joe arm into this. Yeah, man. Jamie. No, no, no. Yo, yo, he put him to sleep and he held that shit on for a next year. How too many seconds. Look at this watch this. No, no, I'm telling you. Do you tell me if you think it's too long? That guy's neck makes me sad. But that look to know he's going to do that to him. No, I'm going to host to see this. That ready? Let's see. Now he's out, right? He lasted a lot. Yo, yo, yo, yo, what the fuck is out already? That's really crazy. That's really crazy. Yeah, that was that's so unnecessary. That's what I'm saying. What the fuck? Yeah, that's I felt a lot worse than I thought it was going to be. Yeah, sorry guys. He had to bring the room down, but I mean, that's the crazy thing his arm and nose he was out right away. Yeah, that's what I'm talking about. Also that guy's neck looks like it's never been choked. I felt sad when he was going to do to it when I saw a snake. He was like, his neck is making me feel sad because I know that's going to hurt. That fucking gorilla. That dude's got a clamp on him, man. Little fuck is having soup for a week of that. Yeah, right. It's a problem. I'm in fucking grass. So incredible, man. I'm just very impressed with him, man. Very impressed with his grappling. I just wish he could keep it together. Yeah. I mean, it's striking is not bad, neither. Like he's okay. His first way, but Islam was very close. Very close. First fight in the UFC. I don't even think you got a full camp. Probably not. I think it was short notice. Yeah. And he fought very well. You know, he's he's at the it's just like crazy that fuck ups have kept him from being at the time. The missing the title fight was the big one. Yeah, that was the craziest one. Like his back hurt the day before. Do you like come on? It's crazy. Yeah. And you make a nacho mukanah go out there and you know, not not having prepared for him. Right. My kind of looking again. I'm getting money. Yeah. I like what he gets on that mic too. He's awesome. He's not what you would have started talking to. He's even earlier. Like I always liked the guy, but he's fucking hilarious. He might be the best in the business right now. He's funny, man. He's just not getting enough like time. When he gets on the mic time. Money fucking boy. It's a terrible podcast. He's good. You know, he's good on there with him and I think Gilbert, you know, they all fucking bullshit. He's doing some streams on and he's doing them in English and in Portuguese, but the Portuguese is doing better for. Okay. And he's like, I'm making money off YouTube now. Like, so I don't care anymore. Yeah, I have my money. Like, I have a big stream of revenue coming in from here. He's a scrap. My son. He's fucking baby motherfucker. He's all right. You need that. You need some personalities in that. Fuck yeah. He's good too. Remember, like it is is fight with Ben was sending me. Oh, yeah. Right. Mark them. Right. And Mark them. Sandin is on his way to. That'll show you. That will show you. That will show you. That will show you. Real good. Real good. You can't charge him on that short notice. I know. What do you guys think of? Hoke. It's he's so fun. Who you think it's fun? I think it's fun. I don't get it. I don't get it. I don't get it. I don't get it. I don't talk about. I'm talking. Talking shit. It's not it's not witty. It's not like it ain't funny. It ain't witty. It's looks like he's trying too hard. Exactly. I love it. I don't get it. He's like a pro wrestler. It's like pro. Right. It's like smart. Do you bro. You talked like I he's a smart dude. He knows what he's doing. He's being a goof. And here's the thing about people that act really goofy and stupid. You kind of you a full of the game shit. Like they can trick you. They can trick you. You think he's going to be Curtis. I don't know. Man Curtis is a lot. You know, it's a big step. That's brilliant his career Curtis says a lot of power. He's a big fucking. Going to be a letter wrestler problem. Got a lot of MMA experience. But Hoke, it's a hard dude to solve. He's a really good wrestler. And he's fucking hyper aggressive. And he's got his best. He's got his best. He's got his best. He's a athletic. He's a one of the guys that I have my own. You think he can make two of those five or you think he's should. I mean, well, heavyweights lights. Perhaps maybe stay there. But really we're just waiting for Gable. Yeah. Yeah. Right. He's getting Roman all of I think is wrestling him. And I let him do that. I'd be like, what if you blow your ass here? What are you crazy? Why are you doing this? You're going to be the heavyweight champion of the UFC. They got to be paying for the big dude, man. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, look, I think I think I think he'll be fine. But when you think of guys that are like a Mike Tyson and MMA, like when Mike Tyson was coming up, that's what I want to think of when I see him. Yeah. I'm like, how do you deal with that? Right. How the fuck do you deal with that? He moves like a cat. He's 240 pounds Olympic gold medalist. And he can KO you. Smartest guy in his corner. He's got John Jones as a mentor. Are you fucking crazy? Fight IQ, John's, you know, he's one of the smartest guys. Yeah. You got that guy in your corner. And everybody's saying, I mean, he's on the only guys that isn't even in the UFC yet that I had him on my podcast. I was like, I gotta talk to you. I mean, he's accomplished. I think enough anyway. He's got a fucking Olympic gold medalist. NCAA champion. I got to be mid 20s. Oh, he's young. He's young. And they're doing it smart. You know, they gave him one of those, what do they call? Dirty boxing? Dirty boxing. Oh, yeah. Did you see chum through? Chum through for the run. Like it was not it was pretty sick. The he's such an athlete. Just stood there and leapt over the ropes after he won. It's jump over. Yeah. Yeah. Like the dude after he won the NCAA champion chips. Like he can do like round offs and. Like the shit. Like literally boom, boom, boom, like a gymnast. It's fucking crazy. I guarantee you that it should be that's we can trip to the speed that he has and covering distance. He's dangerous man. Watch this. Watch when he goes over this rope. This is crazy. Damn. BJ Pend Your Banana La Pora. I mean, that is crazy. He just stuck the landing. He's done it. Affirmously. He's a monster dude. Real hard problem for people. People said it wrestled named Gable. You better fucking be good. Yeah. And named after. Yeah. After Dan Gable. Damn. So he's been wrestling since he's a toddler. And he's just such a fucking athlete. And so smart. Just dedicated. Did they're doing it smart too? They're not just jumping him into the UFC right away. He's getting famous outside the UFC. That's the way you can. You sure? That way you're. You're trying to bring him along as much as you can. Yeah. Fuck your 10 and 10. Come on son. What? When they say they got to get they're going to get more than that. But the thing is you don't get some people are a opinion that you don't want to give a young fighter too much money early because it'll ruin their motivation. They're so I mean, there's truth in that. But I mean, it's not who's that for you to say no. You don't say like, I want my money. Exactly. You don't get the determine that. I want my money. Guess what? I think the cream will still rise to the top. I think the guys that are dedicated that have a lot like Floyd Mayweather when he was worth hundreds of millions of dollars would still never drink and run home from the club from the club. So people driving his Rolls Royce. He's running behind it. Yeah. I mean, look at look at the arm and man. I got money. Yeah. Give a shit. It's got a private check. Yeah. He's just arm and it's got a private jet. At least he's always on a private jet. Seems like he knows it. Yeah. He's got some cash. His family has. Yeah. tons of money. Yeah. But he still has the desire to be the best. Yeah. See, the innuance, not with that. You know, maybe that's why he can't get his attitude together too. Perhaps right. He doesn't need it. Yeah. A bit spoiled in that way. Right. Yeah. I mean, who's disciplining him? You know what I mean? He runs his town. I'm sure. Well, you guys think about harm's on Strickland. Well, let me tell you. This comes down to Strickland's motivation. Well, I mean, I'd be fucking motivated. I mean, I'm going to say, I don't think he's going to get that. Yeah. But I mean, he's worked with him before. I mean, I know they say that comes out cemented him, but if you hear Strickland talk about it, they were doing bashin' around when you're starting on his back. I mean, come on. But I think when they move the round, I think he feels pretty confident with it. He's a hard guy to keep down, Sean. Yeah. And who made who made comes out look human, Gilbert Burns, Kamar Uzman. I mean, they made him look human. You know, and Drake is, again, you don't want to see that rematch. But take the fit round. But in that fifth round, he did get into some decent positions. He just got reversed right away. I mean, Sean, if there's any bit of blood in the water, he's fucking a finisher. He's, you know what I mean? Stay on him. Or if he's heard it all. He's durable. I mean, everybody's saying how underrated he's grappling is the guys that work with him. So I mean, it's so hard to hit, man. He's got a weird style. It's very weird. He fucks you up. And he's really good at moving back away from shots on the hands or in your face. Yeah. It's weird. He also throws like looping shots on purpose. Sometimes like you would think it's bad technique. But he's like finding a way around your guard. Yeah. He's catching you with weird stuff. And his fucking jab is on point. And that's, where'd you, where'd you come? No, no, I was there for that. And you could hear it. And you don't always hear that. You could hear the foot in his jab when fluffy was blocking him. And it was hard. He was making his kicks in there. Well, he's going to watch that. And he wasn't getting hit, man. The thing about him, if you, if you watch him when he's on point, he's so fucking hard to hit. He just fucked up with Alex. He just can't make any mistakes. It seems like everybody fucks up with Alex. He's, he's a freak. He doesn't negotiate with you. He's like, you fuck up this over. Do you think that, um, do you think that translates to heavyweight with gone? Well, I don't think so. I think gone is a little bit too. I think Gary would decision to like the chance of fucking dancing and jabbing his way to. But I don't say like scon is gone is going to like, if he doesn't like him, I think Alex will fucking could put him out. Here's one thing. Gone has been 185 pounds since he was 12. Right. Yeah. I mean, that's a big, he's gonna be weight athletic moves like a cat. And he's got world class striking skills, man. That Tom asked when I'll fight that first round opened up a lot of eyes like he looked fucking good. You open the eyes. All right. I feel bad for Tom. Man, because we talk about a guy that got the shit into this snake. I was not going deep in his fucking eyes to surgeries. Everybody's like, yeah, I walk it off. I just think that was handled poorly right after the fact. You know, I think you have to address right after the fact that you have to probably tell people like what kind of injuries could be sustained from this. They're permanent. Look at Michael Bisping still can't see others. Right. I you can't you can't just have a guy go back into a fight when he can't see it's crazy. It's crazy to ask the guy's eyes been injured. If he gets hit again, it could rupture who knows who knows what kind of damage you have to her. Who do you think was irresponsible or who respect God? Yeah, I mean, but in terms of handling the situation afterwards, you think it was Tom's well, I think all or do UFC for not being like getting his back on it. If I was doing a press conference afterwards, what I would emphasize first and foremost is how dangerous eye pokes are. Yeah, but I think we've neglected some simple solutions. You know, and I think there's there's gotta be a solution that we use to stop these fucking fingers from going into people's eyes. Point deduction right away. Point deduction is the easiest. Yeah. One, you touch someone's eyeball with your fingers. Well, unless it's a complete scramble. Yeah. Doing this his head happens to be there. Yeah. Maybe if you're doing this when the guys coming in and your fingers go in his eyes, one point every fucking time every fucking time for sure. No judges discretion. Yeah, you know, no referees discretion poking the eye out one point. Did did you ever ask Dana about the pride You're shocking time for sure. No, no judges discretion. Yeah. No, you know, no referees discretion poking the eye out One point did did you ever? Estana about the pride gloves. What happened to him? I did You know, I don't they should own that I don't remember the tech right. That's good. The best stuff is Trevor whip Right, just I was trying to broke or something and I might still be able to do that to try to figure out a way to just like Like those gloves are perfect the knuckles curve over your hands or in this position Yes, it does not impede your grappling. It's easy to do that if you want to but the natural position is like this So if you're doing this it's because you wanted to do that. It's not like the gloves are forcing your hand open like a lot of people complain about now It's only it's scientists on this here's the matter right this cover the tips of the fingers you don't use them anyway True nobody does this right so you don't if you're always grappling like this right yeah, so cover it with like a mitten Yeah, little mittens like a leather So it's your thumbs are free so you still have some potential eye pokes from thumbs But that mitigates a lot of it and you Completely stop all this stuff because now you have a solid thing Yeah, it's not gonna go knuckle deep in one finger goes in one fingers on your eyebrows It's just fucking digging in that's crazy. That would all stop if you had a mitten Well, I mean there's not a lot of eye pokes in bare knuckle Right right that is interesting And it's because they're always like this yeah, because they're noted true It's just these guys they get in there and they're just like yeah So the way to stop it really I mean it's take away points and guys will be like this more Yeah, but I wonder if there would be less eye pokes in Just if you just think about MMA with gloves on it was it was just Boxing and no kicking and take downs Maybe it's like all the different possibilities of things that's what it is like it's like they're trying to like yeah Boy to take down and everything like cakes. Yeah, everything so that's why you're doing this because like boy tie guys do this all the time Boxing guys very rarely do that no very rarely Yeah, unless they're showing off and they're about to hit you with a big right hand bang a jante Wilder, right? Yeah, he'll be yeah, old scream Not they watch it literally like hold his fist in front of your face and then wing one wing a nuclear bomb at your head I think you just got to discourage guys to close your hand cover the fingers. Is he fight we ossia? Come with I don't know. I Don't know thought I heard something about that. That's a tough fight He's too skinny for that at this point he looked good in the chisor fight in moments There was moments he said I love you and then just sort of said I love you too, and then he hit him The auntie said he backed off on him because he saw he was hurt and he wanted him to go home to his family I love you too. We fucking did I waska And I think a lot of times when I straight up assassin like Dante Wilder meets God Oh, yeah, it takes a lot of that mean out of your heart Need a little that mean to land those haymakers. You got to be angry true Yeah, you don't want to be happy when you're going in You want to talk about one punch power though that guy might be the greatest of all time Dontay he was pretty damn close 48 knockouts. Yeah, 49 fights One was not a great technical box or he started late in life that right then just was fuck Thor's hammer was Pissed on people's heads Teddy Alice always calls it the eraser and it takes you make that right hand erases them all I always wanted to see him fight got Ingano that would have been wild To make that they've been in God who would have been to fight to make them to bomb it at each other They could actually still do that. Why not they could still do that like ingano If you want to look at it from a business standpoint man, that guy's killed it right Yeah, went over got that crazy contract with the PFL He got a chance to fight Tyson Fury knocks him down becomes a legend Then gets a big money fight with Anthony Joshua That doesn't go so good. Oh, and then he has the his reintroduction to MMA If I said dude, Hannon right this six hand infrared guy take some down smashism beat some down So he made what 20 million in that fight something crazy like that. They're the crazy contract, right? Yeah And he had a contract where his opponent at me He's two million. Yeah. Who does that? Yeah. How do you know love the guy? I know I love that right? He puts it into his opponent must make at least two million dollars. Yeah No, no, and now and now he's got to be making a lot for this Netflix Netflix thing They got to pay him because they need legit names and You know Felipe lens he fought at light heavyweight and UFC right? Yeah. Yeah, I worked with him a bit at top team And I mean I just this is a big moment for him. So all I can say like I don't know how he's gonna do It's a big moment for him. Yeah, I'm happy Nate is making that money My parents too. I'm happy for them. Yeah, I heard those guys are getting paid. It's nice because this is this is a thing where If a fighter is in contract negotiations They have their last fight on the contract and they decide not to fight or not to sign until after the fight Yeah, they do make that decision which legally they can do right? Yeah, also Yeah When big yeah big so showing knock out for sure and then you know you come over to Netflix and make what 12 Yeah, a fight that's nuts and that forces everybody forces everybody's hand. That's what business is supposed to do That's how it's supposed to operate. It's good. That's what's good for the fighters. That's the most important thing And that's good writers, but that's but that's just like I swam hoping that this Netflix thing can be sustainable I hope so too. Yeah because like if they just do it one off. I'm a terrible businessman. Yeah, I'm terrible at it Yeah, me too, but Just give them all you the fighters They they're the ones who fight right without that you got nothing right everybody's making plenty of money Yeah, come on It's gonna be big though for sure this thing Everybody's gonna watch it a hundred percent it'll be huge because it's everybody has Netflix. They're gonna watch it It's gonna be crazy Bronner could become a superstar again Well, she's already a superstar, but I mean if she wins again then people start talking about like maybe Ron is gonna come back to the UFC And then maybe Ron is like a WWE moment Ron didn't dana shake hands on a stage with like Erica Kirk fireworks going off behind them And Drew ski dance yeah, Rhonda Kayla Harrison White House lawn number two next next summer. Oh I don't think she would do a UFC, but this is great for her. She's done with the WWE and all that stuff Yeah, I probably it's probably hard for a mean it's probably enjoyed the job. It was a great job Made her a lot of money But it's probably hard for an elite competitor to do these stage things And she's an elite competitor because I instinctively she just wants to do compete Yeah, just want to fake compete. Yeah, I mean some guys did it right Kurt Angle turned out to be a real good pro wrestler You know this is a great gig don't get me wrong, but I'm saying for someone who's still good fight Angle was done at that point where he went to pro wrestling. I went to one the Olympics with a broken neck Savage I just went to the The head court is in Connecticut. It's pretty well He's very nice definitely man nice and I see that whole fucking place if you're into WWE It's like a fucking nerd guy, right? I'm not really into it Cream is oh my god He's already been there. I'm sure. Oh, yeah, he's working with them now. Is he? Yeah, yeah, he's doing stuff with the WWE is he right in form or he's gonna be in some Shows I have to be quiet. I don't know how much this is public But they're doing they're very dirty announcing they're doing some stuff with kill Tony And he's gonna roast like WWE people Doing a lot of collaborations together. It's perfect that guy's a giant wrestling fan He loves it. Yeah, the guys I love it. Love it He's the best roaster too, man. What'd he when I'd be sitting up at the fight's I don't say shit. I'm like When him coming at me He had Dana's back boy. Yeah, he had Dana's back for the fucking tongue. We had to do that thing at the left factor Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, Dana's a game. We're gonna do this thing and no one has nobody's coming in prepared me But he had Tony Hinkler Two much prior that's hilarious. Yeah Tony's the best of that shit. Oh, these are the best of crackable crack it on people Kind of down, but the people that love that that soap opera like WWE I don't hate on it. I know what's the much they love it. Well, he keeps you entertained. They like it You know, I mean it's they're really smart it makes and things up and bringing in new characters Have a new crazy moments and if you're a nerd like Tony like It's like you're you're it's like the same as like a male soap opera. Yeah, but it's like the same kind of scapegoat you get if you're watching game with Ron's it's just an escape This is crazy. Oh my god. He's back from that I Drought a line there. I can't do that and I got I gotta be I got a problem with it I just can't do it. I'm gonna save campus. It's not my thing. I don't watch it But I respect it I respect how hard it is to do. Yeah. Oh, yeah It's fucking good to do remember remember you wrestle data Memphis yeah, we did a little thing in the street. We have a but we were just winging it You just let me get a submission you fight me off Come on My knee it was tough man. I ain't what I think this is harder than I thought. Oh, no guys take a beat. Yeah, sure Oh, you can learn how to fall, but you're still falling. Yeah, I meant Hulk Hogan twice Well, I met him before when he did a promo with me with the UFC it was when we were on I think we're on spike back then Yeah, but I met him a long time ago and he was like he was six foot five He says giant fucking dude. I was like holy shit. It's Hulk Hogan and then I saw him the last time he did my podcast And he's like four inches shorter and it's all from getting it. All of his spine He was like a big guy still, but it was used to be a giant You know, there's a ton of fucking crazy out bald Underlips. You were so fun. I do was so fun But uh, that's how many backsurge you had and he said it was all from that move that he had we dropped down So the big seat drop exactly so the seat drop every time he does that he's compressed 300 300 plus yeah, man every night dropping down every night and just blowing his back out His back was just destroyed Wow destroyed every every vertebrae destroyed every disblown apart Carnie agents all throughout a barely good walk. I was watching the princess pro the other day with fucking I'm trying to try and Everybody want a peanut. Yeah, he's fucking great. My name is Diego Montoya. I love that. You kid in my father Such a great such a great movie Yeah, put that on for the family Kids watch it. It's classic Yeah, that's one the that last ages it goes through generations look at that fuck. Yeah, yeah, it holds up You know Then I'll make them like that anymore. I just saw that project Hail Mary. That's a nice one for the family What is that it's with Ryan Gosling goes to space and fucking that's the same the world type of thing but uh You know, it's more than that, but that's pretty much the premise where these Artemis people at now Are they are they passing the moon yet? They passed it what happened so they went to the land yet are they back yet? Where are they? Well, who's going away? They went around the moon. They did they went all the way around the moon No, no, they just went around and saw the dark side. Yeah, they two photos of the dark side. Oh really? Yeah But this flash splash splash. I was getting ready say what they crash So they land tomorrow Wow, so they So the the dark side of the moon is only dark when the moon's not it's not dark Like the sun still hits it the same amount the sun hits the light side of the moon is that you? Yes, the way though. I used to think I'm a retard I used to think that the the reason why we only see one side of the moon is because the moon doesn't spin That's what I thought no, no the moon not only spins around us, but it rotates But when we see it it the only time we see the moon during a full moon or a quarter moon or whatever it is Is when the sun is hitting the side that's always facing us Right when when it goes the other way That there's a different side that's facing us, but we don't ever get to see it because it's dark Right, that's what it is. So we but this are they took pictures of the other side Exactly. Yeah, and there's aliens everywhere. I was gonna say. Yeah Dang sensation on the other side. We're talking to the other side and in that movie he finds an alien by the way Oh, it does not really a spoiler. It's a little in the trailers. I had that guy Bob Lazar on again recently Who's that you want to see a great documentary? It's fun The first I would say Jeremy Corbells documentary which is a area 51 Bob Lazar and flying saucers That was it's called Bob Lazar area 51 and flying saucers So this guy was a back-end he was an engineer and he was hired to work on these Spacecrafts that he didn't know what the fuck they were and they told him like try to figure out this propulsion system They brought him into this hangar and this is in like 1988 and It's a flying saucer. It looks exactly like that thing on the desk Jesus and has an American flag sticker on it and so he's like oh must be ours like and then he gets in it He's like what the fuck is this? It's made for people that are three feet tall if there's no controls no buttons nothing. Why are you looking at me motherfucker Why do you all be gonna conf That flicker you know Amazon Amazon some other places what's it called again? That's four. That's four. I just saw I was just watching a series But you are not a ancient apocalypse was I'm not yeah, you was in that with a always Grand Grand Car That's right. Yeah Grandma. My man. Do you know how to rego Gracie? Yeah Good buddy of mine my your my old roommate He's a fucking wacky guy So you know we were just out to eat last night with Danner We were talking about I love that guy and he's like oh he's great. He's oh, I'm glad how to be goes mature I was talking about how to read he's doing good. He was visiting me through my podcast and he did a A seminar at my place. So you know I was catching up with him So he told me he was visiting an area 51 with his wife And he goes so yeah, you know, I always wanted to go there. So me and Fernando we drove down there and No, nothing was happening So then I'm driving back. You got to drive back hours through like the dark desert right So he's driving back and he goes to Fernando fell asleep So I had my laser pointer, so I'm just pointing out a sign pointing at this He goes mad and then I saw blue lights in the distance He goes oh, I could I want to make contact he goes what he goes. She was sleeping So I started taking my laser pen and pointing He goes and I didn't think nothing of it and then All of a sudden I'm driving and I hear And a yellow circle around my car And I wake up Fernando. She's like what did you do? And he's like I just took my laser pen it was a helicopter Fucking following him like just and he goes he goes he was getting down to like almost my roof I didn't know what to do. They had our yellow spot around my fucking car So I mean she told me I we called the police So he you know, they go look there's a helicopter Following us and they go is are you in a they said the car the everything They go the authorities are waiting for you at the rest stop Up whatever so he goes to the rest of it takes his laser pointer He gets they throws it in the garbage. I don't know why and then he comes out they They're like look they they put him in coughs He goes to his wife he goes going and get the laser pen It's in the bathroom. He goes in the men's room through the garbage finds it So they're saying all right, you were you were shooting interfering with A military helicopter or whatever it is like in other words, it's a major Yeah, crime here that he could be facing He goes mad because I was shitting myself The two pilots come over One of them takes off the helmet Cowley flow is he goes fucking thank he trained under my cousin You guys He goes my wife's yelling at me so he got out of it the guy trained under he's a brown bow Oh my god, how do that so I hope that rego man only you bro That's so let yeah, they probably thought they were trying to like fuck with planes Because kids do that they shine laser beams of planes. It's like a real problem They're getting their eyes with a fucking The ladies go all the way up to a plane. I used to be with a video on on 27th Street He's like bad watch this we'd be at the window Guys walking down the street Fuckin he's like, I look at him. Jump on the cover That's over ridiculous I think it's a laser sight on a rifle Exactly Take that down don't you know Don't do that around here Because he thought he was making contact Let's go to chopper Yeah, they keep talking about making contact. I'm tired of hearing about it Let's do it already got them. Yeah. Yeah. I want to see it. Yeah. They're just dick teasing us Oh shit, I don't think But you're a sci-fi guy. Oh man. Yeah, you watched the dude movies. No, no I know I just want to give it a shot. I do. I don't have any time But I get home too like if it's like late at night when I'm home and I'm by myself watching shit I don't want to watch anything like that. I want to watch documentaries. I was about to say man Take a week off of a documentary on fucking now I'm gonna find out what happened with you hours like this week The doom and movies are so fucking heard they're amazing Rolling is great and now they got the doom Messiah. I'm gonna know I was in it Third one coming out. Yep, third one coming out and this guy can't miss this Tell me how awesome they are good. They're good. They're very good. I tried to watch it was kind of slow Yeah, you know what I you get that just Yeah, it's a little bit in opinion Hey, you know what else is coming out with a movie You cannot would have paid it flowers. Yeah, I did it. I did it. Hey wait wait. That's why Dean picked up dinner last night Yeah, no, no, I did that because of my new job And you reach for that fucking bill Is this a movie that you put together? Yeah, yeah, what's the difference? It's uh, yeah It's about a female in an abusive relationship. Wow Look at you mr. Sensitive. There it is. There's a lot of world boy. No shit the multi talented You know nothing to do with cage fighting. Look at that. Nothing. I'm as That's incredible dude. Congratulations. That's awesome. Yeah, I'm gonna start The film festival. Yeah next week. That's awesome. Yeah, that's awesome Yeah, I like when people spread their wings. You got to you like you know, I'm life is short You don't want to be in a box. You know, you might be able to do all kind of different things and you can do whatever the fuck You want you can do whatever they want. Yeah. Yeah, so I try to do whatever the fuck I want I'm telling you that's how to live. Yeah That's how to live. There's too many people out there not doing what they want to do That's a it makes me sad actually it's a sad existence. Yeah You know and a lot of people are doing it because like you got to take care of your family and I get it and I respect it Maybe have a good time at work. That's great But there's a thing you want to do while you're still breathing. I know do it do it You should try you least try it get it out of your head. I feel so fortunate My fucking have my day to day. You know, yeah Thomas I don't want to do shit My school gallows pizzeria No pro man, no bleach And my pod my podcast I'm having fun with and UFC on filter dude. It's just such a perfect little thing for me I don't want to do anything else beautiful. It's so much fun. That's the there's a lot of power and saying no Oh, you know saying no things. I don't want to do anything more like just Enjoy what you're doing. Yeah, you know Keep piling on but the thing is once things start going good. You start saying. Oh, I better not say no to nothing No, yeah, yeah, no, but what me that hush do that. Yeah, I'll find the time But once but once you get to the point where you can say no, that's a great place to be That's the best place is your heart in it or not. Do you want to do that? Thanks a shoot man The day to day your day to day life. I thought I love about long ago long goes He knows funny. He's holding for my daughter now, which is so great. She had a first kickboxing Imagine what I thought but like they sound the pictures in the group So it's a problem. Oh, so proud and it's so it's so cool man When I see him holding for I like he doesn't have like you know He just that guy just sees the basket. He's doing the same thing you and him So that pair of out was smart. They would do a fucking a whole series of you and him Traveling to fights working with people hanging out in corner and each other you guys in the corner are some it's Fuck I might keep the camera out sour It's the truth we always talk about it in the commentary like it's fucking awesome What you guys in a corner good technical advice, but just fun you guys are fun together Just on an amateur card. We just got brought back together for one of my fighters Adrian's this young Filipino guys Good kid nerds a nurse always smiling. They're all nurse brother. He went he went My wife's a nurse But he went in there and he says I kind of just have just might one wishes to have you and Ray and Mike What he's such a nice kid so we went in there We called it and we didn't have to work the corner know the first roundy flat line is guy nice Oh, man, so yeah, man, you guys are great on your podcast together You got a crazy friendship. It's perfect. It's like the bantars hilarious The two of you guys you compliment each other perfectly. It would be a great show Soon before the first episode is me and the guys taking longer to a home Fucking road trip to the fucking home What do you think of Gilbert Burns versus Mike Malat Is Gilbert's loss for an a nobody did it to all killers? Yeah, I mean lots of stuff guys Malat I'm better only lost once to Neil Magney in a fight that he was doing great in but then he got Neil Magney because that guy's fucking never gets tired never gets tired never to make discipline always in shape He right of the ship since then yep, and that kids like the next captain Canada He's doing people. Yeah, they make an unfair comparison like you didn't exchange that type of thing But he's his own fighter. He's got a great skill set good head on his shoulders Family of studs. He's brothers like an ice hockey fucking good. It's a good test for him. Gilbert at this stage of his career You know, yeah, see if he's still got it. Yeah, you know, he's the first guy to make comes out with human But when Morales did that to Gilbert. I was like Jesus Christ Morales is terrifying. He looks so big. I know. I know. I know he doesn't make any sense So when we I was with Brady when Brady got beat by him and At the way and he looked okay, right? I think you know a guy at least 170 pounds did the next day We should he steps into the cage and we're just looking at oh my god He's massive massive. Yeah, and when you're that much taller that the and you're you're the better striker God, that's a huge advantage like he just because you can stand six feet away from a guy It just be like whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa and gari last week. Oh my god I know man, so what he trained it with grants of the crown controls a kid and Before he went off to college and all and I mean, the only thing I can say first off Obviously he was not ready for him yet But he definitely showed a lot of heart because he fucking prayed in there and took a two-way Yeah, I was just thinking the exam. I hope he comes back. I mean, that was I was bad Personally knowing him. I felt horrible watching that I was like he wasn't ready for that yet Yeah, there's when you get an elite striker you got to realize that guy beat Pereira and glory Pereira knocked him out twice after that, but in the first fight beat Pereira I think just a decision like ordinary in his first couple like he came out with a new version and it was fucking impressed He's fucking good and he's trained with Pereira now So he's a lot of glovers. Yeah, you know, that's a great fucking camp and Glover has so much knowledge Yeah, he's that guy was in the dark for six years where he couldn't get into America and during those six years He was the boogeyman Everybody talked about Glover. They're like there's a guy that's in Brazil He can't get to America But if the guy gets here, he's fucking everybody and that was Glover Glover was a tell he was always training with truck trucking in And they're in Danbury, Connecticut So that's me and that's it Not Wow, they should to do out there. All they doing is training. Yeah, dude Just nothing but Lyme disease in the woods right there and federal prison in Danbury Yeah, Connecticut is it's a good place to just not get distracted Just get to work damn berries were a hot rego Gracie broke my elbow. I was there. Yeah, you was that I Didn't know you was that I go you know, I was there Damn Jeff get pins in it no idea. I mean he said reset it cast it No pins he told that story at the seminar. Oh, he did We weren't close at the time, and I was yelling shit, but I regret that too Go he let it go And you didn't tap well, yeah and right which was great and then I was yelling out of for letting it go Which I was like My friend now at the time It was just well to be fair like if I knew it was gonna break I would have tapped Yeah, I didn't know it was gonna break right yeah Yeah, that's what the story told then he said that Hanzo yelled at him too if they're for letting it go. Why'd you were you getting soft? Let that shit go. Yeah, I gotta get Hanzo in here. Oh He's definitely we were doing it one time, but he was only an officer for short amount of time And I didn't have anything open I couldn't get him in I loved to sit down with that guy. I want a legend Yeah, stories for days and he's one of those guys like you hear about a guy getting the black belt and you're like, okay And you go they got a black belt from Henso you're like, oh Okay, definitely it's like Hanzo Hickson John Jack Machado. There's a few of those guys that are like, okay That's a real black belt like I Mean pencils New York Place is like one of the most legendary places in the history of jujitsu If you had a right a history of jujitsu the Hanzo Academy in New York City. Yeah, holy shit Came over in 96 we had like an in school tournament It was great because a Craig Kookuck already had two schools for him. He had a jersey school and No, no one He's like this appeared my first instructor, but he was not an easy guy to he'd never let you get too close I bought all the tapes Learned amount of skates One day. Oh, oh, she's a very good a teacher. I was what I was to if you had to go early Brazilian jujitsu black belt Yeah, like early 90s, right? Like the Steve Maxwell or he was one of the earliest ones I found out about him through the Gracie newsletter that I was applied to at like 17 I used to get that the great because I would buy the tapes you get a newsletter and one newsletter It was like every few months It was announcing the first American black belt and then like two newsletters later. They disowned them Then I found out through black belt magazine that he was teaching in the village one day a week in the city I go all right They might have disowned them, but they couldn't take away a skill set There was no place to learn in the on the East Coast except for Maxwell and Philly Yep, so that's how I found Kookuck and then he'd be partnered up with Hanzo and Then I went with Hanzo when they broke up obviously. Why did they break up? I Remember Hanzo took me out to eat one time and he's like look and I always got I got a one-way What Hanzo when they broke up? Obviously. Why did they break up? I remember Hanzo took me out to eat one time and he's like, look, and I always got I got a one with Hanzo so much better. He right off the bat. Like Hanzo was just so warm and great. He'd fight me over his house and he was just such a and Craig was always kind of a wall. He was a big German guy just. But I remember one time he told me like, look, something with the business where he wasn't feel like he was being treated fairly. I'll just leave it like that. And then he goes, look, he goes, if he no one likes Craig, he goes, if you go with him and and me, he goes, people will go with him because of you because they like you and you but I want you to come with me. I go, look, I go ahead and at first I'm like, is any, you know, I was young kid. I didn't know. I go, is any way you guys could make up? He goes, man, if it was Brazil, he'd be already dead. So much for that. I went with Hanzo and Craig kind of left him. So Matt, where are you in the pecking order in terms of American black belts from Hanzo? I'm the first American of the Hanzo. That's amazing. That's amazing. That's something that that's my biggest achievement right there. You know, he took me another his wing, Hanzo again. I was a purple bow. He got me out of a security guard booth, taking me to Japan to corner him versus rings because he wanted to have me to see what it's like backstage. Dude, I was no, I didn't do anything yet. I'm like, oh shit, really Japan? So he would just do stuff like that. Yeah, he did. He put a lot into me. So I can't thank him enough. That's fucking camp. You just think about how many elite black belts Hanzo produced. And then think of the John Donner, her branch of it. Yeah, I know. Right. Well, like generationally, like it just it dominates all the generations of jits, especially now if you think of what Donner has done. I mean, his prize guide Gordon Ryan, Chris of all time for sure. But I mean, even on the other side, who they don't get along with so much now, like Nicky riding that are still from Donner. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And all a lead of the elite. Yeah. That's a crazy lineage. That's a guy that just put 100% of himself into it. And he's got a genius mind. I remember him and even on the television until my buddy, Chad Lebron, who was moving back to Virginia, James, something he gave him one so he could watch. It had, I think, a VHS and a DVD thing where he wanted to just study wrestling tapes and Japanese tapes. And he just used it just a study. I have a question for you. Whatever happened to Eddie Wolverine. It is all I asked him about that last last time again. Comments coming. What did he say? He got into some kind of business now? He's not really training as much. God, that guy was good. Yeah, he was good. It was like, he's not an early in the day. Like as the leg lock revolution was unfolding, that was John's first, you know, savage he put out. I remember. And, you know, just super, super technical, you know, little change a lot of those guys in leg lock technique, too. You know, they all shared techniques. Oh, yeah. I think it's just amazing that John drives. He never drove in the North. I go, I drove, like, are you fucking with a rash guard on a fanny pack? Did he sweatpants? He was dressed up last night. He had a all-black polo shirt. I go, yeah, New Zealand. Yeah, a new, you know, all the same. He was your bad ass, that because what, what, no rash guard? And he goes, oh, I got dressed up for you tonight. Yeah, well, you probably went back home to his family and his mother was like, right? Stop wearing the red card everywhere. Yeah, crazy. It's all right. He's teaching a king's way now, go out in school. Now that Gordon's done competing, he's got that school going on. He's like a character in a movie. Like he's not supposed to exist. That are? Yeah. It's a philosophy major at Columbia, who is false and love what you just said because he's a bouncer. He wants to bounce that scores. Yeah. Right. He's just like Jack, like power lift or bouncer. Play rugby. He was like 220. He was your. Jacked. And so then he learns Jiu Jitsu becomes obsessed with Jiu Jitsu, but his body's all fucked up from rugby. He's got a fucked up knee, then his hip gets fucked up. And so he can't really compete, but he is such a Jiu Jitsu fanatic that he trains the best guys of all time. It's kind of nuts. It is nuts. And that's all he cares about. Like he doesn't give a shit about anything. He doesn't give a fuck about social media. Like a John. That's one of my favorite. Oh my God. Full of that hair. Jacked. Looking ready for a gay date. John, definitely. All the great. A skirt. Yeah, it does. He was a really good child. Definitely would rock a headgear too when he rushed. He was a bad motherfucker, dude. Bad motherfucker. I know a lot of people were rolling with him that were shocked. Yeah. Yeah. Dude, John would do privates and wrestle everybody all day long. Yeah, he lived it. And he still lives it. And it's just so fortunate that you get a guy who's that smart. Like in everything. Like he's really well read history, all kinds of, like he's a very interesting guy that he's talking to. But it becomes obsessed only with Jiu Jitsu. He didn't have a family. He was like, yeah, his wife and kids got to take care of her. I love that choking people when you have this out here. It's like a routine now. Now every time we come out, I get, you know, what I'm, I don't see him to waffin. So it's great. It's like a little reunion. Each time we come to town, I'd be with him. How many days a week? We just train and go to Baritoville. They were in Puerto Rico during the pandemic and they were having a hard time there. And I was like, come to Texas, baby. Come on down. I'll tell you. You're the pied piper. They all ended up here. Well, it's a fun place, man. It really is. It's the last time the whole Puerto Rico thing was good for a while. I was talking to Nikki Rad about that. He said it was great. He was like just like being in Puerto Rico with your friends. And like a frat house training at Jujitsu all day. It was like amazing. Well, especially because they were shut down. Yeah. And in Puerto Rico, you have outside, like you can get light into the room. So he kills the fucking staff better. Yeah. All right. How many guys got staff from that basement Jujitsu? Right. Right. A lot of people got staff. There's a lot of funk that gets on those mats that if you're not careful. His belly would hold the other body. Yeah. That's from staff. Dude, my fucking belly, Joe on the way here on the way to the JFK. I thought it was hard to tell him. Because I always got my issues, but I usually give myself like, if I'm going somewhere, like on a car trip or anywhere, like I clear out for at least an hour and a half to two hours. Like I'll give myself my espresso in the morning, two seltzes, and then I just let it go to work and I'm pushing on my belly. Because I think it's stuck in there. So I thought I gave myself enough time and I was going to JFK for my house 30 minutes. Not in the morning. We 10 minutes into that fucking car trip. I go, I'm not fucking making it. I go, I'm not. I go, I'm not. And the guy was my. Why the was such a good guy? What a nice guy. I get my fifth. I get my fucking tip. Good tip. So we're driving. I go, I go, all right, let me just keep watching videos on my phone. I mean, I'm like, let me just try to put my mind go somewhere. Clock the clock wasn't moving. I look back. I go, that's another minute. I'm not. I just know where I'm making this. So I'm on the bell parkway. It's not like you could just pull over. So I go, you know, I go, buddy, I go, I go, I go, I'm sorry, man. I go, I'm not going to make it. I go, we got a pull over. He goes, oh, he goes, oh, the, the, there's no way really to pull over. You want me to take a leg? I go, go off an exit. I go, you can, I go, you can have to do something. I go, I'm not making it. I go, can I get you? I go, can you seven, 11, go. I go, he goes, don't you have to be. I go, I'm going to shake your cup. I go, no, I'm sorry. I go, I go, I go, I go, I go, I knew it was, it's just, it's going to happen. And it's my biggest fucking fear and it's coming to life. So he, this guy, it's okay. No, it's, he got it over. We almost hit a fucking car. I'm on the side. There's not even bushes or anything. There was some, like some, like a, nobody could see you, but everybody saw me. No, there's got, you said I'm happy your head. I got out. As I'm taking my pants down, fucking, I'm going, thank goodness. I made it. And fuck, I get back in, I go, buddy, you're shitting the cup. No, I didn't, I'm shit, I just piss. Oh. But it's like, well, I mean, I thought my, my asshole purples, but no, you know, when you feel like, you know, what does it, but it's like that with you, you have to pee too. Yeah. Sometimes I have to, I have to do both. Like I'm like, I have to pee, but I know to really get it all out. I have to push it. Hey, everybody, how's my ass? So we, you know, it's pee though, like, you can't just hold pee. Man, I can, but not to this. Not like how you used to be able to. No, well, it's not like, it's one of those things where I have to clear out in the morning and I thought I totally cleared out, but sometimes I'm like, I had them good. I pushed out totally and then it kind of just gets something else in the chamber or something. I'm like, oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, it's, it's still so, I love it. So we're driving, I'm like, when I get the feeling, it's such a horrible feeling, because you're, it's not about willpower. It's not about thinking of something. I'm like, dude, it's gonna fucking happen. This is the day that I just pissed myself. It's gonna, but thank, dude, I gave a custom tag. If 70 dollars for the road for the trip, I gave him a $50 tip. I go, dude, thank you, bro. You're a fucking hero. This guy fucking saved my fucking ass. And I could someone else have like, they'd be like, hey, dude, fuck off with it. I go, or don't do this in my car. Dude, I'm like, it's happening. And I go, give me your coffee. He's like, hold you up the pee. I go, obviously, but I do it. He made it, but I couldn't do it. I fucking, a 30 minute drive there. I couldn't fucking make it. That's crazy. It's scary. But as you get older, it's hard to hold it, man. But now I think it's my ulcerative colitis. Has to do with that. Yeah, I don't know. But, because that sounds crazy. Dude, I comes on that query. It's, it was, I've had it before, but like, I don't know if I told that, maybe he said it the last time here. We were going to wanna query him out east with my family. And it was one of those things, just like this. And I get out of the car and then we're looking and we're like, I can, then I see this like a line out to do. I'm not making this. There's no way of making this. So I go, honey, I, you go, okay, go, go. So I fucking, there's like a post office with those, those bushes that come straight up, like they're all tied together. I fucking smoosh myself through the second I take my dick out. Fucking bees come around. I go, I'm gonna get stunk cause I'm not going out with my dick. And fucking, I didn't get stunk, but I definitely had some on the front of my pants. What are you gonna do? Sometimes, I'm a very clean person. So the black area is related to that. Imagine being a woman in that situation. Man, right? No, there's no hiding it. Oh, hard. Yeah, man, these are the things you gotta deal with when you get older a little bit. I am getting myself, that's hopefully gonna help me. What is the cause of alterative colitis? What do they say it causes it? I don't know. I mean, I think some of it's, my history, I know one of my brothers had Crohn's, which is even worse. Yeah, it's Crohn's disease to level up. Yeah, man. Like, so I know my grandfather, when he was getting older though, we had some shit. Have you ever like swarmed off pasta? Well, just like taking like months off. I was, I was trying to go carnivore. I did go gluten free for a while, you know, but, you know, they even espresso. I go, come on, man, I got out of this. I know. I'm with you. Every time I go to New York, I have to eat Italian food. Like, I'm looking forward to made the Jersey shows, so I can get some fucking New Jersey Italian food. I gotta take you to Italian. You love this pizza. Let's go. You love this. Oh, yeah, I'm trying to come up next to me. I'm sure. I love pizza. No, no, they just, they're fucking, no bleach, no probate. Don't get me, love it. But it's so, because I could eat it. I could eat three slices on the way to my school. And I'm not fucked up. I could train and it's fucking, if I did that would have fucking regular slice of pizza. You do it. I want to take a nap, you know? So it's even my wife now orders the zero zero flour. The couple. Yeah. We get that. She makes the bread. She makes the pizza. She makes fresh bread. I feel like I got a game of drones. Mm-hmm. That place was the biggest place I've used to. Guy Thanos. Yeah. All Italian flour. Handmade pasta. Oh, yeah. Tonight we want to go to a place. Let's go. I want to fucking do that. I get to my fucking hotel. But I wonder if you did that if it would have an effect. You know who cured his fucking ulcerative colitis? Is George St. Pierre? How did he do that? He said it's one of the reasons why he was stopping fighting. Fasting. Fasting. Really? Yeah. Interesting. Did that? That's what he said. He was so hardcore like three-long shit. Yeah, he does like at least three. Three days. Nah, I can't do that. I do 24 hours sometimes. Yeah, but that's not that hard. Yeah, I mean, you stay busy enough as well. I think if you're busy, definitely. You can't. He's just eating a big dinner. Want to check on each of the next dinner. What is that? Check. You know, you got him all sorts of things. You got him all sorts of things. Sorry, he thought it for me. But it is tasty. That's delicious. What else? I love it. They're illegal in California. They all. Isn't everything? You can't have flavored nicotine in California. What the fuck? What the hell is that about? Is that like because they just want to be able to tell you what to do? Yeah. That's how the symptom of the, you can go by whiskey. You go to CVS and buy a jug of whiskey and drink yourself to death. But you can't buy flavored zins. That makes no flavor. That makes zero sense. That makes zero sense. That makes zero sense. I can't buy flavored vapes because they don't want to encourage kids. Because you know how kids are. They just want to, they want flavored zins. Yeah. Yeah. Talking about all the kinds of fucking stupid. It's so stupid, California is just so dumb. They just want to tell you what to do. Yeah. It's a bunch of nannies. And if it's legal, they're going to tax it and regulate it. Exactly. And everybody's moving out. People just flee in that state like it's on fire. But it's coming here. They're coming here. They're going to Tennessee. They're going to Florida. They're going anywhere. They're going to have to fuck alone. I think they're going anywhere. I think they're going anywhere. They have to be. They look so much better. No, I will help. Everybody's running out of there too. Not me. I'm going to have to live. I'm not going to live. Yeah, it's just, it just sucks when the government gets goofy. And they're like, what are you talking about? Now that Cathy Hultralady is saying, begging people to come back. Get those people to come back to New York. Remember before? Yeah. All of you go move the Florida. Yeah. That's pretty good. Which is a crazy thing to say. That's a crazy thing to say. It's so delusional. But that lady's not anyone. Yeah. She said, they're like, vaccines were gift from God. She says, she talks crazy. It's like people were so tired of Cuomo. They're like, who else? Okay, fine. You run it. You know what I mean? It's like, how would that lady become like the, your best choice that seems nuts? That makes me concern that Steven Corbe is doing the next fucking Lord of the Rings. Who is like he's writing the movie or something. And him and his son. Really? And I know he's a fucking little bit of a woe. Wait a minute. Colbert? Yeah. Colbert. Oh. He got all that. Peter Jackson was making an announcement. I know all the nerd news. Peter Jackson was making an announcement about a new Lord of the Rings movies coming out with. And I'm partnering up with, well, let me, let me show you. And all of a sudden they go to Steven Corbe reading a Lord of the Rings book. Oh, hey, you know, they planned it. And he's like, yeah, I took it from this part of the thing. She's gonna have any dans and shirringes in there. She's gonna have a poor token. They shit all over his thing. That rings of power is just a fucking mess. Piece of shit. What is that? Orcs rings of power. Orcs will just create it. They're making swords like in. Yeah, they were like, yeah, they were feelings. And they were like, they were like kids. They were like little kids. It was weird. What? Yeah. What is this? Rings of power. The Amazon series of the Lord of the Rings is the biggest pile of shit next to the actualite. Everybody's shit on our fucking child. Or shit on, they shit on their major franchises that had some really good lore. Like everything from Star Trek with the fuck they did. Did everything Disney touch they fucked up Marvel. Everything. How do you fuck up Orcs? Not on the mail. They made him tear a fuck up the Hulk. They make him smart. They make him push him down. And he never got his balls back. if it down. Let's kick his ass. Yeah, that's an orc, bro. Yeah, no, watch him with the helmet. Click on that. Click on that. They do like they have feelings. Jesus. Oh, yeah, they make no way to be eliminated against. Oh, no, it's fucking brutal. That guys got feelings for real. Yeah, he had feelings and yeah. Yeah, that's what's that feeling. There's no more. Because we're seeing like demons. Nope. No, no, that's one in the lower right hand corner with the fucking helmet. Look at that. Oh, fuck. Yeah. That story might be a good guy. There might be no other. There's a bad story. The one to be a good guy. Me neither one orcs old school. Like from some of these. That's why that night of the Seven Kingdoms was refreshing. Because there had no bullshit in it. There you go. Wow. Oh, jeez. Wow. Give the guy a chance. Who knows? Maybe it's awesome. You say he was a had a cameo in desolation of small goo. Oh, no shit. They did an animated series at the War of Rohan, which was a piece of shit. They made a girl boss in there. Yeah. All the cool dudes get killed and the girls killing everybody. And she knows everything. And they took it from like one like she was in like one paragraph and fucking into the thing and they just gave her this big backstory of being a badass. It's like the fantastic for her with the female silver surfer. She appeared to maybe one or two comics. Spitches not a main character. No shape. No how, but boom. Is the real silver surfer in it too? No. They got big, absolutely. Exactly. Not it. What? There was a female silver surfer for a while. No. Like very sporadically. No, but they appeared in one or two. It was actually his. Now you're getting on my nerd side. Yep. It was his golf before he was the silver surfer. Like, like, shallabal. It was his chick. And the Russo brothers. They are. They are. They are. They they've been hitting out of the park with every Marvel movie they did. Yeah. So they're doing doomsday, which is going to be coming, which is basically going to be they're putting out end game again in theater in the theaters. And just going to be like correctly. Like it's going to take place directly. Oh, good. Good. I'm throwing a Thor's coming. They damn fucking ready for that. They did win the soldier. Like the highest level of Thor. Oh, that's funny. That's keep going. Oh, my God. He's a nerd. He's a fucking nerd. He died. Oh, no. That's his. Thor. That's so. It's such a crazy. They were grown ass. That's a fucking grown ass man. That's your last level of Thor. That's the. That's my WWE. I love it. It's like. It's like. I love. But they ruined those fucking movies, man. It's fucking Thor. Yeah. Ratonnak was fun. Dude. Love and thunder. Oh, he's my friend, the rock monster. And his life made ball. Right. What? What the fuck. Why though? What is that to do with it? You got to give credit to the DC movies then. Because they never ruined Batman. You know, the most recent Batman's at least the Christian bail man. The power patterns. Yeah. It was still pretty dark in like dark. Yeah. It's just right. Yeah. There's like, there's no bull shit in them. There's no, it wasn't. It wasn't. They fucking murdered that Thor to killed him and Gore. like Christian bail played Gore in that movie. And the comics, that is the fucking best Thor story. Like first off, he did. I mean, I love him. Like he did on the movie. But he's killing every killing all the other gods. Like, I mean, Thor, his fucking dad had to get a whole crew to come and fight this guy. And none of that really was showed in the movie. It was horrible. Love and thunder. Yeah. It was not. I didn't know he was such a nerd. Oh, for comics. I didn't know. Why did he do it? Like the fucking. Oh, wow. Look at him there. See, if you can look in the comic, like the comic version of Gore, because it's not even closed. So this is already turned into this movie. Well, that was shit. That was shit. Damn. Look at his, click on that. Well, your cursor's on. What the fuck, man? And he wrecked. He was a perfect guy to play it, but they just ruined the picture. Yeah, he can't play in Christian bail. Yeah, they should have done it just by the comic books. He shouldn't be able to rewrite history like that and fuck it up. See, it's Gore, the God butcher. Yeah, that's ruined, Ken, for just in case you were wondering. Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ. He's like four. He's like four. Sorry there. How many daughters are the same guy? It's just levels. Oh. Explain that. Uh oh. Whoa. Damn, he looks good in the movie. That's pretty dope. Probably else they're just the renderings. I don't know that they've shown stuff like this. When does the movie come out? Later this year. Do they come out this year? Oh, this year. And so does Dune, Messiah. It's a good year to be a nerd. Yeah. Well, the nerd movie's held the best if you think about it. The stars are like 100% guaranteed. The Harry Potter show that they do it on HBO. I've read, find out if it's true. Put this in a perplexed day or wonderful AI sponsor. If they made, it cost them a hundred million dollars each episode. What? The new one that's coming out? This new one apparently it's so highly produced. Like they've risked a billion dollars. Oh my God. It's supposed to be insane. Who? Harry Potter? But it's Harry Potter. I feel like you can't miss with Harry Potter. Right. Except for trans people. There's a lot of controversy with the casting because they did a race swap with Snape. Snape. He's like a guy that's a hundred million dollars. That's going to be a rough one man because his backstory is not good. It hasn't been confirmed yet. Several recent reports claim the budget is around a hundred million per episode. Jesus. Seven plant season eight episodes per season. 56 episodes total. That per episode figure implies an estimated total production cost of about 5.6 billion dollars. It looks like it's done well. I saw the common expressions. How are you? You have to. If you're going to do a Harry Potter, you're going to do it to the maximum. I got to get an Harry Potter because there's not a lot of black characters in it, but there is one. There's one now. But before that, before that, the one character, guess what his name is? I'm not guessing anything. Dean Thomas shut the floor. That's where the guy is. I swear to God. I swear to God. I want my royalties. I want my royalties. I want my royalties. That's not another guy. That's not the real way, but yeah. There it is. There it is. Dean Thomas. That's correct. There it is. Dean Thomas. That's correct. There it is. Dean Thomas. That's correct. Why is it controversial because they've raised swap because his backstory was, I think he was in love with Harry's mom and then they fucking, I think they all beat him up and stuff. It's just not a good look. If it's, you know what I mean? Because he plays black snape. So you're implying that they beat him up because he's black. Well, I'm not saying that. I'm just saying it's not, I'm saying to me, Kim, like a character that's, I don't know. Why does he like me? It could be, it could be interesting. It's gonna be me. It's gonna be, it's gonna be amazing. If they just follow the books, it's gonna be amazing. I, I, you know, I missed the, I was a little bit older than my kids love the Harry Potter. You know, people, don't read the books and shit. I think it's the most successful books of all time. Yes. I think so. I think it's like right up there with the Bible. Damn. I feel bad for that lady. Find that out. She got crucified for just comparing the sales of Harry Potter. She's not their guns though. She got crucified for being logical, reasonable. They tell them the trees and trying to protect women and all these fucking people's, these actors are still saying she said problematic things. I want to hold them down. So he tell me what she said that's problematic. Yeah, that was a bit unfair to her. It was a article written about this one actor that did it, where that said he is more concerned with being on the right side of Hollywood than the right side of history. And that's accurate. Because these people all don't want to offend these dorks in Hollywood that are out of their fucking minds. And enormously commercially, commercially, what does that mean? An enormously commercially successful, but the Bible has sold far more copies overall. Harry Potter series has sold over 500 million copies estimated for the Bibles around five to six billion copies. How many copies of the Quran have been printed? But before I mean, there's also multiple versions of the Bible and there's seven books of Harry Potter. So yeah, there's not seven, you know, right, right, right, right, right. You could break it down. There's 45 books in the Bible and those are also, you know, I don't know. Yeah, but most people buy it as the Bible. Right, I know, but there's also the King James Bible. There's the Bible and there's the Old Testament. And yeah, so by fewer copies, Harry Potter book sales are estimated to have generated about $7.7 billion in revenue. Harry Potter in every hotel room. Dang, that's true. That's a good point. That's a good point. Yeah, they keep that Bible in that hotel room just in case. That's a weird thing, right? Yeah, why do they do that? Why I think someone donated it? There was a Bill Hicks joke he did about it back in the day. I forget there was a name on the Bible. It was a dada-da Bible. Like someone, like one family donated Bibles to like every hotel room, get in Bible. I think that's it. Is that it? I mean, I think that was one of the Canadian family. I think that was the joke. It was part of the joke. Who the fuck are the Gideon's? I was so depressed. When I got here, I bought my Metacust and I realized I brought two right controllers. Oh, my God. I had my headset on. I don't know. No, no. I'm playing a game. I'm playing a new game. What's the game? Jamie, get ready for this. Go off run. 16 on 16. There's tanks. There's fucking choppers. F-O-R-E front. It is, forget about part one, forget about contractors. I know I hyped them up on it before. This fucking game is just pure adrenaline. Okay. That's what I'm saying. That's what I'm doing. Get that out. Joe, I'm telling you. You used to like the Quake shit. Yeah, I want to see what it looks like. Show me what it looks like. Show me what it looks like. The forefront is so good. Here it is. This is it. 16 on 16. Yeah, that's, but it's the gameplay. This is the, you have to, I love the sniping. Oh, you, you give me my behemoth and I am fucking taking people out. You just bring that dude back to life. Yeah, you get him with that. You get him with that frickering letter. But it is so, look at the tanks. But you're seeing this through you of the R. It is so much fun. Me and my brother, Lord Edwin, we go on this motherfucker and we take souls. You can get on a bike. You could do all four, the four wheeler. They have anti aircraft, they have carriers, ACPs, they have tanks. How do you have a life outside of this? Wow. That's the part. That's the problem with these things. Let's do good. How's the women, you know? They're watching love on the spectrum and I'm playing this. They like that. The problem is these are too good. They're too fun. They can take your whole life away. No, I got a two hour time limit on my, I play into my battery dies. That's good. Two hours, that's all those things. That's around that. I want to have a, if they're a day, making people more dangerous, do my podcast. You know, I deserve it. How do you deserve it? I deserve it. I deserve it. I'm scared. I'm scared. I watch it. I get scared. No, no, no. Come on. You would get addicted to this. No, no, no. Oh, yeah. It's a real problem. It was like, I can't play these things. It was like a cracker that couldn't get his light on working today. I would get that. I'm like, because I like the kill time here when I'm fucking. I made a decision a long time ago to never bring a like a gaming setup with me on the road. I'm like, I can't do it. Yeah. Everywhere it goes. I'll be up to four o'clock in one. I'll be like any first person shooter where you're running around a map and there's another dude on the map and you got to get a rocket launcher and fucking it starts to feel real. It feels very real. Me last night that I had to go back to this one. Oh, fish. Oh, this is doom. Oh, my god. It's doom. It's doom in VR. Oh, no, this is a problem. I got to find this. But doom is, I actually think this is the quick one player of course. Yeah. It is quick one. Yeah. Oh, wow. I like the quakes though, I love it. But I'm more of a quick three arena guy, because quick three arena like show him some quake three arena. They got the graphics down and then they had it set up where everything was online. So you didn't have to like buy the new version of quake and download it to your computer and run it and play it. No, it's online. So you just log in and you're playing this streaming. It's fucking phenomenal. No, like that now. But the matter, we just get updates show some highlights of game place. See what it looks like. It's supposed to be the VR version. Oh, this is the VR version. Oh, Jesus Christ. Why are you showing me this? Don't show me this. Because I was going to tell you next that the division pros being updated now so we can play a higher. Oh, don't do this to me. This is my game. This is my game. I fucking love this game. I had to get a star link. I get it to this on the front. Shut the fuck up. I'm not doing this. Is it a battle? Yeah. You just got to kill everybody. The problem is me. This is my game. I fucking love this. I think you had a Starlink, I think it's just on the phone. Shut the fuck up. Oh, you're just kidding. I'm not doing this. Is it a battle royale? You just got to kill everybody? Yeah. The problem is, man, I start doing it. And if I start fucking people up, I can't start. It's funded. And I got pretty good at it. Not like, you know, I could win tournaments. Good, but I got pretty good at it. Like I fucked these guys up. The dudes in the studio I fucked up. Oh, dude. I'll get real addicted to it. Not so good. That's a problem. That's a problem. Just going into real. Next thing you know, yep, your life is going. This is one of my favorite maps. You bounce out to this one and everybody could see you. So they're all sniping you when you try to come back when you get the God power. Poor. Now you just fucking destroy everyone. Hey, you speaking my language. Yeah, look at this, bro. You got a railgun precision movement. Boom, look at that. That's the rail. Look at the railgun, bro. You got to have super accuracy. Boom. And while you got God power, you just have to hit him once. Boom. Boom, look at that. Oh, shit. It's got timing. This is a dig. This is like you're watching. I'm watching people smoke crack. And I'm going, no, give me that pipe, baby. Give me that pipe. It's so funny. But that was VR. I would never have a life. I don't have a life. I can't do it. It just helps balance me out. You know what it's like, dude? It's like you're just two if you never got tired. Oh, yeah. Well, that's what that's why you have the battery life on it. I think it's the most. The match of the whole. You just do it all day. If you never got hurt, you never got tired. You just be training const. Especially if you were fucking people. Oh, my God. Always winning and tapping people out. Once you got to a certain level, I mean, this is to me, straight crack. Oh, dude, that looks fun. Come on. How fun is this game? You're swapping weapons instantaneously. And you have certain weapons set to different keys, like my rail gun is always this middle to wheel button. I hit that motherfucker. I hit the rail gun. And you could adjust your speed of your mouse, depending on the weapon. Do you hear the other players? Do they complain when you use a certain weapon? I don't know if they use that with this. I never did. I don't, when you chat with Quake, you would have to pull the menu down and chat. If you have a bunch of people talking while you're playing, it's going to ruin your game experience. Yeah, sometimes with this, I would chat with them. I don't want anybody talking shit. I just want to kill you. You're like, good job. Yeah, good job. A punk. They call me a punk. Good job, a punk. You have to use a shotgun pussy. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I try to be mature. But you're dead, you little fuck you're dead. You should use a shotgun, cop'sucker. Yeah, yeah, they complain when I kill them. They're like, what are you, 30, you're playing a game? I'm like, well, I'm actually 50. 50. 50. Thank you, kid. I'll be 30. My money is old. I'm going to throw it on his 30. I'm like, well, screw up. My man, when I was in high school, I found out Madonna was 26. I was like, oh, she's old. That's a lot of it. Dude, I'm in a big, I remember getting ready for a fight at 35. I was getting ready for Trig. And I had G on Vellante there. Now he's older than this now. He's like, dude, has a field to be 35. I go, do fuck you. I'm not fucking kidding. Fuck you. I bring that up to you. Now he's like, 40 now. I'm like, I didn't say you caught up to me a little. Yeah, man. It's where we're all dying. I know. I mean, I ain't got much time left. Slow to process. Really? I'm 58. What are you, Johnny? 57. Oh, you guys could have worked high school together. You look like a class above. I'm 51. Young man. I'm still only 49. You're full of shit. I'm 49. You've been it together. Yeah. All right. I like it. I thought you would be like a Brazilian. How to regal grace. He used to lie about his fucking age like a chick. I know. Dude, you're my age. What does this say fucking 29 still? What are you talking about? No one knows how old Yo-L is. Oh, yeah. He's probably older. Yeah. I know. Might be older. It does feel weird when you say 51. Like when I say 51, I'm like, oh, 50. And I'm all over the spot. You never really hit you. You'll be happy too. I'm almost 60. I mean, we were growing up. Those 60 was broken down. Yeah. That's a big difference from shout out to ways to well. Yeah. Life met from you. Yeah. Wait. But you hang out with younger guys? Cause I was all younger. You're in the gym. You're with younger people. Yeah. It's a lot. It's always with the younger comics. Yeah. Unless it's Ron White. Right. It's those worlds. And I bet you when you hang out with Ron White, it doesn't feel a young and I would an old man. No. It's like me, a long ago. He's that guy's awesome. Jam. He's a jam. Long ago, 67. I hit it with the same tools. Throw away something. It would just be so funny. He's a diet laugh. And he's a naturally funny dude. Yeah. And just a sweetheart of a guy. He was good and tired as all so. Oh, he's great. And I like that show. Yeah. You know, he's homies with Shane. Shane's always there too. Tonight, it's but that again. Like young people that are doing the thing we all love to do haven't fun. Just like, did you just do a jam? Just like anything else. You know, I mean, this idea that you have to one day grow up. Like that's not true. I'm here to tell you it's actually. You should grow in some ways like being a good dad. Take care of your taxes. You know, that kind of stuff. Look at that. After that, shut up. Shut up. That's me and a fucking nudge. Yeah, there's nothing wrong with you playing those games. Just don't tell those kids how old you are. I don't do the call me a little. You're just going to sound 30. I'm like, you little fuck. Yeah. But it's don't have a heart attack for real. You have to take any shit breaks in the middle of your VR experience. No, but I'm not a bug. I'm a little bit. I'm a little bit. I'm a little bit. I'm a squat down. I'm in my fucking thing. You might be back. You go after you kill him. They get me out of the eye. We'll t-bake some. I'll give a fuck. You don't outgrow that. So you actually squat physically and it does it. Maybe. My wife's a weight down there. He deserves it. I'm crazy. This is crazy. This is crazy. Sometimes different than a video control. You actually squat. You're actually squat. That's crazy. How you get my squats in? You've seen those multi-directional treadmills. But I'm not doing those games on now. But I'm not running. My knees aren't good for that. So there's a treadmill, like a circle. And it goes in any direct, omni-directional, I think, that's called, and you're strapped in with a harness that you can see from them. They just move. They would move like you're running. You would be in sales shape. There would be some people in better shape. Oh, do you think how good that would be for your footwork? Like, if you could have a VR, there's a good VR boxing game. And one of the things that I noticed when I was playing it was my feet were hurting. Because I was doing it on concrete, on cement. And I was wearing like converse all-stars. And you just push it off your feet all the time. I was like, oh my god, I'm getting a footwork out. This is crazy. Like, it was gassing me out. Because you really see the guy. And he pops you. Everything goes white. Like you got stung. You want to get him back. And you're moving around stuff. There's a bunch of them. I got to get into those. The tire is just tiring. I think that the footwork is. The whole thing is, when you hold the gloves, if you hold the hand things like this, it shows the gloves like this. So when you're punching, it looks like you're punching them wrong. So you're, it fucks your head up. You know what I mean? So when you're twisting the punch, it's showing this. And it fucks your head up. Because it's like, you're a fucking winged chunk. So like, if you punch like this, it looks like the knuckles are coming up. But you're doing this. Oh, yeah. I think you're out of can't they get that? They should get that right. It should be where your hands are positioned. Exactly. So if you hold it like that, it should be the gloves like that. And then you turn it like that. And it looks so that way it doesn't fuck with your head while you're punching that thing. Because it's weird. Clearly the developers. Yes. One box. But I think there's some real benefit in it for real. Because first of all, it's harder to hit air than it is to hit a thing. So you get a little workout doing that. The things don't way much. But you know, it's put like a little, you know, a little whisked wrist weight or something. Or someone can make a controller that has lead in it. That has a couple of pounds for each one. You get good endurance doing it. And you're doing a lot of footwork drills. Because like your Loma chanker when they just move around. And it's good for you. And it's also showing you how to move away from things and counter. There's a bunch of different things that you could actually apply to it. It's better than real shadow boxing. Yeah, but it's like intense extreme shadow boxing. Yes. Yes. It's like you're really visualizing because there's an actual thing in front of you. I think there's benefit to it. I think it would help you. I mean, 100% I think there would be benefit. Yeah. And you're not getting hit. Right. So it's timing. I'm not getting the CTE. Right. You're getting it's not going to replace barring. You're always going to need a spar. But it'll give you a lot of like neural pathways to different movements that you'll have like programmed in you in a fight with zero consequences. Right. That's great. Yeah. You can't do what you get to. Unfortunately. But you probably could be with a robot one day. You get a good AI robot. You know, that's not going to spaz out on you. Right. And head on. I would never trust that. Right. I got mad at you. Yeah. Yeah. I'm going to show you my real strength. Yeah. Deed in this next row. I'm not going to go easy. Yeah. What do you mean? You know what? Fuck it. You got me fucking a look. Only because they look human the cyclones. I'm watching the battle stock. I'm not going to watch it. It's really cool. It's really good. It's really fun. What do you get on? I'm almost on the first season. On the sci-fi network years ago. It was an un-like unappreciated series. Like one of the greatest sci-fi series of all time. The reboot of battle star Galakka. I was super skeptical. Because battle star Galakka when I was a kid, I loved it. Everybody was a super campy. I'm a great champion. And then all of a sudden Skywalker was a girl now. I was like, what? Starbuck. Starbuck was a girl now. Katie's a man. She's great now. That fucking series rules, dude. It's a great writing. It's great writing. I'm on the first season. I'm almost done with it now. I got like an episode left. Way better than the original series. It's really fucking good. It's phenomenal. It's really good. And the silence care, the fuck out of you. And they're hot chicks. Yeah. It's ruined your life. Oh, my favorite. My favorite. Yeah. Everybody's favorite. It's great. It's a great fucking series. John James Elmo, so what else? James Elmo. Yeah, he was great now. He was amazing. Did he die? I don't know. James Elmo's? Is he alive? No, there's no way he was alive. Edward James Elmo's. He was great now. He's great now. He's great now. Yeah. I'm a shit prison movie. Remember that? Yeah, what was that? Blood and blood and blood and blood and blood. You got in trouble with that. Yeah. They wanted to kill him because they made it out like these dudes are fucking each other in jail. Oh, man. They're not. Yeah. Yeah. Even if they are. Yeah. Don't talk about it. They're not stitches. Yeah, man. I think people died because of that movie. No. Yeah. I think people were coming up. Yeah, I've heard something about that. Yeah. Make sure you're not going to jail. Well, I just don't think they let these dudes know how they're going to portray them in jail. And I think, you know, they weren't happy about that. It's a weird disrespect. Is he alive? Edward James Elmo's? Yes. Oh, he's a good fan. He's phenomenal in that show. Phenomenal in that show. Yeah. This is a great show. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I just got I I I think I heard you talking about it. And I put it in there. I got on Amazon Prime. I bought the first season. It's fucking good. There's another Amazon series. What's it called? Not the eclipse. Um, the expands. Yes. Yes. I watched. I watched a bunch of those. I had to get back into that. Sometimes it gets a little chatty. I watched a couple of them. I was like, I see this could be really good. But my wife wasn't into its way abandoned it. It's good. Keep hearing. I keep hearing. I hear once you get past like the first few episodes of really picks up. Yeah. It's good. It's a Thomas Jane. What's the Thomas Jane? Oh, you played on a shirt. Yeah. He's in at at least the first season. It's good. The lead guy reminds me of John Snow. What have you seen? Really? He looks like a skinny, John Snow. I want to have John. I'll play the Punisher, right? Yeah. There's a bunch of people play it. He's going to be people play the Punisher. Well, I mean, the guy from. Don't do something. He's been doing it one day before. That's back into that. He's a big boy back in the way. He had at least four or five of them. He gave him a fake stubble and it was obvious. It was like literally like the makeup lady didn't even try. It is just like some fake. That was like the worst. He's the only face stubble you've ever seen in your fucking life. See if you can find that. Dove, Lundgren, face stubble from the Punisher. It's like you're looking at that guy, just leave him, unshaven. Yeah. He was cool as he did. Oh, you're good. He's a good guy from Ron, Steven, too. I know. like a photo from the actual the actual movie it looked like why does he have smudges all of his cheeks. I like Baron fall to best. The new Spider-Man movie he's going to be in at the Punisher. The Punisher is supposed to be gigantic though. He's supposed to be like that dude that plays Reaper. I thought race dude was in a creature. Yeah, Adam Richmond. He's supposed to be like Adam Richmond. That's what the Punisher is supposed to be. It's supposed to be a giant Jack dude. And good for reach of a smacking that guy around and I got his arm right. He's like, he's running there with his kids. The guy got in his face. He's made a drop his bike. Got his face again. He deserved a smack. Push him off his bike. Yeah. You know how? That guy looked like a retard. Well he said he was drunk. So the guy smelled like booze. I know shit. Smack him up. He was asking. They showed the cops version of the video when they went to his house. He's like, did you want to talk to college on that guy? Because I think he's drunk. He's my one liquor. They got trying to knock him up. But you see that guy? What are you doing? He's really lucky. He had that camera on. Yeah. You know what I mean? Because that saved the percent 100% because you only got to see him beating that guy up. That would have been a real fucking problem. Because that guy denied it. But he had a camera going on his chest. Luckily. Yeah. You see that guy grabbing the bike and pushing him. Yeah. Got put hands on him first in front of kids, man. So many people out there. You're on a bike and you fall on the bike falls in your leg. But you fucking idiot. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then he breaks on one's fucking leg that way. That's what fucking 100% warranted. When I went to go see that project hellmayer reading the day, dude, this motherfucker is I got the second row and sure enough, the first row like 15 ages, dude, they don't even they have their phone and it's bright. And you see it like they don't give a fuck. The lady, there's a couple next to me older. The lady comes at you. Takes a thing out. I'm like, what? I feel like saying, you should know about a lady. What the fuck? And the kids, I want to say I couple times I got up this and then they put it down. I'm like, I know I'm going to say something and if I get the wrong response and I'm going to smack a 15 year old, am I going to smack if I get a fuck you guy, what's going to happen? I'm not totally normal. I mean, you know what I mean? I just don't want to like, because this right in his wrong, a whole generation has not been checked. They're going to get smacked because they're not leaving. And I just see UFC fighter smacked 15 year old. I don't see that happening. But anyway, I got out of there. What out? Nothing. But it's just all the way. The kids are so addicted to their phones. They can't put them down for five seconds. It's just how it goes to. Yeah, it's crazy. In movie theater, the kids stop texting people. Yeah, it's not enjoying anything. Everything they're doing, they're getting distracted. Yeah, which is crazy. I feel like talking to that parents. That's not going to help. You know, no, you got to smack them. So much guys. Man, I'm sorry. Good happen. Our generation, if you acted a fool, you got slapped. If you talk my movie theater, someone's going to get up. You know, if you were allowed in the movie theater, yeah, people would get up and he shut the fuck up. Yeah. Like I've seen that happen many times in movie theater. Yeah, people almost get in fights. They don't do that no more. That is. There's no repercussions. I think a whole, like what did my tithes and say? The lot of what he's saying, he said something like a lot of people he used to talk and shit when I get into smacked. So you can punch in a face. Something like that. Yeah. And it's true. Like people just don't worry about anything. You know, but there's also so many streamers that are doing these things online with provoking people on purpose that it's almost like normalizing fucking. I hate that. Yeah, I like when they get smacked. Yeah, they think it's like they're creating content by harassing these people, fucking with old people, like just walking up to people in the store and yeah, doing shit to them. I don't understand it. Teaky elbow that kid in the face. Oh, yeah. Yeah, what fuck that kid he's starting shit. Whatever. I mean, that's, I mean, that's, I'm like, that's warranted. I mean, you're in my face. Tell me you're going to fuck me up. I can do this. He said he's going to fuck them up and then he got close to him. Like he's going to bump into Yeah. Well, I mean, you know what? They don't even give a shit because they get clicks. I don't think they give a shit. But that's because like they're getting hit by like regular people. Well, he suffered a teaky case, but they're getting by regular people like, I'm, I'm waiting for the opportunity to lay these five on somebody's chin. I'll put somebody out. The press charges. They'll sue you. I'm also, you know, if you knock somebody out and they phone hit their head and die, that's a fucking fucking yeah. And that's a real possibility. Body shot. And then that liver shot. Right. But you know, you're not going to throw a watch. He's done. He's gotten a fight with the former UFC heavyweight champion. The current bare knuckle boxing champion in the world. You dumb asses. That was hilarious when I saw this. He's just teeing off on it. There's imagine you get an Andrei Aloski's face. How the fuck do you not know who he is first of all? Again, my point is actually, how do you not know who Andrei Aloski is? And then he got their body guards next to them to try to shut out to that dude. When's bare knuckle boxing? Oh, I'll ask you to start. Yeah, it's still getting after it. And it still seems to enjoy it. Like almost 30 years in the game. And he's kind of rode off his chin a while ago. And then also it's like, I never saw a chin make a come come. Oh, incredible. Did Freddie, Rich said he thought he could really be a contender if he just had a you know, proper chin that he said his boxing skills were there. Well, I mean, there were so many times when he got clipped like the fatal one was the wireless. He was winning that. He was, he was, he was caught in the middle of a jumping knee. Big mistake. Laces out moment right there. The fataler. That motherfucker just found ways to win. He just found ways to win. Sure, did. Remember when a random man was a random one of them. Yeah. Then he can board him. Yeah. Like, yeah. He's a kimorag gorilla. Yeah. And random man was so exposed. So, so vast. That guy was just nothing for a special fiber. Pre-saw 100 100 100. He had the worst half I've ever seen in my life. Oh, he had holes in his armpit. Oh, he lives on with him. And you could see the skin was gone. You could see the tendons and all the leggings. Yeah. See, we can find a James. Oh, is it the craziest thing? Because staff, if you don't get that shit treated right away and you've let it get systemic, I mean, it'd probably be led to his early demise. It's probably something that led to him dying early, rest in peace. Look at that. That's his armpit. Oh, that's his armpit, dude. I mean, he's fucking wallet in that. You know how crazy that is? You know, crazy that kind of hole is what that does to your body. Yeah, I think. But it's not even when that heals up. Like, it's going to take a long time for your body gets back to your mom. Oh, man, staff's scary, man. Staff's real scary. Oh, come on. I want to say you want to tell you, let's say you He's spread fault of fight when he I didn't fight when he got bit by a brown recluse like his leg had a fucking hole in it. Well, those are scary. Those fuckers damn, they necrotize you. They like their venom burns a hole through your muscle tissue. Oh, it's horrible. You see brown recluse spider No, it's like first it just swells up and you get like a big zit on it and then it eventually eats the tissue underneath the venom. Fucking spider. Yeah, you got to get that treated right away. And even then it's like really dangerous. People die from it. Brown recluse are scary fucking spiders. See, because of my brown recluse spider injury nasty dude. Yeah, creepy little fucking bugs out there. I'm going to get the eggplant roll of teeny later. I just want to show you what works. There we could move by land. Yeah, man. Come on. No, it's burned to hole in you. Yeah, we're those things live at. I don't want to get bit by that. Texas. Yeah, over the place. We're so lucky. They're little. Oh, you got that shit out here? Those things. But imagine that was big as a bear. Yeah. You know, we're the last one. We're just lagging a brain man. It's as big as a bear. Dude, in one island, I guess we just got some assholes out there. But we don't gonna worry about fucking things getting a flesh off and shit. It's a few serial killers. Yeah, a few serial killers. Guys wearing white beat is that's it. I was just watching this video that said the most popular job for serial killer is those long range truckers. Like, since yeah, I mean, you got, I mean, you're on the road. Got a lot of access to a lot of different people. Yeah, and also you think you keep it moving. Yeah, moving. Moving. Yeah, before they even know what happened, you're gone. Yeah, there's a bunch of them that are linked to potentially the long range truckers that they never solved. Really? Yeah. Well, they don't catch a lot of those guys. That's what's fucked up. You want to think like that life's like a movie where they catch where they catch them all day. They get on my head. Random killers are some of the hardest to catch because they just show up, kill somebody, leave, and there's no rhyme or reason to it. They just wanted to kill somebody. So there's no like motive. It's hard to tell. And if they've done it and not gotten caught for a few years of their clever, like a lot of these guys like the Zodiac killer, he was brilliant. He wrote things in code. They had the, I don't even know if they ever cracked all of it. They're not, they still don't know who the the fuck it was. They did that movie. Yeah, I thought I thought I'd move it right. Yeah. Yeah. They kind of made it like it was the giant that I got. I don't think they know. I mean, unless there's some new data, unless there's some new information, I think it's a unsolved mystery. But he was obviously brilliant. So you got a really smart guy who's just randomly killing people. And he's also taunting you, letters, leaving letters behind. It's got to be a little more difficult now without a camera's issue. What is John Dan ever been up to? Does he have an hour? Trying out new techniques. All right, boys, so we wrap this up. Good times. One more thing we should probably talk about. The White House card. Oh, yeah. Like, what? Yeah, unless things get crazy, tree now and then. But the idea of them fighting outside in Washington, DC in the middle of summer, nice, sound crazy to me. You asked someone to dehydrate themselves to cut weight. You know, I mean, think about a gachi. Gachi's going to cut. He's got to cut to get to 55. Iliya probably doesn't have to cut too much. But you're fighting for the world title and you're fighting outside. That's the new the new time has now been corrected, which is more sense. we get good weather. So the the paper view or the main card starts at 8 p.m. Eastern, eight. I was in the middle. I was in Abu Dhabi when they did that. That's a little better. Yeah, but also it can rain. Yeah, it could easily rain. There's going to be bugs. Imagine getting lit up by mosquitoes. What? What? I'm kind of a guy. You hear me. You hear me? Well, they put a 10 up over the. I don't know what they're going to do. Back in the day they had King of Cage. It was like raining out. It was called wet water. So yeah, it's a mess. So fights outside of a mess. It's a terrible idea. I hate it. There was a I hate it. It's a rain in that cage. That was a crazy show. If you're fighting in a elite world championship level, you should be fighting in a controlled environment. Period. Right. It's already a problem enough to fight to deal with the like currency extra factors. Yeah, all these are made of area. You might not get the best fighter. Right. And you it also might severely impair someone who's had gone through a big weight cut. If it's really hot out, yeah, I don't know what it's going to be like, but we looked it up. It wasn't it last year at that same day. I think that was 20, 25, I guess four, but still it's like it was what? I was like a hundred degrees. A hundred. Yeah, dude. I live it. I live it. I live it. Yeah, six and a half. It's going to be a hundred. And here's everybody's dealing with the same thing though. So it's not like somebody's got something different than right, but it's not fair because people file with them if you're having world championship fights where you're going to decide who's the best in the world. It should be in a controlled environment. Yeah. You know, the White House baby. It's still the fuck it. We were not able to do y'all when I was fighting. And now we're at the fucking White House. It's crazy. That is crazy. I support all crazy things. So I'm going to. Yeah, we are. I'm just yeah. I just got I just got the call for clearance. I'm going so I'll be watching on Paramount+. Yeah. Jimmy wanted to go. He said, can we go? I'm like, I'm like, I'm going to go get me outside in the audience. That's the question. I don't know. Like how many people are going to is it going to be a round thing? Well, apparently I think on those Saturdays broadcast, they're going to announce like how it's going to look. So like that's part of the I think part of the allure for watching Saturday shows. They're going to announce how it's supposed to look. It's exciting though. You got to say fuck it. It's crazy. It's definitely crazy. It's only because president do it. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, this card you send this card. Oh, you got a very good card. I'm telling you the mercy con off in uh, Paul Acosta was the one I got my eye on my back could be very interesting. Mm hmm. Very interesting because Paul was a big fucking middleweight. It might do him good later in his career to go up to light everywhere. I think so. emergency. No, he's only five 10. Yeah. He's he's short. Yeah. Oh, he's got weight to cut too. I mean, he's not exactly. He ain't you know, I'm not even close. He's definitely carries much more body fat on him. Who is he for? That's close. Is he for anybody? Rocket. Stop rocket. Well, yeah, he's last fight. That's it. Um, but he doesn't. It's been hard for him to get fights. They may date a little taller there. I put my arms tall. And since this the one thing he said would stop to fight. Yeah. Well, that could be it. Yeah, that would suck. Imagine someone died from getting hit by lightning. Yeah, they raised their hand up at the end of the fight. You hit by lightning. Have you a bad look? What do you have? I just don't Bruce Puff against it. I like the idea on paper, but the fact that I'm going to be their sequin jacket and try to slice this crisis is going to be crazy. People are probably going to protest it. It's going to be nuts. Yeah. It's going to be a lot of protesters out there. We're sure all this stuff will work on. It's going to be a wrong place to come and protest because it's going to be a lot of pro-Trump people in that audience. It could be a mess. Well, that's what they like. You know, a lot of people that are running this world like when there's fights. Oh, that's the fact they like writing and they'll connect it to Trump and they'll spin it and connect it to whatever the fuck they want to. I just want to see some good fights. Zero gun and peraris are very good. Yeah, it's interesting. Very interesting fight. Just because a gun poking everybody in their eyes, I'd be happy to see him lose, but I mean, the size is real and he's got legit skills. That tie to evasify, maybe those combinations he's in tie with. Everything skills also KO on Netflix. Setting up the South Lawn will begin one month out compared to a few days out in normal arena. Dana and Donald will have 200 tickets each to assign to who they want. 84 from each we choosing for a VIP event inside the White House prior to the fights. Most of the rest of the tickets will go to military personnel. The event will have custom fight kits for all fighters on the card. Wow. And then more to come Saturday with more to come Saturday. So they're probably an announcement, but the UFC will have to talk about. Interesting. Nobody's given Justin a chance here. Justin's a fucking animal dude. I mean, I love. And look how technically fought when he had the fight for the... For Z for Z. Yeah. Yeah. And he's a very technical fighter. Yeah. If you go by the way, he fought, Patty, he kind of just walked Patty down. It's just like, was just how I'm going to create chaos. You also got to kind of give Patty a little break where he he did get poked in the fucking eye or... True. I mean, I think two KG fought with staff. Did he? Pretty much everybody thought so. Yeah. I mean, that thing on his neck. Yeah. He said it wasn't. And he's not going to tell everybody he's got stuff before to fight. He could say it after the fight. He looked good though. You know, he's a fucking animal. And he only reason I think that is he don't really get tired and he seemed like he's mentally so tough he just pushed through the tired. But you could see he was fatigued at the end that I fight. Well, he's a complicated riddle in the feet too. He's he's just good stand up fighter man. I mean, when he knocked out Dustin with that headkick, he's fucking good. I'm a, I'm a, I'm a gagey fan. He can love the same dude. And into early days, man, he was one of the wildest guys to watch ever that Michael Johnson fight was mad. Just madness. It was pretty crazy. He just, just goes, let's jump off the cliff together. I mean, as we does in those fights, man, he was one of the best early in his career at throwing leg kicks from really close to close. Yeah. He got away from that. I wonder why he got away from that. Could be injured shins. You know, it could be knocked a lot of guys. I was out with his hands. Just work it as to that one. I mean, I thought that was one of his great. Yeah. Why he got away from then could be injured chins, you know could be knocked a lot of guys out with his hands. It's weird. To that norm. I mean, I thought that was one of his greatest weapons has been so close to just water. Crazy pertserving, like a weird flexibility of the hips to do that and generate power from enclosed. With what the right hand or the candidate kick is kicking. jump in the conclusion. You're doing it in a cholertime pick. Not and with power. Yeah, definitely has a chance. I mean, you know, I mean, people will just kind of not even give it to my shot. I'm like, that's how good. Yeah, no, I get it. You get tittle lot and they're just putting the equation together. It only got that one punch. Yeah. It's for a bit of a look at the guys he's done it to, you know, Vulcan, all ski Charles, Matt. Max. No, bro. Yeah, bro. Ryan Hall three KOs in a row against world champions. That's crazy guys who not are not used to getting put in. Yeah, you know, like, you know, think about how durable Charles is for him. Just one shot like that. Take him out. That's crazy. That's crazy for Max. I mean, Max did well in the first round. He did. But until he got hit, till he got it, it never been knocked out. He's a different dude. It's, you know, there's levels that this game achieves as people get better and better and better and watch everyone around them. And I'm in Ilias like, this is the next highest level. Right? You know, now everybody's shooting for that. Boys, lot of fun. Good time again. I love we do this. It's so funny. It's my favorite podcast. Hey, I love coming out here. Such a good time. And also I need to find out what's going on in the nerd world. If you want to find out what's going on in the nerd world, Matt's our channel on YouTube. I talk all about that gig shit. That's it. Sometimes I play VR and I do movie reactions where it's like the mystery science theater where I talk to this. I took the disc. Yeah. I took their in a movie a lot. Like, Dean, what are you got going on? My movie, Flowers, Short Film coming out. And I got a new show on Paramount Plus called Deep Waters with Jorge, MOSVIDOW, Chris Wyman and Dustin Poryade at starts next Monday. Everyone does like the name. Yeah, I like the name. These letters coming out. We're still doing ground control. Just open the school in Seixville. Dustin Poryade is actually coming out to there. And the spot next door to a stratosphere on May 16th. Show gun, still going. So grab your own site. Showgunfights.com and showgunfights.com and at bmore MMA. Look at you, bro. Promoter, coach, GMO and hustle and hustle. Hustle and hustle. Hustle and. All right. Thank you. Thank you. Always fun. Bye, buddy.