Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan Podcast by night. All day. All right, sir. Fine, thank you. Thank you very much for being here. I'm really excited to talk to you. Obviously, there's been an amazing amount of interest and controversy because of your work. We should explain to everybody right off the bat what this is about. You are the man that was at the head of this research that is looking at structures that are underneath the bottom of the pyramid. And incredibly controversial, very fascinating. And if it's accurate, it essentially rewrites all of human history. Yes. Thank you for this invitation. And yes, the group is a composer, the by-corradam alanga, which is the head of the group. And the dean of chemistry at University of Pisa. Did you explain your background, please? So people understand? Yes. My background is this, I am a typical musician engineering. I graduate at the university. What is that word again? Say it again. Technical communication. Telecommunication. OK. Your English is excellent. But you're telling an accent, although fabulous, sometimes it's difficult to translate. Thank you very much, Joe. I'm sorry. Yes, that I'm not the mother's tongue of English. It's still much better than my Italian. OK, good. Yes, I graduated myself in university at the University of Leche, south of Italy, very nice university. And it has the name of a famous Matimatic Italian, which is Anyodhe Georgi. Anyodhe Georgi was living in the era then John Nash was living also. And they were one against to the other. And they were both studying the 19 Hilbert problem. And John and Anyodhe Georgi sold at this problem one week before John Nash. Interesting. John Nash, from the famous movie Brilliant Mind, Russell Crowe. Yes. Yeah. So then I performed at the My PhD at La Sapienza in Rome. And now I'm here. And how did you get involved in this discovery? Yes. I work on radar and synthetic laboratory radar for a lot of time. A radar. For the Italian motor. Some work. Yes. Which you can't really talk about. No. Right. And I was involved in some research where together with the Italian research conceal of body, always south of Italy, we was testing some special processing that were able to perform something special. And so this is. So this top secret research that you work on for the Italian government led you to try this stuff out, try this technology out. And this is satellite based technology. Correct. And it's radio tomography. Yes. It is something my personal opinion very simple. The radar is installed on the satellite. The satellite flies at the distance of 600 kilometers at 7 kilometers per second in velocity. So while it flies along the orbit, it is able to catch snapshots of the earth. The snapshots has to be focused. And this focusing procedure, let's say in the adenot eye ticket is in the adenot direction, is done by sound, by the processing of sound, because it is involved at the so-called Doppler frequency. You know, Joe, and you hear noises that are approaching to you. The signal is wheel rise of the frequency because the target has a velocity, a positive velocity, with respect to you. And so the frequency is rise up. And this procedure allows us to estimate or to grab, let's say, vibration information that is always present at the surface of the earth in terms of a vanishing waves, that are present on the surface of the earth. So this is vibration, which is mechanical vibration, carries inside of this the information that is located underground. And so, the data is. And was it a specific idea specifically to look under the pyramids or was it something that was discovered accidentally? OK, yes. Once we discovered this method, it was a coincidence. The time in New Corradamalanx, at the time, I speak, we are in 2018. He was studying the pyramids. And so we were talking about something that if there was some methods able to scan inside the pyramids, because he needed some information or to conclude the research that he was doing. And so I proposed him to use my technique. And we started to work together. And so we focus that in the time on the pyramids. And when was the first scans in 2019 and 2019? And when you got the data back, did you immediately get the data that you're showing today where you see the columns with the coils around it? OK. And let's say that this research can be divided by 2. The first one, 1.0, we were concentrating research on the kunum kufu pyramid, the kyob's pyramid, to watch inside the pyramid. And so we have the tail at tail or at our processing to watch only inside the pyramids, because that pyramid only won't pyramids, because we were doing that kind of research. Then once we discovered things in 2020, we published a peer review paper. And we gave public the results that we found inside the kunum kufu pyramid. We decided to expand our research in all the geosaplato. Can I start with there? So we know quite a bit about the kufu pyramid and what the chambers are inside of it. Did this technology accurately describe the pyramid itself and the insides of the chambers that we know exist? Absolutely. Because we have detected this multi-lyastructure that is inside the kunum kufu pyramid. This is called the zad. We have discovered it very well from the space, and it is located inside the pyramid. And also we discovered it in the new. We discovered it. We gave an image also of the other known structures, like the Grand Gallery. The Grand Gallery. The Grand Gallery. And then also the Queens chamber and the Kings chamber also. So an accurate internal size dimension and also position and location. So when did you decide to focus below the pyramid? Yes. We decided to focus below the pyramid because we were, our intention was to expand our research. And then also thanks to the third component of the research group, which is Armando May, he suggests us to expand our research and scan all the geosaplato. So what date was it that you discovered these immense columns with the coils around the know those structures that are underneath the pyramid? Yes. In the second part of our research, we started focusing our scans on the kafra pyramid and like kunum kufu. And then we adjust our algorithms to go deeper. And so when we did these very nice things, began to appear on our results. Well, what did you feel when you first saw those images that do appear to be immense columns? I believe they're the diameters 20 meters. 20 meters. So they're huge enormous columns. Yes. What went through your mind? We kept the shiz in skepticism. I told for also Colorado was with me because we had those results for an hour desk without disclosure anything for six months. Because my opinion was that was not real. I did, I was thinking that maybe it was noise or some artifacts you buy our processing procedures. Did you give you pause at all that they were so uniform that these columns were in very specific places and that they lined up. There was a uniform gap in between them. Yes. And why would disclosure this? Because we started to use also satellites. And once we, at the beginning, we were using only the Italian satellite system that is it is Cosmos, Cosmos, Cosmos, and Cosmos, it's second generation. It's very good, very precise. But we wanted to shift our research using also other satellites because in research, when we have diversity, diversity is a good thing because it confirms other things that we were searching, we were searching confirmation. So once we had the same results while we were using American satellites called the Capella Space and also other satellites having always the same results we decided to disclose. How many different scans have been done on this area toward more than 200? And all with uniform results? Yes. Wow. Yes. There's a lot of resistance to this and it's from the usual characters and it's from people that I would characterize as gatekeepers of archaeological information. And unfortunately, they are not willing to approach this with an open mind and you see this skepticism. It seems to me to be confirmation bias. They want this to not be true regardless of the sheer number of scans and the uniformity of the results of these scans. And also the fact that this stuff has been proven to work on other things. Like, didn't you guys use this exact technology to get the exact dimensions of a particle collider that you have? Yes, you have a particle collider where I have a born in La Guilla. Which is located in the center, obviously at the center of Italy. There is a huge mountain called Gran Sasso. The Gran Sasso detail, which has a maximum altitude of about 3,000 meters for being precise to 9, 9, 3 meters. And so that there is a tunnel, very long tunnel, about 11 to 12 kilometers. And in the core of this mountain, there is a particle collider. There is an elbow rotary, let's say, that. And this technology got the exact dimensions of this particle collider that's deep in this mountain. Yes, okay. The 1.4 kilometers with respect to the top. Wow, yeah. Okay. So we know it's accurate, we know it works. What do you think? I mean, other than what I said, that it's gatekeepers of archaeological information. It's people that don't want to admit that there's perhaps a quite a bit bigger mystery than just the pyramids themselves. What do you think it is that is causing this resistance? Personally, Israel, we found a lot of resistance. Yes, Israel. But that's why I don't know why. I can say something regarding to my personal opinion. It is something that maybe is too big, too huge, to be this collider like that today. I don't know why. It's confusing to people because it's essentially paradigm shattering because the pyramids themselves are absolutely spectacular. The Great Pyramid is 2,300,000 stones. The alignment is the perfect true north, south, east and west. It's a really incredible accomplishment whoever built it and when they built it. It's just undeniably fascinating that this was done at the very least 2,500 BC probably even older than that. We really don't know. But that alone is spectacular. But then when you add the findings that you have, it just makes everybody go, we don't know anything. We really don't. We know that these things exist, but their purpose has always been speculative. The speculation was that it is some sort of a tomb. But that doesn't make any sense because there's no hieroglyphs inside of it. It doesn't seem like a tomb. It's a little bit of a tomb. And I'm sure you're aware of Christopher Dunn's worth. Which he's an engineer and he said, it appears that this thing is some sort of a mechanical thing and that it's probably designed to generate some kind of power. Yeah. Yes, in this context, I have spoke a lot with Christopher Dunn. And I like a lot of his theory. And it makes sense. And so this discovers matches a lot with his, with his and also to other scientists that makes, make a request, the effective purpose of the pyramid, not to be tombs. Today we are sure we are sure of one thing that the pyramids are not tombs. They're not tombs. And what is truly spectacular is that if this data is accurate, those immense structures that have baffled mankind forever are just the tip of the iceberg. Yes. That's just the top. Yes. And underneath it, you have these immense structures that we have not yet fully explored. But you have data that shows that let's look at the images. Let's pull up some of the images so people can see what we're talking about. Because once you see it, your mind just goes, OK, what are we even talking about? Like, what was this civilization? When did it exist? And what kind of technology would allow them to not just construct the pyramids, which is absolutely baffling. But if this structure that is underneath the pyramids is accurately described by your work, we're looking at something that is going to have to change our entire perspective on the history of humanity. Yes. I agree with you, John, because what we found is something that has been confirmed by our measurements. And at the moment, I suppose that our measurements are the only data that we have because there are not other data. So what we are observing, we are observing, principally vertical structure. This vertical structure has a pattern, a regular pattern. And this regular pattern is constituted by a so-called the spirit nature. I found this. OK. So what are we looking at here? These are the first ones. Yes. Yeah. Yes, that is the cover pyramid. And you see, Joe, at the top of the tomography, the tomography is on the X, so they hold its own dimension. We have the space. Space, adjust the range. And on the vertical, we have the depth. On the top, we have the pyramid. You see the pyramid on the top. And why you go down, you are observing the structures that are going down a look. You have the spirit nature of the structures. OK. This is not the clearest image that I've seen. So let me see some other images. Because this is just one. That's what this is from his presentation. And I didn't know where to get the best of the pyramid. Pack up one. So go, OK. Again, we have a lot of images here that is recasting all the data that we have done together. So the images that are going around online that people have seen are these 3D replicates pull-ups more of those? OK. Some of the images online are recreations of what is observed and what you believe this could look like underneath. Correct? We have performance measurements. And they are sound measurements that has been picked up from the surface of the earth by satellites. So they are very precise. And they are coherent. You coherent it means that contains a lot of information. So it is characterized to have high entropy. And so when we perform a this, or called the tomographic inversion, we can see what there is underneath. OK. So this is a recreation of what you believe it looks like. Yes. And how are you getting that from the image this below that? OK. So the image is just one aspect of the data, correct? Yes. The image? This? Yes. The whole thing. OK. Here we are observing inside the kafrapiramid. And inside the kafrapiramid, we are observing those structures. The those are inside the kafrapiramid. And the image above. Yes. That is an artist's recreation of what you think it looks like. Yes. Now, how did you make that determination? That's what it looks like. OK. The 3D model has been a retry that not observing just only one result, but observing a lot of results. So putting on a table all the results that we have, we were able to retrieve, so to facilitate people to read our measurements. OK. So observing the results, we were able to determine the spirals and the structures that are located, starting from the base of the kafrapiramid going down. I've seen other images of the scans that are more convincing than the one that's below. So let's see if we can find some of those. What else do you have here? Yes, these are all images that are related to the first. So this is just an article that's in the news. OK. I mean, by the one here, I don't. What is like, where's a good place to get the best versions of these images? Like that, right there? OK. OK, what is this? OK. Here we are watching why the RIA of our tomography is looking. And we see the structures that are going down. Yes. This is much clearer. Yes. OK. And below the structure, at the end of the structures, there are huge chambers, but they are really huge. Approximately having a wetland and the length and the height of 80 meters. So 80 meter structures that are below all of this. Yes. So almost the size of a football field below all this, that is some sort of a chamber. Yeah. And see if you can find some other images, Jamie. So the coils, how did you determine that there was coils? Is it just because of the gaps that you see in the imagery? Will they come in this uniformed pattern? I have a two or three slides on my presentation where we find the coils. OK, let's see if we can find those slides. You know, if you go down, please. Yeah. Wait a minute. OK. OK. Here, OK. Here, we can observe a regular pattern. So not coils. In we go down, please. OK. Regular pattern and the coils are beginning to be seen. Then on the third image, here, regular pattern, go down, please. And here, this is my personal opinion. The fourth image from the left to the right, the 50 image, 1, 2, 3, 4, the 40-ish. I'm sorry. Where you have a core at the center of the core, at the center of the structure. And then we have something that spirals down. So is anybody speculated about what this could possibly be, like what these coils are? Yes, I spoke with two independent, let's say with some independent researchers, and especially with Christopher Nahn. And also, I spoke also with the Jeffring that is considering also the GZAP power plan like chemical reactor or something like that. So we have on one side scientists that say, OK, it can be something related to electricity. Or we have something related to chemicals or other things. In my personal opinion, me, I can see anything. I can say anything because I just measure what there is there. So it is not my job to do this. My job is, OK, here we have the measurements. And now we have to see what there is inside. In my personal opinion, this is the right time to say, OK, let's go there and see what there is. Let's start there. Yes. Yeah. I'm perhaps more images, please, Jamie. So yes, this is very important if you want. I can tell you this is. OK, because it is a very important project, research project that I am working now. And it is something that if it could be possible, we can go there. And without digging anything, we can go below. Why? Because belonging between the Sphinx and the Coughra pyramid, there are some shafts. And there are the photos of the shafts, where we can go in situ and we can physically go there and watch those shafts. Currently, the shafts are blockhead by debris. And there is also rubbish inside. So I perform, I perform a lot of scans at those shafts. And you see, Joel, the shafts goes down, down, down, and they reach chambers. The town below. And that is the Doppler tomography. Yes. Yes. So the shafts go down. How far do they go down? Yes, they go down, up approximately 600 meters. 600 meters. Wow. Yes. So 600 meters down, and then they reach a chamber. Yes. What is the conventional explanation for these shafts? Is there one? Like, what is the current archaeologist? What is academia? What do they think these things are? Leave that right there for a second. Yes. Yes. This is the complete 3D model that me and Corrado did. And so to observe all the structures that we have find that we found, the what we think the tomography that we have done on the Gizaplato. So it's not just under the gray pyramid. It's under all three pyramids. And also the Sphinx. And also the Sphinx. Yes. And they all seem to go down to uniform depth. We found that the moment, the same depth. Yes. And they all have chambers at the bottom. Yes, absolutely. Yes. And that's the, in my best opinion, mine, the next thing that we are dealing. At the end of the structures of these tubes that are going down, there are huge chambers. How huge? As I told you before, 80 meters times 80 meters and times 80 meters of height. And that's uniform underneath all the pyramids. Yes. It's the same dimensions. Yes. Wow. When you look at it like this, when you see your 3D recreation of the site, it's stunning. Because it just makes you think, what is this? I mean, I can understand the skepticism. And I can understand the resistance to this that modern academics have. Because this throws a giant monkey wrench into everything. This makes everything we know about that area thrown into question. Because if this is true, like I said, this rewrite history, because you're dealing with an advanced civilization that is demonstrably more advanced than us. Yes, because they were able to build very precise things, but not at the surface of their below. Well, they even built a lot of precise things that confuse us. Like one of the things that Christopher Dunn gave me is this. It's the recreation of the Vase of one of the many Vases that they have. That is accurate in the way it was made down to, what was the number? A thousandth of a human hair or something crazy like that? Like much less than a human hair in the diameter and the uniformity of it and the fact that it was carved that is incredibly hard stone at a time where there was no. human hair and the diameter and the uniformity of it and the fact that it was carved that is incredibly hard stone at a time where there was no metal alloys they you know there's supposedly had copper tools no one understands it no one knows how they did it and it has handles on it so it couldn't even been turned on a lathe. Yes and also if we go inside the pyramids inside and also outside the pyramids we can observe that the measurements are very precise the the chambers are constituted by flat walls we don't have inscriptions and the dimensions are all related to the constants to the major constants of universe. Right they're all aligned to the constellations there's a lot of like very strange calculations that they were able to make like pathways where the sun during the solar equinox passes right through it's a fascinating place. Yes but when you started acquiring this data and you started accumulating it and then started going over it with experts what did that feel like to you when you're when you're realizing oh this is real. Yes It was something that was very very nice for me because because when we this the thing was I was saying always to Colorado shall we disclose or this or not I think for now not for now not but then the results were always the same so we decided to do this close with this. How long did you sit on it before you decided to disclose it? One year. One year. So for that one year how conflicted were you? You must have been walking around like I have the biggest secret on earth. Yes how weird was that? Only two powerful. That's crazy. That's crazy. Two people having one of the biggest secrets on earth That's backed by data. I mean it's not even like you know someone told you something like you have extraordinary data due to fascinating modern technology that indicates that there's these paradigm shifting structures. Yeah and I tell you Joe I would like to go there and see what there is in person. Yes Because it's it's no time I think. Is there resistance from Egypt and the people that are in control of that area or are they fascinated by it? I tell you Joe I didn't find a lot of resistance. There is I found a lot of resistance in the internet. Yes a lot of the banking a lot of people that know is not true is not true. A lot of people that continue to say no rather can penetrate the earth for working on it. And they didn't know or they purposely not saying this that we are not penetrating anything because we are just grabbing the entropy that is on the surface of that and with that information we are retrieving tomography. It's something new that I invented but it works because we have benchmarks that demonstrates the effectiveness of the and it's this is 100%. And there's also been some criticism that the patents have expired but that's because you have new patents on better stuff. Yes now Joe I am under in the A so we just might think I can say something about the second patent because just yesterday we filed the patent in the USA. Nice. Yes. Wow. Have any academics reached out to you in support that are interested in this and would like to explore this further? Yes. Yes. I tell you this there are companies related to mining and crude oil extraction and then also water. Joe, today we are leaving a particular time because water is very important. We are in a so-called water emergency in all the world. So for me the first thing that we have to do is to scan the earth and to fetch to find to try and find other that's a opportunity to extract not to solve because it's very important. So you'll be using this technology for that as well. For now not about time technique to do it. Well it makes sense I mean if you can detect this you should be able to detect that as well and that would be if it's and also if it's accurate that will also help garner support for this exploration of whatever is under there. Yeah and so we are receiving a lot of calls from companies that want to work with me and so let's see what what we can do. And so this is all companies that have reached out after you released the results underneath the pyramids. The most of them are calling me recently. Right. So they've heard about the very recently. Yes. Well that's capitalism right. They say oh we can make money off of this. Yeah. That's good. It gets people interested. It gets people involved in this. And so we have also philanthropic philanthropic project. We are opening a foundation in Malta. We are realizing it in two weeks and we will have a foundation in Malta and with that foundation we can operate also philanthropically for the Gizaplato and other and other anti-em and other analytics that are located in all the world. We have a plan to scan everything. Really? What is next? Maybe we can see a pumapunko or other sounds. Yeah. Go back to the topic. Go back to the Yes. Have you looked at the labyrinths underneath the ones that were described by Herodotus that Ben van Kirkwick has been talking about and is uncharted X channel where there is a huge atrium with a 40 meter metallic object that's a shape of a spectacular. Yes. They ask me to do it. And we will do it. We have to do that. I tell you Joe, the processing is very nice but requests a lot of calculations. So it is time consuming. So the moment we have some computers that are dedicated on Gizap and other projects that we are doing. And in the future maybe we will have other machines that can work to do other things. But we will do it. We need time about we will do it. Now are you absolutely convinced that this data is accurate or have any of the criticisms of any of the people that are trying to debunk it? Has any of that resonated with you and rang true? Is there any validity to any of the criticisms? Radar is only precise. The nice thing that has radar is the precision. And especially from space. Because space is a very silent environment. You don't have noise. The platform is very stable. So when you transmit electromagnetic waves, they return back with absolutely precious, with absolute precision. And it's recreated over and over again in these 200 plus scans that you've done. With various different satellites. Correct. Not just one so that one could have errors. So you're convinced. I'm convinced. 100% because. Wow. I did the, I invented the method. Yes, I know. But I tell you that I am happy if somebody can replicate things. So if other research groups can replicate the things that I'm showing, I'm happy. Well, you got there first. Yeah. So no matter what. I mean, you, if this is correct, you will go down in history as one of the most important figures in archaeology. Because if you are. You're welcome. But it's just fact. If what you're saying is true, we're just recently discovering this in the 21st century. I mean, that's absolutely mind-bending. Thank you for this. Yes, I am happy for. For being in this, but not totally me, other people had been to do my work. Oh, of course. Of course. A lot of people didn't put into one of my family. Yeah. Um, this, these structures and this, this whole area, if this turns out to be something that you don't find just at the Giza Plateau, but around other parts of Egypt. I mean, there's always been a lot of speculation as to whether or not a civilization existed in sub-Saharan Africa and advanced civilization that in areas not now sand. You could probably do that same sort of research there as well. Yes. I agree with this. And we will do it. Yes. Wow. What is life like for you now having this exposed and now, you know, having this on the internet and all of this speculation and all this excitement. What does that have been like for you? Yes. I am not very used on all this exposure in on the internet. It is something that I have to get used of this. Yes. My life is simple. I live in Italy. But now I repeat this, it is time to go ahead and go on the Giza Plateau and in person. I wish to see if the effective structure, how they are and the purpose of the, of all the plateau. What it is? And is there plans to do that in person to do some sort of excavation? Yes. I have rolled a project proposal, which is a research and also not research a proposal. And is now we are, our intention is to submit this proposal at the Egyptian authorities. If you want, I can explain you this proposal. Please. We are involved in University of Ferrara. It is a principal scientist, a professor of Sava Caro, Italian professor in she is a geologist. And other, another governmental Italian governmental institutions that are very clever to do scans in city scans. So we are not using my technique. We use the state of the art technique that it is recognized by science today. And our intention is to concentrate the efforts on those shots that I showed you, that we have seen because we are not 99% convinced that or sure that those, those are natural entrance into the structures that are below, because we have the vertical structures and the use on the on the tomography. You have also horizontal connections. So there's corridors. Yes. You have. And how large of these corridors? About, they are tall, about three meters tall. Okay. It's about nine feet tall. Yes. Yes. That, that we're using these corridors. You will arrive directly inside the, the, the coils that we are, that we are visualizing, that we, we visualize before. So there's passages and shafts and these enormous ways that they can go back and forth in between these various structures. The thing that we have to do now is to clean those shots. We have to do cleaning because now they are, uh, same. Yeah. It's really. Yeah. And, um, is there a timeline on when you would like to start cleaning these shafts and start doing this kind of stuff? Yes. It depends when we submit the project. The project is ready. I know people that are living in, in, in, in Egypt that when we are ready, we can submit to their project proposal. Then we are, we are at, uh, when the government, if, if approved the project, we can start. Now, what imagine that something like this, something at the scale would require enormous funding. Yeah. And how do you, uh, how do you hope to acquire that? We, we can make, uh, we can see people that this, this work is not for me, but it's for humans. And so people, we, we, we ask people to help us in, uh, getting money to perform the work. We have to ask people. Have you reached out to any like Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk type people that have tons of money that might be interested in doing something like this? I don't know them. Joe, you don't know them? No. But maybe, uh, it's a big ask. Yes. It's a big ask. You know, asking. It's a big ask. If you, a few billion dollars to go dig around under the parents, I mean, how much money do you think it costs to do this? To do, we, we, we have to do, we did an estimation of the, the, an estimation, uh, but about, I don't know for maybe, maybe, uh, belonging for 20 million dollars or more. 20 million dollars. That's right. And this is just a clean the shaft and go underneath. And, uh, because why so much money? Because we are, our intention is to work safety. I don't want that people as to go down the shaft and work. We will, we want to use drone as robots to make something automatically and so go down by using machines, not humans. Yeah. That makes sense. Yeah. And that way you can get accurate real time video and. Yes. Yes. With cameras and, uh, uh, it will be something I am thinking about this. The most maybe it's one of the most ancient, magnetic structure that we are dealing now can be recovered by the most modern technology that we have now to move. And so we can recover it modern and unseen together. So you've been giving this presentation now and even going around, what is that been like? What is the reception of it been like? Yes. A moderate, positive reception. Moderate positive. So people that are like, if this is true, it's amazing, but you have to show me more. Yes. Yes. Uh, I tell you, in this project proposal, I am out. You're out. Yes. It is better than that. University of Ferrara, that is, uh, one of the most important university in Italy can stay there and they manage all the work is better. Right. And they mount. Right. You showed them what's there. You showed them the technology. Yes. Now, good luck. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And good luck. So tell me about this presentation. So how do you set this up? I know you brought some of the slides of this presentation. Yeah. Tell me how you set this up. How you set it up? So how you explain it to these when you have these, you know, semi skeptical scientists that are sitting down there and you're going to tell them, I'm about to rewrite human history. How do you set this up? Oh, they were, they were listening me very well and they asking me things about how they, everyone, the first thing that they asked me is how it works and that's good. And so I slowly explain it's explained them how it works and how I arrived to, to, to make this presentation, so to have our results and, uh, uh, and so on. And the day they, they, some of them is skeptical someone a bit less sketch, which is what you want. Yes. Yes. You want healthy debate about this. How did you debate? Yes. The only way you find out what the truth is. Yes, only only having a, a healthy debate. We can find what is the truth. I don't want to polarize people for me, you know, it's not my, it's not my job. No, but not only that, it's not, you're just discovering something. Yes. This is something that's there. And for people to just put on a skeptical lens and just not look at it at all, it's crazy. Yes. Like if you're skeptical, we should probably explore it and if you're wrong. Okay. Now we know it's not true. But if it is true, it's a crime to not invest. Do not investigate. Yes. It's a crime to not investigate. Yes. And I tell you, the, uh, solution to we don't, we don't have to dig holes, uh, ruin the what is now preserved. No, we have to only clean enough, only clean. And we have to use what there is made. It's for us because the shops, yeah, they are for us. They are calling us. We're, uh, our, our rights are to clean them and see what there is and go down and explore them personally. What just seems like if these shops exist at alone and they are at that depth that you describe and they are the dimensions you describe. It really does lend credence to what you're saying. Yeah. Because it seems like there's a purpose for those things. And if they do go down to the area where all these structures are, it seems like there's something there in my bedside opinion, they were beat porpoise and if you see the, the access points, probably yes, the access points. They are, they were made probably to, um, you know, John, uh, when you go deep below the earth, the temperature rises a lot. So there is a sustained, uh, uh, uh, ratio of, uh, um, uh, where the temperature rises, uh, proportional to the depth that you are going. So the shops are made, purposely to take the, their, the function is to transport air, light and so cool what there is inside. Well, that makes sense. Yeah. And also access. Um, show me some other, other slides and other things that are in your presentation. So you can get a more comprehensive understanding of what we're looking at. Yes, this is, uh, that said, this is Mario Pinker le Mario Pinker le was a, um, a researcher, uh, that he died, they, they're on 2011 at 12. And, uh, he, uh, was a studying, they zed, which is the multi-layer, uh, monument, let's call it a monument, but it's not a monument because it, it has a certain and very precise function that is, uh, inside the pyramid, this is the, and this is the, uh, outlined image in the lower left hand corner. Yeah. That's the the tomography that we, that we have retry that look is very precise. Right. It looks exactly like what it's like in the actual image. What is that thing? What is the, what do you think the function of that thing? Yes, the function is, uh, um, is, is this, uh, uh, uh, it is, uh, you, you see on the top of the structure, there is something like a cap. Yes. Like a cap, uh, that cap, uh, is has a, a precise function to attract, attract the, the, the vibration. Okay. It's an antenna in the, in the vibration domain. Okay. And 10 and the vibration domain. Yes. Okay. Attract the, the energy in terms of, uh, mechanical vibration and propagates them, below. There are these lights. Please. Okay. Here I did a simulation. Uh, now I'm sorry because I don't have the video because this is a PDF, but I, I, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, reproduce that the function of the Z on the computer. Okay. Okay. And the look on the right side, we have all the vibrations that interacts one to each other to each layer. Look. And you can see that each layer, look how strange it is. Each layer on the top of each layer, it is a scattered look on the top of the each layer. And the bottom is very flat, it's flat. So what is that? It is something related to filter. It is a, it is a low pass filter. I mean, uh, made by stones. Very crazy. That's a low pass filter. A low pass filter. Yes. What exactly is a low pass filter? Yes. A low pass filter is a filter that allows the, that allows the transmission only of 13 frequencies and reject other frequencies. So it is a stabilizer, frequency stabilizer and the low pass or a certain low value frequency. Okay. Right. And so this aligns with Christopher Dunn's theory that there was something underneath the, the pyramid that there was a chamber that was, they were using to generate vibration. Yes. And that that vibration would go through the entire structure. Yes. And look, Joe, the last layer, look, transmits directly inside the, the, the so called the sarcophagus. That's not the sarcophagus there. And so what do you think that sort of what they call sarcophagus? This immense granite box. Yeah. I see that, let's call it yes, the granite box. Yes. And the inside the, the granite box was done to contain a man, a body. And that vibration look collapses at the center of the granite box where the man was lying down. So do you think there was actually a man inside that? So a person would lay in that box. Yes. And what would happen to them? I don't know. Whoa. So I don't know. That's a simulation that I did, about that. I understand. So you don't think it's for a dead body. You think it's for a live body. Yes. And so a person would lay there and have some probably incredibly profound experience with whatever nobody has. What do you think it was? If you just wanted to get crazy and put on the tin foil hat and speculate, what do you think it was? I mean, what would happen to a person to think counter this kind of vibration, these kind of frequencies in this resonating granite box? I can say something that is not shanty-fic recognize. Yeah, that's what I want. Maybe, maybe what do you think? Maybe the person was ready to have an out of the body experience in the ocean like a gateway, a gateway to the spirit world. Look, on the top you have the antenna is accepting all the vibrations that transmits all the signal below directly inside the granite box. It's very exciting. And what do you think was generating these vibrations? Yes. The natural vibration of the earth and also some, let's say, flowing the flowing of water, also the flowing of water. So it was also shafts that were, this is part of Christopher Dunn's theory, these shafts that reach the outside of space that he thinks were attracting space radiation. Can be. Yeah, that's another possibility. Yes, another possibility. He also had a theory that perhaps the lower chamber that's below the pyramid itself, that there was some mechanical device inside of there that was generating vibration. For this can be, yes, can be. So we don't through the entire structure. And this is creating this vibration. That's the antenna. You've got this filter through it. And then someone is laying in the sarcophagus tripping balls. Yes. Whoa. That's crazy. That's crazy. If you imagine this entire structure was just built so that someone could have some sort of a bizarre out of body experience or psychedelic gateway experience. I think that's true. I think it's like a deluxe Disney world. I do. Seriously, I had that epiphany like two months ago. Really? Okay. I don't want to explain it, but yeah, I was looking at a picture of me when I was a kid at like a Cedar Point, which is like roller coaster place. I was just thinking of how much effort we put in to making kids or young adults have a wild experience. Yeah. That is only in reference. I you'll understand it if you live there. If you found Disney Disney World now in a thousand years, you'd be like, what the fuck they worship mice? The fuck you talk this is insane. It's a picture for mice everywhere. You'd see that giant castle and there's rides everywhere. And you would have no idea what the experience of that ride would have been like or the tea cups. Right. It's nonsense. It's fun for kids, but also would make them feel amazing, but also adding what this vibration stuff does and sound and music and all these other things. You could put them all together and back you could feel like a God. Yeah. If lightning hit the thing, you'd be like, what the? I don't know. I just had that wild idea one day. It's an interesting idea because you think people have always been fascinated by achieving novel experiences. And what more novel experience than a two million, 300,000 stone structure. It's perfectly aligned to true north-south east and west, aligns to the stars of Orion's belt. Yeah. You lie inside a stone box and the vibrations hit you and you're in that box. Not totally evolved. What it who knows what it does to the body and the mind because we know that the mind is capable of producing endogenous psychedelic chemicals. We also know that people have a very profound reaction to frequencies. That's why sound hits us so hard. We love music and and just vibration itself and this sound weapon that they just recently used in Venezuela. Supposedly to knock out all Maduro's troops. What could this thing have been? Yes. I am relatively sure that the principle actor of everything can be water vibrations. So sound sound. But we are dealing now to the third thing. So the purpose, the exact purpose of this. Maybe it can be also one more than one purpose. It's not more than one scope of the... Maybe it can be also one more than one purpose. It's not more than one score push of the pyramids The pyramids intended to be now I am 100% convinced that the pyramids can be considered the tip of the iceberg of something of something very Huge that is composed by things that are below the earth and the pyramids that are up at the surface of that So what do you think the reason for the design of the pyramid in that specific geometric shape? Yes probably because they have to resonate with the universe in in some in They have to resonate with the universe. You know the universe the universe Joe it is it is not complicated is simple because the universe is constituted by things the matter the particles the light yes but everything is regulated by some constants There are the constants so there was a speed of light c three three times 10 to the eight kilometers per second then you have so there was a delight so you have the electric constants the magnetic constants that are That a range is very well below of the universe so it is important that something that has to be well related to the place that we live to the universe has to contain very precisely the dimensions of Recasting the constants of the universe and that's what you think the pyramid did Personally yes Personally yes How old do you think they are? Yes, so yes on the sorry the data on the stars over I Start speaking it out. No, it's okay The thing that We can say for certainly is that the pyramids are older than the dates that are written on the typical history books so To see something that to say something very precisely we have to go back in time Into the zap tape so there's more than 36 thousands years ago Something happened to the earth so the zap tape began and In a time belonging the zap tape and the great flood were built to the pyramid the pyramids So what I'm sending you something Jim in this very interesting. Yes, I'm so Do you have an idea do you have an estimation like what what is your personal belief? Yes? We can't say exactly the year So zap tabbi list let's explain to people what that is since we're I sometimes forget The zap tabbi is the thing that I did to describe to Zahi hooras and he dismissed it What is this? I've never heard of this It's an ancient Kings list And it's a list of pharaohs that goes back past 30,000 years and It's very inconvenient for modern academics And so they like to portray it as myth And then when it gets to the age of historically accurate Pharaohs that we know of kufu and kafre then they allow those Hyritlips yes, but when you get all the way back to the 30,000 years ago They like to say that that's just mythology Yes, it's true But it is a matter of fact The zap tabbi we have We have also other ancient megalitic zetam very old Regal nice at very old the source We have to deal with that Well, just go backly tap it with like diabetes a big problem So more than 11,000 years old for sure Yeah, yeah And there is that we saw There it is This is something that I actually just talked to Graham Hancock about This is Stella's a limestone inscription Discovered in 1858 near the Great Pyramid Complex of Giza And the text describes a pharaoh kufu Who ruled from 2589 to 2566 BC Visiting the site and ordering restorations To existing structures Including a temple associated with the goddess Isis The stellar refers to Isis as the mistress of the pyramid A title that has raised questions about whether parts of the giza plateau Were already considered sacred before kufu's reign And although most Egyptologists date the stellar itself to the 26 dynasty More than 2000 years after kufu It's wording continues to draw attention because it betrays the pharaoh As a restore rather than the original builder Whether inscription provides older traditional reflects later religious interpretation Remains debated but if this is accurate This describes kufu as restoring The pyramid now this exist throughout history The temple of to note Chitlan Where the Aztecs had when when they described it They described it as the place where the gods were born And they found it Like people think the Aztecs made the pyramids They did not They there was some sort of a previous civilization that lived in Mexico Prior to the people that called themselves the Aztecs or what we call the Aztecs And they built so there's a long-standing history of people Repurposing existing structures and claiming them as their own And if this stellar is accurate and this was also in fingerprints of the gods Graham Hancock's book So I sent us to graham and his reaction was pretty interesting But he said to me was that The strong suggestion that the kufu pyramid might have been one of the three subsidiary structures alongside the great pyramid Eastern flank and all that looked like damaging evidence against the Orthodox chronology of ancient Egypt But also challenged the consensus view that the geese appearance had been built as tombs and only as tombs however Rather than investigating the statements From the Stella the age of childives They chose to devalue them and his quotes They chose to say yeah, that's inconvenient But if it's if they are describing it that way that that seems This is a long-standing tradition of people finding things that exist There's clearly each ancient Egypt itself dynastic Egypt is a very complex society Very complex and very advanced society even if they didn't build that stuff But it seems like they're saying the restore yes I agree with you Joe I tell you there are Some facts that we have to observe because I am used to observe But before I have I say something I have to observe So I'm not I say an expert of pyramids because I am an engineer. I work on satellites. I am a space engineer. I'm not an Egyptologist But I can observe In inside the dipera meets They found a lot of salt That were a touch it on the world So they find the salt Why there is the wider was salt there First Second These shafts that we are dealing now if we want to clean these shafts Why there is debris? Why they are top-ed Now so if the great flood is an historical parameter Recognize it so let's say 11,000 to a thousand years ago. Let's say something like that. I don't remember precisely The zap tappy which is not recognized at is 36,000 in the past So between the zap tappy and the grid flood We can't locate the dipera meets and this things Wow, so the great flood we're looking at 11,000 plus years ago Zap tappy you're looking at 30,000 plus years ago. Yes. We can say I'm an engineer. I am I I pulled by set with the set that between that that's That's 6,000 and 11,000 saving and find some images of salt In the in the great pyramids because it is quite fascinating and if there was some sort of a massive rise of sea and massive flooding which is depicted in every single ancient religion Yes From epic of Gilgamesh to the hope he talked about it I mean, it's like almost all cultures have a story obviously Noah and the ark In the flood in the Bible, but this salt uh Joe two months ago I went for the first time to visit the pyramids and I found salt on the wall The rest is salt and you think that salt is probably because it is Water of the sea Wow. Yes. I forgot to Bring it to you not just that but there's so much salt that there's still salt there 11,000 years later Which is really extraordinary And so you think that that salt is because the entire area was flooded Yes, and that's the reason why the shafts were flooded until it would debris. Yes, right Top-top would debris because everything just flooded into there and then when the sea receded You're so many years later. You left with salt everywhere. Yeah, and that's why The reason that uh I don't want to that people goes to work inside the shaft because our dangers can collapse the day The debris and collapse because you can have bubble of Air and so it's dangerous right right robots has to go right? Well, it makes more sense Robots safer and it's also so everything is connected the great flood that zep-tap and the pyramids Wow We said with that. Yeah, I am convinced that That may be 18 that I go in the center 18 18,000 or something like that 20 between 18,000 and 20,000 well what's crazy is I mean that pushes back that ancient civilization by 14,000 year yeah Which is at least 14,000 years. I mean John Anthony West thought maybe 30,000 plus years To the construction of this fanks. That's what he thought and when Robert shock from Boston University The geologist that started doing work on the pyramid and then excuse me the Think I just think yeah, and the water erosion. He's like this is vertical Yes, it's vertical fissures that come from thousands of years of rainfall and the last time there was like significant rainfall In the Nile Valley like that was nine thousand years ago. Yeah, so you're dealing with thousands of years before that of Rain to achieve that kind of erosion. Yes, it is necessary Now when that's why this research and this activity that hope we will do It is very important. Yeah, because this it is able to rewrite everything It very really rewrite everything. Imagine if you could get something from down in those shafts in those corridors Something that you could date Yeah, and you get a date back of 26,000 BC. You go what? You know, I mean this is It's not outside of the realm of possibility. That's what's so crazy about this It just really does seem like we're getting more and more evidence That things are far older Than conventional wisdom the conventional the conventional narrative that's taught in schools Yes, I agree I agree because As I told you before this is time. This is the time to You see effective what we which is the exact date of Construction who made them and how they made it How could we figure out how they made it? That's the crazy thing Right because we don't even understand the technology they used to cut them Yeah, we don't know what they had and that's the other thing if you're dealing with something that's 20,000 plus years old 15,000 years old What's gonna be left? All the metals gone everything is eroded the earth is reclaimed most things really the thing that you have left is stone which is pretty crazy Yeah, and If we see the the rooms all the structures that are currently inside Let's say the the kelp spear. I mean which I like it a lot of the grangela is very nice fascinating They have a precious on incredible precision all those big huge Stones that the comp that is composing the current gallery is very exciting. I like it a lot Did you have any sort of fascination about the pyramids before this or Joe I remember when I was young very young I used to I had It how you say I had the A personal computer very old one and I was always playing old always on on something that And there was the pyramids they were all in the pyramids and that in that the meantime I I realized that that I like the pyramids and so I was very young So the personal beauty just researching the pyramids that what it was. Yeah, it's just looking at pictures and images. Yes Yeah, I'm the pyramid. So you always were fascinated by but did you have an understanding or even Any questions about the timeline of civilization before this? No, no, so it only happened within the last few years Yes, I began I began working so being interested on pyramids Starting from 2018 so it was right after you started doing this research Yes, and you started saying okay, what is this? Yeah, and so when you start the two to research on something that that is Our history our past our regions because we our regions are there so we have to Fetch we have to find what there is there because it is important that We it is important to research our origin because in this meantime humanity Does not know we don't know who we are we don't know our origins we don't know anything of Who we are and the most of the answers can be found in the Studying the pyramids Well, it certainly seems to be the greatest accomplishment that ancient humans had ever created. Yes And if these humans were far more ancient than we currently believe That is really really interesting. Yeah, and it is for me a very It is something that I have it always in my mind Only to know how they did how they cut the stones how they Have transported the stones that how I don't know how how how every day It's all how how yes what what gave them the idea like were there any Previous pyramids because it's weird because the older you go the more complex the structures are and the newer ones Shitty yeah So okay, so we went from that we showed this antenna and it goes into the supposedly sarcophagus and these vibrations What are the things do you show in your presentation that are interesting? I Showed the principle or the structures that are that are under the the cover pyramid and also under each pyramids and Also, I describe it the day method on How Going Below without drilling anything and so I Showed them. I show at them That there are the entrances are there on our eyes Everyone can see those Those shafts and so why we are not exploring them why they are so dirty why they are so without Any kind of work over a new maintenance. Yeah, I don't know why Well, it seems like there's limited resources first of all. It's yes. Yes, and also it seems like Egypt entire Economy is based on tourism and immense amount of tourism because it's so fantastic There's people from all over the world make a pilgrimage. I also I also I also find a method to combine So not stopping the Datori's you know, so it is possible to combine the work and also the tourism So we can delimitate the area Inside the area we work and outside the area safety all the people can visit the pyramid edges of the door I'm not only that. I think it will enhance tourism. Yeah, because if this speculation proves to be few fruitful Yes, and you start looking under there and you find that there there is evidence to all this It's just gonna make more people want to go. Oh, yes. I agree with you You imagine John we will find The structures that are underneath No, and maybe we can try to build a huge lift that carry people downstairs In safety always I or maybe not below for a lot about It is a stain It is a thing that so they can also travel along the or it's on tachoridors Less and so they go up from the shafts and they they go up They they go up for To the kafra pyramid and they go away from so the entrance here and they and they go Interrupting the pyramids that would be amazing. Yes. Yes. I mean it would just be much more tourism. Yes Yeah, and also the all eyes would be on Egypt. Yes I mean it would probably a huge boost to their economy. It would probably be a huge boost to archaeology Because more young people would get fascinated by it want to study it. Yeah, and and imagine imagine also these What can we find below Down there. What can what can we find? This is a question that I am asking because if we watch the The slide concerning the shaft that I want to that I want to clean up there are things inside it I am showing that that there are things located inside the Chamber look there is something What is that what are you saying when you we're talking about the shower goes all the way down to the bottom And there's the chambers that what you mean That one. Yes Right there. So that structure that is at the bottom. What's that? I don't know. Is that right? It's very huge. Very huge. That's at the bottom of the shaft Look the or it's on takaridos And so there's more horizontal car corridors during the when you traverse down into the shaft then you there's you intercept the right Other corridors and how large are those corridors by about them? Three meters tall So there's three so there's these three meter tall shafts That go to the side these corridors that go to the side. Yes Along the way and then also down at the very bottom. Yes And you're convinced of this this is all accurate data right? Um And no one's ever sent a camera down there. Okay, those are a few months Men made structure like A ring on another ring. Mm-hmm. Look it is it is very clear Right if you observe the structure those are met men made right and they go deep very deep and you can see the rubbish that is On the bottom of the debris that the and that debris you think was a lot of it because of the flood I am hundred percent sure of this Yeah so the pyramids or the jisaplato it seems to stop the functionality the Working We don't know which kind of work Well use it to do but stopped because of the great flood So we can go back in time in 12,000 years ago and when people's People that don't know if you're hearing this like what great flood? That's just not just meth There's a thing called the younger dry as impact theory and the younger dry as impact theory group That's been studying this they now know that there was impacts to the earth That are allowed around the 11,800 year mark and then I believe again in the 10,000 year range Randall Carlson is probably the best guy to talk to about that but that they find High levels of ridium which is very common in space and very rare on earth But there's a layer of it. Yes. They also find these nano diamonds They also discovered during the first Trinity explosion when they detonated the atomic bomb They find these microscopic glass particles that are created by the intense explosion interacting with the sand So it was it called trinity trite Somebody's called What are those nuclear glass? What is that called trite tonight? What's called some something related to vatrification? Yes, okay So this Excess all over the world and it exists all over the world when they do a core sample at the same depth And so this is a very strong scientific indicator of evidence that we've been hit Yeah, but another scientific indicator is the debris. Why is that debris that? Right? Why so much? So much right? Why so much? If we do a carotage drilling of that debris inside the shaft I don't know how how deep we can go. So why there is all that debris there We don't know right, but which makes sense if there is a great flood that fills the pyramid Yes, saltwater. Yes, that it probably washed all that sand into that gigantic vertical shaft. Yeah, completely makes sense And I tell you Joe we if we do the chemical Chemical-acchemical exploration of that debris We can find also a 13 density of salt because where mix it in the pasta by salty water and debris and soils Also, you could get dirt from the very bottom and it gets some sort of organic material and carbon date that And maybe you can get an understanding of like maybe when stuff was washed down to the bottom of that shaft Very interesting. Yes, it's possible. It can be possible Crazy if they did that and it lines up directly with the younger dry sandpack theory. I mean that would be incredible evidence Either way just what it is that we know that there's immense shafts We know that they go many many meters deep into the earth and we know that there's these Horizontal shafts along the way these corridors along the way like all of it is just nuts They saw I was looking at the Osiris shaft here The shaft Just near these other ones When they found it there was water down there they had to get out And the water is not only cold ice cold. It says Clean up to be drinking water. Yeah, and I don't know that it doesn't I've seen sound like it refills itself So there's a spring down there Well, that is also the problem with the labyrinth So the labyrinth that they have where there's this enormous atrium and this 40 meter long metallic object that apparently is underneath there And this is through ground penetrating radar the diffs cover this I don't think they know what that metal is either. I think it's a unknown metal But they built a dam there. I believe in the 1960s And to help the farmers and unfortunately that flooded that whole area So because they changed the direction of the water and built this dam the water table rose And that entire labyrinth is now filled with water But through ground penetrating radar they've been able to get this accurate assessment of the dimensions of it And then they go back to the descriptions of Herodotus Who described it see if you can pull that up Herodotus described it as greater than the Giza Plateau itself So these labyrinths these corridors these atrium these huge passageways Underneath the the gray pyramid area More complex and more spectacular than the pyramids themselves My god My god like what was this civilization? These people living in Africa however long ago Were so much more advanced than perhaps anybody that's ever existed Including us Just in a different way Including us Just in a different way Just to remark the fact that there is difference between the water table which of course is Composed by drinkable water and the water that they found Compounding the Drosari shaft and the water that transported all the debris but that water was A salty water because of the great flat so it was Water of the sea composing the sea which makes sense when you see the salt That's all over the pyramids. This is Herodotus. Just quote I've seen it myself and indeed words cannot describe it though the pyramids beggar description And each one of them is a match for many great monuments built by Greeks This may surpasses even the pyramids That is crazy That's crazy that he said that and if you're seeing any of the artistic renditions of what it looks like But the seeping and find some of that because we did it if anybody's interested in this I can't recommend enough uncharted X. It's been very curb with this This is what apparently is underneath this area Which is just fucking staggering. Wow. How nice. This is all underground That's all I think we The next the next Site that we can study can be this yeah, yeah, and water and if you could find out what that 40 meter long metallic object is That's that's when things get weird That's when things get real weird because you find a spaceship down there Then things get really fun I mean we're Egyptian space travelers Why not I mean if they could build that why not space who knows what they could do? They're lying in a gigantic stone box tripping balls. They have this huge pyramid. There's The structures go well how long a kilometer the entire thing into the earth 1.2 kilometers into the earth from the base of the pyramid down 1.2 kilometers Wow, wow This is change maybe from 2018 to now from you researching this and this is change your entire Perspective of human history and just human beings in general in my personal opinion. Yes because Before this was a problem accepting how the pyramids were made all those stones But if we can if we are adding also the structures that are underneath I don't know what happens Rising More impossible than before right more impossible at the goals of these structures that are underneath. I don't know what that is. Right. More impossible than before. Right. More impossible than, I mean, if you'd imagine with modern technology trying to recreate something like that, you're talking about it in men's project, they'll cost hundreds of billions of dollars. Yes. If not more. And the engineering involved, and you're an engineer, the engineering involved in doing something like that, like, how? they can cut the ground it so precisely, it's impossible. Is it possible today? Is it possible? So they had some sort of a technology that is far more advanced than we have. They just went in a different direction. We went in the direction of internal combustion engines and electronics, and they probably went in some completely different direction. Yes. Yes, because the modern science started from a point and then, as you are saying right, we followed a direction, which is the direction of light, because most of our inventions, our internal combustion engines and other stuff, but principally we use light, because we can see it. We can see light, okay, we use light. But other existence, other people, that was living in the past, maybe use other things that we don't know. Maybe sound. Maybe sound. It seems like if this is generating sound and vibration of your speculation is correct. Yes. And they were obsessed with vibration and sound. Yes. They were obsessed in vibrations and sound. Because all these structures that I watched inside the pyramids, they are like something that generates sound or they maintain clean the sound. It resonates sound. It resonates sound. It resonates sound. It's very specific. I go to it. That z, like that, is magnificent. The z is perfect. It's a perfect device made by stones. It's very nice. And just how, how and where did they get the understanding to construct something like this? And this is what screws up our idea of a linear timeline of human progression civilization, to go from caveman to modern 2026 human being. We'd like to think that it was just, oh, we figured this out, then we figured the wheel out, and then it was agriculture. Now here we are today with cars. But more likely there was some peaks and valleys. We rose up to a very high level, probably during Egypt and it was shattered down, and it took probably a long time before civilization built itself again. Yes. So, again, we are speaking about modern living, but modern living has to be sustainable. I don't think that our modern living is so sustainable. No, no. I mean, even our population isn't sustainable. We're in population collapse in many countries in the world, South Korea, Japan. Even there's arguments about America itself. They're wearing population collapse. And we're also chaotic. We also have a very bizarre distribution of information that's filled with nonsense and lies and propaganda. We're a lies and propaganda, yes. But of the government that's constantly trying to censor people and control speech and limit your ability to express yourself and complain about things so they can continue to dominate resources. You have a weird society today. But it's also a society because of this access to information where you can discuss and explore things in a way that has never happened before. And that's the most exciting thing about our time. There's so much room for discussion. I want to, if I can, to explain you something that is maybe related to philosophy or to other things. We have an example of how modern humans are a bit strange. Because we are not made, it is like that we are not made to research, to all to find the harmonics, harmonics, the harmonics in our living. And so I just want to make an example. The, do you remember in the 80s when the cold fusion rises? Yeah. So maybe we are speaking about flashman and ponds that made for the first time. They had the glass of water and inside the day made a mini nuclear reactor inside. They had some results that were very, very poor results. I know, but was a base to build something stronger. They put away that experiments or know they the bank at that experiment. It was not good. It is not good because it is not possible. And the example of the cold fusion is how we are because cold fusion was devoted to find the energy using resonance. Resonance. Why? How it works called the fusion? We have two atoms of hydrogen. We start, we start to get putting together these two atoms. But why do we put together these two atoms? There are atomic forces that tends to, no, I don't want to stay with the other atom. So a pattern that is a limit that the atoms fuse together and it transform, it is the air transform in helium plus energy because of mass difference. And so you can do energy by fusion. This is fusion, not all the fusion. So you can have a fusion by forcing together. The atoms, they don't want to stay together. So the force, force together. And that is hot. Yes, that is hot fusion. Call the fusion, you convince the two atoms to stay together naturally. So today, what method do they use to convince these atoms to stay together naturally? Yes, you have to find a third material that convenes the two atoms to stay together. Like you say, I have a couple, you have a couple, a girl and a man. They don't want to talk, want to each other. If you put a third person between them, at the center of them, and maybe a third person, convenes the men and the girl to speak together and they will speak together. So the third material, which is palladium, they use a palladium, palladium has the physical property to make, speak together the two atoms. And without force them, they naturally transform into value and they generate energy. Because the atom has a mass lower than the two atoms. With mass difference, you will. You will generate energy. And doing this at scale is really the holy grail of a man. Science. Yes. This has always been the quest. Yes. So we have two paradicma, convene, sink something or obtaining the results using the force. And so the the street that you were speaking before, science, head, this street, we want to have things by using force, not convincing. Right. That's where we are. Yes. Nuclear power. Yes. Nuclear energy. Yes. Because I tell you, today also hot nuclear fusion does not exist. Because it is very difficult to make a huge reactor that use a de-tocamax or something related to laser, that uses that forces together the atoms to is something not natural. Cold fusion was natural. And so the pyramids are something related to vibrations, to harmonic resonance, to something like that. That it is the right creation that was the past. Mm. They were the right creation. Yes. They were doing it the correct way. Yes. Instead of doing it against nature, they were doing it in harmony with the nature and in the universe. And that's why all the dimensions are related to the cost of the universe. The universe is like a book that is open. We have to just observe it. And it's not difficult. It's very simple to read the universe. Okay. Show me more. Show me more of this presentation. What else do you have in here when you go from the cap with the sound resonating into the supposed sarcophagus? Yes. Yes. We can go to that slide. This stuff is awesome. This is my favorite subject. By far. Have all subjects ancient history, and particularly ancient Egypt is my favorite subject. Okay. We stopped to speak. So undeniably interesting. If we can go as light up, here we are dealing with something that happened in 2022. After this, after our paper was published, because these results are on our first paper, look at jaw. That's light there. That's the lower slide. Yes. You depict chambers that were previously not known. Yeah. That's the big void. Right. The big void. That's the big void. And then there is the chevron connecting with the corridor. The base of the Grand Gallery. That corridor was discovered at six months later by Zagya was. Wow. They made the paper, but the, I depicted six months. So you let them know it was there. And then that's the corridor. I found it. That's the corridor. Yeah. I don't want to say that I found it about. Well, you found it. I'll say it. You found it. So your technology showed something that turned out to be true and is now established. Yes. And again, how crazy is it? They're just finding new chambers in the pyramids in the 21st century. Pretty spectacular. Yes. That they're just finding this now. And the just yesterday, I was to examine it again that I don't have it. I don't have it as light here. I'm sorry, but there are the results of this Campiramit project. This Campiramit project is very good. I, it is a, it is a very nice project project group. And they discovered the so-called big void. But there is a problem because they say the big void can be something parallel to the Grand Gallery. Not steady, but in clean it like in climate. In that one, right? Examinating the results. I was observing something. Maybe I say maybe I can say that I am right of this. Maybe they are, they are confusing and inclined new chamber by the top of the, they are distinguishing the top of the Grand Gallery and the bottom of the Grand Gallery. Like that. I am sure that the results, but in my personal opinion, the big void is not inclined, but it is located where there is that red blob there. That's the Grand Gallery. Yes, there and also up. Yes, that's the Grand Gallery. It is not inclined. It is, it is flat like that is how you say is steady, not inclined. Right. That's the Grand Gallery. Why do they think it's on an incline? Because we are not seeing, we are not, my technique does not detect, is not detect an incline at a chamber on the top of the Grand Gallery. Why do they think there's an incline? Yes, because they found two targets parallel. But I am feeling to tell them to be careful because maybe they are confusing the roof of the Grand Gallery and the lower part of the Grand Gallery. I say, okay, they have to be careful. Interesting. But it's just also more evidence that your techniques are very effective and accurate. Because you did describe, describe that. Yes, we can see the results that I obtain on the Grand Sasso. We can see the Grand Sasso and the laboratory. And so that is the perfect benchmark that describes the effectiveness of my technique. All right, show me some more. What else you got here? Show me another slide below I think. Ah, okay, okay. We go to go, this is a town where I live. This is a taxi home. This is a taxi home. Yes, this is a taxi home. And here I am showing you the next work that we can do once the Giza Scanning Activity are finished. So this is in Peru. Correct. Yes. And so you want to scan this as well. Yes, you know, we've had quite a few people on describe this. Look, Joe, the stones are like marshmallows. Yes, they are like marshmallows. How they do those. Right. Things that enormous. So 100 tons carved from stones that who knows how they put them into position. But they carved them in this very strange way to absorb the impact of earthquakes. Right. Yes. The idea of this technology is that the reason why they're like a puzzle piece is because it would be much less likely to move in an intense earthquake. Okay. Go back to the tap. It could be just a few words on this city. That is a small town that is located in Peru, where I live. Look, they Italian, the authority of the city of the town. Ask me to perform a scanning around that call of sound. That is, many call of sound. That is located in Cuba. Because probably there is a huge Roman city. Not so old, but it is a Roman city that compounds that are in a, that is there. So a lost Roman city that's around that area. Yes, yes. And I say hello to the people of Cuba. So is this the next thing that you're going to do? One of the next things. One of the next. But Saksa, who am I? Yes. Saksa, who am I? Yes. And there is also, Cara Cora, also very interesting. The slide 51, please. Yes. Yes. Cara Cora. Yes. This is, look at in Russia. And there are huge structures inside there. And this is in Russia. Yes. Yes. Yes. And nobody knows the purpose of those things there. Nobody is crazy. More than crazy. And how big are these things? Oh, I think they're doing other pictures of it. Okay. Okay. Let's keep this up just for a couple seconds. I just like how big are we, what are we looking at here? Yes. We have nine plus 16 plus seven plus 10 plus 36 and they go below. So maybe two or 200 meters below. Two or 300 meters. Yes. And there's this immense rectangle at the bottom of these corridors. Yes. And it goes more, more deeply. And so they, nobody knows what there is. And if you look at that image, it's clearly man-made structure. East man-made, absolutely. Yes. I mean, look, there's stones. They're placed. Yeah. That is nuts. This crazy. And they don't, they just know historical timeline, no understanding of who did it. No. Wow. So it's likely that there's structures like this that exist that are undiscovered probably all over the world. Yeah. Yes. The nice thing of this is, is this. Satellites are glob. Globally. So one satellite flies from, let's say, South Pole, North Pole, South Pole like that. Right. Because of the angular momentum conservation, the, let's say, the wheel of the orbit remains steady. And the earth rotates inside the circle. The circle remains steady. Right. So at least one city, one satellite can observe potentially any part of the globe in one day. So you can program snapshots where you want in all the earth in one day. And how many satellites are up there? There are the satellites that contains on board of them a payload, but composite by synthetic or actually rather, there are a lot. There are different satellites, companies that provides these services. So today it is possible to decide to observe something. Okay. I call the company and they put case for me an image. And this structure in Russia, how was this initially discovered? Was it discovered by, manually, by exploring? Yes. And how did they get the dimensions over? People are able to go all the way down into it? Yes. That man, because there is only a man that went down because it's very narrow. But once you go down, everything becomes very huge and large. Measure it manually, all those depths. But more than than, you can't go because maybe it's too narrow. I don't know. Yes. Okay. Did you find any images about Jamie online? I'm looking into something. Some of us sort of saying that's in a different spot and now I just try to track it down. These are also weirdly only getting talked about over the last month. So I am digging down a different. When did they discover this? I don't remember. 2011. 2011. That's crazy. The fact that they don't know who made it or why, but it is clearly man-made. You've seen these stones perfectly cut, stacked on top of each other. Yes. And you'll have the same. Yeah. Okay. It's currently known from friends, social media, and YouTube style sources rather than former archaeological publications because it hasn't been explored. Correct? Yeah. It's 15 years ago. Yeah. Pretty pretty nuts. But I mean, who's doing that kind of work in Russia, especially now? Deep underground shaft lined with large parallel, megalithic stone blocks with walls described as straight and polished suggest artificial construction rather than a natural cave or fissure. And this is all from our sponsor perplexity that we run all or our questions through. And it's always been very accurate. Said to lie somewhere between, in the Russian caucus, often simply, describe simply as North caucus or caucus mountains with videos and post presenting in his evidence of unknown or very ancient civilization with advanced, stone working techniques. Crazy. They don't know who made this. There's no accessible peer reviewed archaeological articles, official Russian heritage records, or academic monographs to describe the site formerly named the Carahora, is it my say on that right? Carahora. Carahora shaft. Carahora shaft, which strongly suggests the claim has not been vetted by mainstream archaeology, but look, it exists. Well, that's better than not. It doesn't matter. Like, who made it? What is it? Not. That's really crazy. I had no idea that that existed. And it's just, it makes you think, like, if they just found that in 2011. And... Man, well, yeah. Right. And maybe doing a wide research by satellites, maybe, starting from there, or other sites between that Carahora, maybe we would find other things. Right. It could be part of an enormous complex. Yes. But just the fact that that exists and that a human made that are humans made that that's crazy. The whole thing is crazy because it really does like anybody that boy, the modern archaeologist and people that are the gatekeepers of archaeological information are fighting an uphill battle because like you can't at a certain point in time you have to give up and go, I don't know. And that's an I don't know moment. Like, yes, this is an I don't know. What the hell is that? What is that? Do you want some more images, Jamie? Because it's really kooky. Of the shaft. Yeah, just that what that looks like. I'm trying to, it's, I'm digging on a hole and there's a post here on, yes, not so. It's not so, it's like they're misinterpreting something. This is Jay Anderson. No, it's in the podcast recently. This is the tweet I found. How about some fat chunk Carahora in the, uh, uh, cub, cub Ardino, bulkria, Republic, North caucus, the Russian Federation is a different place from Carahora to Carahora and Carahora. So there's more than one place. I'm, I'm trying to, I'm to have it. I'm just googling stuff. It's, it all comes from this one video. It seems like, because everyone's point to this video and this video is compiled of all sorts of stuff. It's got three million views from 2024. So I can see how it goes. We went viral or no, but it starts off with just showing that. And I don't, you know, so this is probably the entry to this area. Maybe, but again, no one knows they can't tell you where that is. I'm on a map. Right. Got it. Look how precise it is. So it's, this might be who knows. Yeah, could be real. Could be nonsense. Well, the, the images of that guy standing there looking outside of that, opening that you showed earlier in your presentation is just bananas. But whatever this is, that's why I don't know where it's from. You know, it could be right. Do they have any video of once they got all the way down through? So here, okay, let's keep going. See what it looks like. And I don't even know. Yes, so someone else is a narration on it. It's coming from a different channel. I can see a tag on there. It's coming from a different show. God, look at the right angles though. This is nuts. Yes. I mean, it clearly looks like something man made. Look how precise it is. It's crunched. That's man made. It's absolutely man made. All right, that are also a comparison with the dimensions of the dimensions. Wow. What the hell is that? That means it's crazy. What the hell is that? It's crazy and they found it in 2011. Yeah. I mean, imagine how much more of this stuff, I mean, that's one of the things about Gobackly Tappy. They've only observed 5% of it. I mean, 5% of it, they've uncovered and through ground penetrating radar, they know that it's all sites nearby. Yes, but ground-painted radar has a problem. What is the problem? The problem of ground-painted radar is the penetration that is a few meters. And so, there is a problem of penetration that, but in that depth, you are very precise. So you have to take in account that more than 15, 20 meters below you can't go. Right. But using that method, they have found all these structures exist. It's a good method for in-seato exploration, yes. And so, you can find nice things with using ground penetrating radar. If you want to perform a wide area, rough, let's say rough, scanning, you can use my method. So you can find huge things on wide area. For the data dates, it's okay ground penetrating radar. Is there anything else you want to show us that's in your presentation that you think? Okay, show me some more stuff. Yes, it's a pleasure. Yeah, please, it's a pleasure for me too. Thank you. Thank you for being here. Okay, thank you for inviting. Cara hora, as I say, Cara chora, chora. Cara chora. Cara chora. So this is Cara chora. So that image, go back one more time to Cara chora. That's a legitimate image. That's not AI generated. This is these guys standing in clearly what looks like megalithic stones stacked on top of each other. Clearly man-made. Yes, can you man-made because look, you see? Yes, you see the blocks. Yeah, you see the blocks. It's fucking nuts. No, but okay, we can understand that it's possible, maybe it's possible to be something like that. Sure, possible. It's possible. The purpose and when and who and what civilization? Right, who did that? That is insane. What even is that? Yeah, I mean, there's ropes that go across, so that's what you're seeing. And you've seen this rope go to versus arm and where's the rope go to? Well, he's got his arm posted on the side of that wall, and that rope goes across, and you're just not seeing it because of the darkness. Is that like he's leaning against something there too? It looks like he's got his hand on that wall, that opening. There's an opening in that shaft. So what else is next in this presentation? Okay. Yeah, which way should I go? Okay, we go upstairs. Let's see. Go back here, tap it. That we have a good build. And here we have the Osiris shafts, which we use this shaft, the Osiris shaft, like a benchmark because we are able to understand the fact that of our technique that is able to retrieve the shape of the Osiris shaft. Why the Osiris shaft? Because it's a benchmark that we know exactly how we damage the starage and So it accurately depicts the Osiris shaft? Yes. Um, well, let's go there. Okay, the 4.3, 4.3, yes. This is the Sangok Tardatano. And here I made an exploration or using my technique in order to retrieve the shape of the railway tunnel that it is approximately 2 kilometers below the mountain. And this light 44, we can understand that in this case, the Alps, the mountain resonates like a crystal. So you are seeing, you are watching the mountain in the vibrational domain. So it's like a photograph, a photo, a pick up or a synthesized by sound. And in that case, we can see the slide 45 and 46. We are detecting the tunnel, the tunnel, yes, that's the In that case, we can see the slide 45 and 46. We are detecting the tunnel, the tunnel. Yes, that's the railway tunnel that is located below the earth. Wow. So this is just more proof of the accuracy of the technique. Yes. Yes. This is some really stunning stuff. Yes, that I can explain your other experiments. We can go starting from a slide 36. OK, slide 36. This is a dam. And it is very important dam. It is a the Marshall dam that is located in Iraq. It is very huge. It's 300 meters tall as a height of 300 meters. And the three kilometers from one part to the other part of the dam. So it contains a huge amount of water from the upper side. There is the water that contains. And below there is the river that the water comes out from the reservoir. That is on top. Why the Marshall dam? The Marshall dam has a problem. It has been built on a bed of a jet. So how you say, Jeff. Jeff, yes. And the jabsum is a while is in contact of water. It melts. So the Marshall dam is dangerous because it has a serious problem of stabilization. In this case, there are a lot of, let's call it, satellites, metals, and synthetic electron rather metals that are devoted to a perform this, or called the infrastructure monitoring. And in this case, the Marshall dam is crucial to be observed by a radar. In this case, I wanted to see this slide 37, please. Here, inside the dam, look, there is a tunnel, the red line, the tunnel. And here, we have people that are working inside the tunnel. And the task was, my technique is possible to detect the tunnel. We go in slide 38. And we see on the right top, there is the tunnel. Just explain you. Where you see red, the vibration energy is high. So it's red. When you see blue, the vibration energy is low. It's low. And inside the tunnel, because you have the air, you don't have vibration. So it's low. And so you see the tunnel. And so we were also able to detect slide 39. Also, the principle facility that are located inside the dam, which are the turbiness, the turbines, and other stuff. And all the mechanical machines, this is the more the mechanical machines that are located inside. All right. So it's showing the accurate shape of the turbines as well. This is just more proof that this technique works. Yes. And so we go slide 31. OK, this is the GANSasso. How nice is this for me very nice. Because I born here. This is the particle color. Inside the mountain, in the core of the mountain, there is the laboratory here. And the task was, can I detect the facility that is inside the mountain? And so we are now in this slide 32 and 33. And we can see the facility that is in a fan is the Institute on Astronality, Physic and Nuclear Area. You see the shape of it in there? Yeah. National Institute of Nuclear Physics, the Italian National Institute of Nuclear Physics. And that's more than a kilometer deep into the mountain. So 1.4. And yes, and slide 35, we can see the laboratory. Wow. Yeah. This is the laboratory. That's crazy. That's crazy. So using your techniques, you get an accurate depiction of the dimensions of this laboratory. Yeah. Wow. And that that triangle is called the interferometer. So when you have two lasers, that goes together. And the day you can study the pattern, the interferometer, the pattern that coherent signals are generating, you can use an interferometer. And that's the interferometer. Wow. This is all amazing stuff. It's amazing. And I feel like we're at the beginning of a very fascinating journey. And I think that your work and this research and all the controversy is good. All the controversy around is just going to make more people talk about it and more people discuss it and more people understand. And it just seems to me that the more they research it, the more the mystery opens up. And that it is without a doubt, one of the most astounding discoveries in human history. Yes. So thank you, Joe. Congratulations on discovering it. And thank you so much for all your hard work. Because like I said, it's to me, one of the most fascinating subjects. And what Graham always speaks of is that we are a species with amnesia. Yes. And I end up getting with this. I did that. And it's one of the reasons why so many people are mad at him. It's because he was right. He was right in the 1990s. And as time goes on, he is being proven more and more to be correct. And things just seem to keep getting older. Yes. It's amazing. Thank you so much for being here. I really appreciate your time. And I appreciate your work. And the story inviting you. My pleasure. Let's do it again when more stuff comes out. OK. All right. I'm here. If anybody wants to find more about this, where would you send them to their website that would give them more information if they want to do a deep dive? Yes. I have a personal website, which is harmonics.com. And I publish it. I say that again harmonics. I said.com. Yes. Harmonics, it's a man. It's a synthetic aperture radar. It's a star. So harmonics are dot com. Yes. Felibo, beyond the. You're the man. Thank you, sir. Thank you. I really appreciate your feedback. Thank you. All right. Thank you.