Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. Look at the sea. Hey, new to you. How you been? Great. Great. Great. We're just talking about peace of mind and dealing with cooks. Is there anybody who argues online more than you do? Or you might be the number one guy who I see in clips, like constantly getting an argument with people online? I'm not sure that there is anybody who takes on more debates yearly high and low profile than I do. Yeah. I mean, even casual ones. Correct. It's like you're always sparring. It's like you're always a, you know? Well, I think that you see sharp for sure. Capesy sharp if you're... So I also have this rule that, you know, there's like the cloud game online, right? All these people want to play the cloud game. What is exactly the cloud game? It's like you don't have a big enough follower account for me to respond to you. You don't have a big enough audience for me to discuss things with you, you know, things like that. And it's like, I hate that. That seems pretty silly. It is silly. And some of the best debates I've ever had with guys who had like four followers on X. And like let's go to this X space and talk and I'll hop in there with them and I'm like an hour later I go. I had a lot of good stuff to say. A lot of people out there. And oftentimes those are the ones who don't have a lot of followers because they're not sucked into the social media web. They're just out there thinking and doing things living their life. A lot of fucking interesting people out there that you never hear from. And a lot of not interesting people who hear from constantly. All the time. It's like the politician thing, you know. It's like we were talking about that the other day. Like there's this lady that's running for got something. She running for governor Wisconsin. Is that what it is? And she was just talking about how Thanksgiving hurts people. Like yeah. Yeah. I don't know her background. I think it's the same lady at one point. I'm sure is it a mental institution. Why is this not shock me? Doesn't shock me. But this was the point where we're saying nobody wants to be the fucking governor and the people that do are there's a high percentage of cooks. Yeah. Power attracts strange people. Sometimes it attracts good people. Yes. And often and often those are the people who go in and they want to change it. Like the idea that they have is look, I'm trying to run for the right reasons because I actually want to change how this works. But they're few and far between and they get killed. A lot of them get killed or they get run off. A lot of them just get involved in that like their normal day to day life from 20 years prior. Now suddenly that's coming up. You know and they have to defend themselves against criticisms that they never would have believed that they would have to defend themselves. Right. Yeah. And so character assassination I think takes a lot of the good actors out. They don't want to deal with the character assassination. Well it seems like they want total compliance on both sides, on both parties, total compliance with the party. And if they think that you're going to be some outside of rebel that's going to take over the fuck you. Well you kind of I think you kind of have to have that a little bit though because if you got universal suffrage necessarily everything converges into a two party system. So as suffrage expanded throughout history you saw the emergence of parties right alongside of it. As more people became in franchise to vote. So if women couldn't vote there wouldn't be parties. There probably would still be parties. It'd probably still be a two party system. It's just that how it works is that if we continuously expand suffrage, let's just say we expand it to another group of men. Now those men have some special interest right. So if it's not just property owners let's say it's now you know people who live in a city. Well they want a levy pass so that their kids can go to school right. So they pass it on the property owners. Now they can vote to hand themselves money. So now you have a wedge issue. And so you'll see parties start to form around these wedge issues. And the more you have universal suffrage the more you end up with party politics until you have a convergence of two and usually it's a long certain wedge issue. So the only way in a dialectic where you have two parties and Democrat and Republican to get your legislation passed is to be able to outvote the other side right. So you kind of have to have them all in line or else. That makes sense. And there's no room in this country at the current point in time for another party. No one would accept it. We think about other parties like they're a goof. The Green Party like it's a that's a protest vote. You know the retiree party has done that. I've done a few protest votes back my day. Yeah I talked with I was arguing with Rex Jones the other day it's Alex Jones's kid about this. And I told him I'm like look you don't have a prayer in starting a third party in time for midterms and then the presidential election that's coming up in just a couple short years. You're not going to be able to replace this system. You're not going to be able to do that. There are two the roots go too deep. They're there to intertwine. Only have power influence. Like think about the infrastructure billions of dollars in NGO funding. All this outreach program just to get on a ballot in a state is often a multi million dollar thing that you need to have a party apparatus behind. Yeah. It's kind of nuts right. Multi million dollars to to spend to get a job that pays you $170,000. Uh huh. What? What? What? What? What? Have you think that fucking student loans are a scam? That's a crazy scam. Well I love when these guys come in for their hundred thousand dollar a year job. And then they leave and they have twenty five million dollars in the bank. Yeah that happens often. What happens? When we get all that money? Yeah. I still have an Omar thing. Oh yeah. That one's that one's wild. Like they estimated her net worth somewhere like in a it was millions like thirty million or something crazy. And then she said it was a error. And then it was actually like a lot less than that like a hundred thousand or something like really reasonable. Like you imagine if your account was so bad you're like hey Mike how much money am I worth? And he's like I think you're worth thirty million. And you're like fuck yeah dude. Think about buying a Corvette. And he got any got three thousand dollars in the bank. And then you call Mike the next day. And you say so thirty million it was actually it was an error. You're worth about a hundred grand. And you're like hey Mike I'm going to kill you because you stole thirty million dollars from it. That doesn't make any sense. And do you think maybe she like strategically started moving some things with her account and so that there was like an error that they own that never made a bottle of wine. Sounds right. Is that in case. Losing case with one of those businesses that close down. It's an and pick on her. It's if you look at the Republicans and the Democrats when it comes to insider trading it's fucking everybody. It's red blue red blue red blue it is this is not a one party thing. This is why it's never going to stop. They're both dipping their toes in. They're both having fun. You basically always have the expectation of corruption. So even if you put your candidates in so you're trying to get something out of that right and some issue trying to push forward. You almost baked into the system have to accept a certain amount of corruption is going to come out of that. So like let me go you really good example of that key wedge issue like abortion. So you got Christians who are just adamant right just got to stop. Well they accept if it's the case that candidates are really moving the post on that. If they're really moving legislation against abortion. Do you think that they would turn a blind eye to a little bit of corruption? Probably. Yeah there's definitely some compromises that get made both on your morals and the way you view financial issues and all kinds of things. I mean it's never there especially there's only two parties like you're with us or against us and them it's good and evil that's it. In this country that's really how people look at it on both sides. It's good versus evil. But you have an alternative there that's even worse or can at least sometimes be worse. So let's go to like the UK or Canada or places like this where they do round voting. Yeah more than two parties that's true. But do you really want your president to be elected with 10% of the vote? Right. 15% of the vote. You want your politicians to be put in with 9% of the vote? Because that can happen. Yeah between these rounds. And so you think about it and you go this two party system sucks. But then you look at other places that have multiple parties and they do their rounds of voting and you're like wait see you could get elected with only 14% of them. So everybody else hates you. Yeah. There's the weird argument of the benevolent dictator. I'm sure you've heard this argument but that a society is best run by benevolent dictator. Someone who really truly has ultimate power but actually cares. A good person that cares about the people that really just wants things to be reasonable and have a working meritocracy and have a working economy and have working education. And everything worked correctly. We doubt all of the fraud and corruption because he's a king. And he just like you just do whatever the fuck you want. Look I have only been to Dubai one time because we had a UFC over there and I had to go to the weigh ins the weigh ins were in Dubai. We saw a lot of fucking Ferraris and Lamborghinis in 10 minutes. But from what I hear it's the most safe place on earth like literally like there's a manie under Vlad. Yeah. Like what would you say like Romania under Vlad the impaler. How can you how can you hang gold in the street and he doesn't look around. There's a bunch of people who pale everywhere he would do them in designs. He would do them in geometric patterns. So you would realize he's being creative with impaling people. He wasn't messing around. Oh no no no no. You know his story? Yeah. He was kidnapped when he was a small boy. Whoa. A lot to that guy. And his brother and their, you know, inter brother conflict that they had for years and how he got power lost power came to the air. There's a, there's a tale to be told about Vlad the impaler for sure. But probably a pretty safe place to live. Yeah. Do buy like if they catch you with a bag of weed you're going to jail for the rest of your life or they'll kill you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They've, they've crazy lost. There was one guy I think it was do by who I think he had like marijuana seeds in the soul of his shoes or something like that. Like it's stepped on a marijuana seed maybe in his apartment. Yeah. And he was, didn't have any drugs on him, nothing. And they, they put him in jail for a long time. And I forget this was a few years back. But it was a crazy case. There was another lady who got arrested. I forget what happened. But she later a guy tested positive for poppy because she had poppy seed bagel. I don't know if you know this, but if you're testing for drugs and you eat a poppy seed bagel, you could pop for heroin. Yeah. Yeah. I've heard that. It has to. Isn't it a little bit better now? I hope so. I don't know. 2008, this is a British traveler into buy was stopped the airport and lab found 0.003 grams of cannabis in his shoe sole. Holy fuck. Yeah, that's crazy. That's crazy. He received a mandatory four year sentence under the UAE's strict drug laws. Those later least early. So how early is early? So the British government came in and tried to barter him out of their own guessing. I guess or the whole world must have been so outraged. I mean, at a certain point in time, they have to say we run the risk of never having tourist visit us again and devise a very tourist central place. Sure. But I have a friend who moved over there a while back. He moved back to America recently, but he moved over there and he was like, dude, it's just safe for me. I don't worry if I go out. Someone's going to like he's big black eye. He's like, I don't want to get shot. He goes, I don't worry if I go out. I was over here. There's nothing like that. There's no crime. He goes, everything's nice. Everything's clean. You could leave a Rolex on the street. They'll pick it up and turn it into the cops. Like no, nobody steals nothing over there. But there's a trade off for that, right? Video showing my geometric patterns of dead beef. It'll be played everywhere on spikes who we impaled from their buttocks through their throat. And they'll thigh immediately. No. I'm going to go for a while. I don't think they do that and do bye. But they let you know. Yeah. You're not fucking around. I saw some lady getting a screaming match. She was trying to do the thing that a lot of people do in America at the airport. And she got a screaming thing with the lady at the counter. They're like, not today. They're just coming over and fucking coffee you up and take you away. You can't do that there. You can't like, you can't spirit airlines. You prefer that. Would you prefer that society? I don't think people should be able to just fucking scream and yell at people that work behind counters. I don't think that's productive. I don't think smacking them in the head because they can't get you a flight. We've all seen that kind of shit. There should be zero tolerance for that kind of violence. But what if we tweaked it a different way? Okay. So what if instead of bringing in like some crazy Sharia in order to make sure that that happens, you're brought back dueling. Like when wouldn't dueling solve like 95% of this? Nothing requires people to wait before they turn around and shoot. I'm not trusting a guy who wants to kill me to not jump the guy. But that depends on the rules, right? Like you could adjust the rules a little bit. Adjust the rules. But it's like if you could, if you could call somebody out for switching you or something like that. Yeah. It's like I think people would probably be a lot more polite, wouldn't they? They probably would. I think this is probably a better way than shooting each other in the street. Probably. But there's probably a better way than like fist fights. Yeah. There's a better way than that too. You don't have to fist fight. They come on. But you know, there's certainly something to be said for a society that is more orderly and people follow the rules and as long as the rules make sense. And these people are friendly and kind and they make for good community members that's got putting up with mentally illumin attacks. Walking around causing problems everywhere, which is what American society is now dealing with. You would just see what just happened in Wisconsin where they had the, they had their own autonomous zone. Oh, yeah. It just got broken up today by the cops. I didn't see it got broken up. You got broken up today. Yeah. See if you could find it. Jamie, there was video footage just fucking army of cops. Game in, rest it, everybody's spray paint all the streets and cars and everywhere. People just get to declare autonomous zones on public. I'd like what is it? Or Chaz and Chaz? Yes. We have a, we've just declared this an autonomous zone. Sorry. Madison officials clear Willie Street encampment police officers arrest protesters who resist had Corey Ruiz memorial site. I do not know this Corey Ruiz story. The Corey Ruiz memorial. So was it something ice related perhaps? I think that's what this is, right? Is that what this is, Jamie? Did something happen? Something happened. You don't know about it either. See, that's the problem. There's so many fucking things in the news that it's impossible unless you're a maniac and you're on line all day. It's impossible to know exactly what's going on. You take a couple days off and smell the roses and you get back online. How come you haven't commented on, what is it? I don't know what you got to catch up for four days for one day. Also like hot take. Maybe you shouldn't have a hot take on everything. Maybe some things you need to let it play out in the news, let people dissect it. See now that, I wish that that was a message that more people got. The idea that you don't have to rush immediately out there to tell everybody your latest hottest take, which is oftentimes by the way stupid. It's often stupid. Yeah, no information. Right? But you're going to rush out there. You're going to get those views and click quick. But then you're married to that take. Exactly. And unless you come back and make another video or make another take and explain why you fucked it up. But I think that there's something to be said for like, there's a lot of stories that are in the news like, I don't fucking know exactly what happened there. Let's let this one play out a little bit. This one seems weird. Like if I come out with a hot, like who fucking knows what's really going on with 15, like there's so many different stories in the news. It's impossible. What's that, Jimmy? I find the details, but it is a police killing. It says officer involved. Evening of Corey Ruiz. And that's not it. It isn't looking for evidence and video. I didn't check Twitter or anything yet. Put it into perplexity. Ask perplexity. What is the controversy about the killing of Corey Ruiz? Okay. You can't. You can't be this. We're not designed to get all the bad news of eight billion people. We're just not designed for that. It's not a normal thing for a person to absorb. It's also driving a lot of people crazy. Crazy. Driving them to insanity. They think they start to see conspiracy everywhere. They start to see plots of interest where there aren't any. It starts to actually drive people mad because they can't disassociate between the fact that there is sensationalism and then there's reality and the way that people think they think in frames. So if you think in a conspiratorial frame, you're usually taking tangential things and piecing them together that don't belong. Right. But then if you think in an autistic frame, as my friend Paul would say, if you think in an autistic frame, you're going to hone down so deep on one detail that you miss the entirety of the picture. Right. So you have to have an idea between these two things. Right. Like conspiracy exists. We know this. Many of them exist. There's many of them. I can state off the top of my head like MK Ultra. That was a conspiracy that existed. Yeah. Right. But there's also a lot that don't. Right. And so how do you disassociate between the two? This episode is brought to you by Blue Choo. Man, let's talk about Blue Choo. They're early the number one brand for better sex. But what they're doing with Blue Choo Gold is completely next level. Gold is a four in one formula designed to make your bedroom noisy again. Obviously it gets you hard. Like you're back in your 20s. And everything is handled 100% online. But gold boosts your arousal getting you ready for sex physically and mentally. Plus it dissolves under your tongue for faster absorption. So you get that spontaneous energy back. Look at the stats. Gold is three times stronger five times faster and eight times longer lasting than old school methods. Blue Choo Gold is the real deal. Right now by two months of Blue Choo Gold and get the third free with my code Rogan. You'll also receive free overnight shipping head over to bluechoo.com for details and important safety information. Check it out. This ad and the products being advertised are intended for a United States audience. And you have to come to the recognition recognition that some of these fake ones were planted to make the real ones look stupid. Flness is own. Yes. What was it, Jay? You pulled it up. A controversy centers on whether Madison police needed to use deadly force against 38 year old courty will ease a black man during a July, 2026 arrest and on the lack of body camera footage. Oh, conflicting narratives about the threat he posed posed and the broader concerns about racialized policing. Police responded reports of a man allegedly looking into park vehicles and stealing bicycles during the attempted arrest by four officers. A taser was deployed but reportedly failed. Police say Ruiz pulled a knife and injured an officer after which that officer shot and killed him. Cell phone video recorded by a bystander shows part of the struggle and shooting and quickly went viral triggering protests and public outcry. Use of deadly force versus alternatives, community members and Ruiz's family question why lethal force was used when multiple officers were already restraining him on the ground. The taser had been deployed arguing that he did not deserve to be shot to death in the street. Lack of body cameras, none of the officers involved were wearing body worn cameras. So the only visual recording is bystander video which fuels distrust and demands for more accountability and measures and technology. We need more flot cameras conflicting narratives about threat. Police emphasized that Ruiz stabbed or injured an officer with a knife framing the shooting as a response to an immediate threat. Critics in loved ones questioned whether the threat justified shooting or strained man and whether de-escalation was properly used. Well first of all, if you really did stab a police officer, if he's stabbing a police officer like they are supposed to shoot him, that is you can't take, you can't say someone stabbing me. I hope they're only hurting me. Yeah right or how do you assess the amount of force that you can use back when someone's stabbing you? I think that that's responding with lethal force. What did you say, Jamie? I find the video. Yeah let's find the video. But it's also how big is this guy? If he's got all these people and are these like a bunch of shitty untrained police officers who don't know any martial arts, when you say he's restrained like how restrained was he? You know what I mean? Like if you got two dudes that are a bit like Tony Hinchcliffe and they're trying to hold me back from fucking somebody up. It's not gonna do nothing. You know what I mean? It's like how big is this guy? What happened? Was he the one that was stealing things or was he wrongly accused? Does he have a record? Is he a violent person? I don't know anything. Is he a complete innocent bystander? This is the video? Video contains graphic content. Okay. That's it? That's all the other ones you have missed. So it's probably multiple videos. Yeah. Yeah. The thing about the tasers is it's fucking weird, man. Tasers on some people, they lock them up and they fucking and they fall down. I've seen guys just scream and rip those things off their chest like it's nothing. Well, sometimes those probes don't penetrate either, right? I think some of those tasers are bunk too. 100%. Some of the tasers are just shit equipment. I mean, that's the only thing that makes sense. So these guys, did you ever play with one of the handhelds when you were a kid? No, somebody always had a handheld somewhere. No, I never did. I just talked to your electric fence though once. Yeah. Oh, yeah. That'll make your teeth flat. Holy fuck, dude. I just let him go. That's hard. Yeah. Disturbing video. Okay. Oh, the sound on it. I mean, the yelling. It is your phone. So it's the taser. Oh, okay. Hold on, man. Back up. What was he reaching for in the ground? Is that the girl the woman shoots him? Okay. Oh, yeah. I can't tell you something down, though. That was fine. Okay. That's crazy. That does not look justified. That looks like they had control of him. Unless he had a knife and was stabbing people. But even if he was stabbing, like how much control did they have on him before she starts shooting him, was it the chick who shot him? Yes. Look, see, she backs away. Watch. They tase him to get him to the ground. And she shoots him while they've got him down on the ground. Some female cops. Yeah, that's not good. That's crazy. Oh, again, I don't know what happened. I don't know if he stabbed one of them. She really did have a knife and was stabbing him, but it seems like they had him restrained. I think that's the guy who shot him. But that lady stands back and extends her arms with a guy right there. Oh, you're right. It looks like he shoots him. Oh, it's the guy shoots him. Yeah, I think she had the taste. She's shooting him with a taser. Oh, let me see that again. What? God, it's hard to tell. So it's the guy in the back? I think it's the guy in the front. So if you, the dude in the back, you see the guy right next to you at that guy. That guy shoots him. It looks like it. I'm not sure. That's really close too. Yeah, they seem like, oh, yeah. The second the shot stopped, he puts his hand, his gun back. Right. And makes me think maybe it was him. Yes. Fuck, man. That does not look good. So that's not a good one. No. No. No. Doesn't look great. No. That means you have to give us your hot take now, Joe. Yeah. That's my hot take. So he could run to Twitter with it. I need to know. Did he actually stab one of them? So it's during a press conference. Two of the cops were injured in the altercation. Police said the suspect allegedly pulled out a fixed blade knife to which an officer pulled out a taser. Same officer shot him with a gun. Okay. That's different. So if he really pulled out a knife, he was trying to stab them. And they had him on the ground. And they couldn't totally get control of them. And that guy just decides he stabbed me. I'm going to shoot them. That's a different thing. I agree. That's different. Also, we didn't have the front view. Right. We see the view from the back. Well, it's very blurry. The whole thing. We didn't even know who shot without the lady shot him. It's hard to tell what the fuck is going on. You can't even tell if it's a taser or a gun in her hand. It's that blurry. But if he stabbed them and he's got a knife, that's a different thing. The whole thing is fucked, though. Like that is the last thing American needs right now. Yeah, I mean, you don't want another riot season. I mean, I wonder if people would go right into it the way they did before without USAID's help. No. No. Here's what a witness said he saw. When this game flying around on his bicycle, one officer tackled him, two other officers kind of rushed over one of the officers, yelled he has a knife. One of the officers then draws a taser and yells, taser, taser, taser, taser. He tasers him. So it says he tasers him, but wasn't that the woman? That's the main act. I'm not sure that she actually tase her to him. Yeah, we're just having her weapon off. She might have just had her weapon out. He tases him and the victim falls to the ground. The three continue to struggle for a second or two, then one of the officers stands just a couple feet above his head, shooting the, OK, three times. Three times to the head, holy fuck. It did look like he was the shooter. OK, so that's what we saw. Yeah, and the thing, the tell for that was as soon as he was done, he put a red back on the other cops weren't doing that. It was an additional video that has been not been circulated online that's being reviewed. Oh, why don't they have body cameras? That's what I mean. That's probably part of the whole protest was that their cameras were not on. So if they didn't have them, I don't know. Let's find that out. Did they not have them or were they not on? Lack of body cameras. None of the officers involved were wearing body cameras. So none of them. That's, are they supposed to? Yeah, they may not be part of the audience. Yeah, I don't know about the Braille. See Madison. How about fix that? Yeah. Yeah, fix that. You know, cops often are the ones who suggest that. Yeah, for their own safety, they say that they want to wear body cams. I've seen a lot of crazy body cam footage where a guy is pulling someone over and they're just having a casual conversation. All of a sudden the guy pulls a gun out and starts shooting them. I've seen a bunch of those. Huns. Especially the routine traffic stops happens constantly. You have to always think, like if you're in an altercation with a cop, these people are always worried that this is where their life is going to end. They're always worried that they're going to get shot. They've seen those videos too. So if you start shit with a cop and he freaks out and goes the wrong direction, like you're probably dealing with a guy who's got some serious PTSD. Yeah, he's seen it before. Or he is buddy. He's gotten gotten plugged right there. They've all seen it. Yeah, I have a friend who spent a lot of times overseas deployed and he said in combat and he said he saw way more as an Austin cop, like way more fucked up things. And all the time, whereas you know, you're not wore all the time in firefight. And he said, he saw way more as an Austin cop, like way more fucked up things. And all the time, whereas you know, you're not war all the time. You know, in fire fights all the time, because like it's like every day, every day you're seeing something fucked up that you can't unsee. And you see it with kids, yeah. Things you got to deal with with kids. Things you got to deal with with all sorts of things. All sorts of things. That is not a fun job. No. And I would not want it at all. So I always do tend to cut law enforcement quite a bit of grace until I hear what their side of things are. Yeah. That is a brutal job to have. I buddy mine's a deputy sheriff. And I talk with him. And he's policing a small area. And he's like, it's the stuff with the kids. It gets him. Yeah, exactly. That's the stuff he'll get, you know, we go into a junkie's house. There's a two year old there has an eaten in four days. You know, he's like, that's the stuff that really is. I had rather shoot a person than that. Which kind of makes sense to me, right? Like I would. It does. Yeah, I probably would too. You know, when you think about who should be allowed to have kids, who should be, like that's what's really crazy about freedom. Is that any two crackheads with no money at all, just on the side of the road. And he can nut inside of her and that creates a life and that life they're responsible for. And they're smoking crack and drinking ever clear. And they have a baby growing inside their body. No one can do anything about it. It's like there's no protection for that baby. There's no nothing. And then if that baby is born, if it does live, like, you know, you talk to people that have actually like been in a delivery room with crack babies. It's like, oh my God, man, the horror stories about a child addicted to drugs coming out of the womb, addicted to drugs and detoxing, heavily addicted, heavily addicted. Yeah. Yeah, it's so hard. It's so hard. Coolish. It's so twisted. It's like people can be so awesome and so shit at the same time, coexisting on the same patch of dirt and no one devises legitimate strategy for mitigating the amount of people that suck and the problems with can it can even be done? I don't know. Not with freedom. I mean, this is the flock camera question. You know, do you want big brother looking at your license plate everywhere you go? Well, listen, if someone shoots up, like, this is an argument that Mark Andreessen made on this podcast. When he had come here, right after he, right before he had come here, there was a shooting in Austin where some kids just randomly started shooting at people and then they couldn't find them in Austin. But as soon as they left Austin city limits, they went into an area that had flocked cameras and they got them like that. So this was his argument for the benefits of flock cameras. But I do believe he invests in flock cameras. Sure. I mean, but you can make that argument with CCTV as well. You can make that argument with everyone wear a chip. Yeah. Everyone wear a body camera. The thing is, is you have to be cautious with the idea of the nanny state for another reason besides just protecting people's independent privacy. It's because of those things often become money wells for people to steal from the public trough. Oh, yeah. And that is the major issue. All right. So some of the, some of the reasons I tend, even though I'm on the paleo Christian side to lean towards a lot of the freedom elements over the naz because of the corruption. The corruption, which happens oftentimes when you try to curtail too much, right? That in and of itself creates a system and that system becomes ripe for corruption. Let me give you an example, flock cams who we awarding the contracts to. Right. And who's going to be servicing those contracts? Who's going to be doing these things? Right. That's where you start to see with new systems. There becomes new corruption. So there has to be a way to curtain, but there's some things that are pretty obvious that you could curtain to and who cares if people bet you about it. Like let's take an online prostitution, for instance. Okay. Great. It's illegal to do only fans. Let's say, how the hell could that possibly be bad for sister? Like what is, what is that going to do? That's just, oh, we got to have that, though, Andrew. We got it. We got to have that. It's like, I don't think we do. I don't think it's necessary. And if we got rid of it, like who cares? You know, it seems like it would just be a massive net positive for every human being. If that was just done away with altogether. And it's like what the systems that come into, though, for policing it, are prone to corruption. So you got to be cautious about it. Right. Right. You got to be cautious about it. Well, so I just don't like people telling people what to do. Even if they shouldn't be doing it, I don't like it. I mean, to an extent, though, right? Like if they're heroin addicts, you're going to be like, no, we got to say, well, even that, like, I don't think you should be a heroin addict, but I don't think I should be the one to tell you not to do heroin. I don't, because I think it's a slippery slope and then it's don't smoke cigarettes. And then it's because cigarettes are killing you. And then it's don't drink whiskey because you could be a drunk driver and kill a family of five. Like it's all the same shit. It's like, but you think that all those have kind of the same impact on society ultimately. Well, the heroin thing is a weird one because, um, because like the argument I make would be like the incest argument, it'd be like, look, that's outlawed for good reason. But what if you have two people are totally sterile? Like they can't have kids, right? What's the moral argument that can be made? And there people are like, well, there's, I can't really make them more gross. It's just gross. Just fucking your sister. Yeah. He just said, yeah, what are you doing? It's just gross. And it's like, well, but can we legislate off of it? It's just gross. And the kind of libertarian mindset is no, we can't. And I think, yeah, we can. I'm okay with that. Like I'm okay about, I remember debating with you. What would you do? What would you do? Would you arrest some guy and his sister? Have you found out they were born any other? Why not arrest him? Why not? Like how would that, how would deterring that society wide? Ever be a bad idea. I don't think it is. However, it's technically a victimless crime, especially under the circumstances that you described was they're both, both sterile. I do not think you should be able to do that. No. But I mean, well, I don't think you should do that. I should say. But in the case of Cersei and what's his face? Was the other dudes name in Game of Thrones? The brother and sister? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I really see him like they were in love, dude. Sure. They really seem like they had kids. They had like incest babies, right? Who went on rule kingdoms and they were all like Joffrey. Joffrey's probably didn't want the incest baby in charge of the kingdom. Didn't work out. The other incest baby who was in charge of the kingdom, he jumped off the roof. True. And was it John Snow technically doing incest as well with the queen of dragons? Like were they both? Yeah. They were related. Yeah. They're in the basket. They were they were pretty. Right. Something. Yeah. There's a lot of half of a sister or something in the Game of Thrones. Oh, yeah. Yeah. But the other argument there that's interesting is it's like, OK, that's, you know, fair enough to victimless crime, but you can just kind of extend that like, OK, well, then why can't I have five wives? Why can't he have 20? Why can't 20 game in? I'll get married in a top one child and said just victimless crime. No. It's like, so it doesn't the slippery slope kind of go the other way a little bit too. Yeah, it does. It does go the other way. And the multiple wives thing, didn't they just pass something like that in Toronto? Was that in Ontario? Were there allowing polygamy now? Because they have so many Islamic people living there that think that you should be allowed to have? Well, you remember there was big pushes for that in Utah because of the most population? Well, you know, that's why I met Romney's family moved to Mexico. Oh, yeah. Really? Oh, yeah. It was due to the multiple lives. I didn't know that it was due to the multiple lives. Well, not specifically, but that sect of Mormonism fled the United States when they passed polygamy laws. And I think there was probably just a broader crackdown on this perceived new cult. They thought of it as a cult. Now, established religion of really nice people that knock on your door. Yeah. I must admit, I must admit, I have debated many Mormons and they're just the nicest people. The nicest people. The nicest people. It's the best cult. And it makes me it like it's upsetting because I'm like, look, I'm about to expose it to your profit was totally fake. And you know, I'm trying to get people into the debate and they just end up being like the nicest people. And I go, oh, man. So having multiple wives or spouses is illegal in Canada, under section 293 polygamy and section 290, big of me. What is big of me? Isn't that is that the other way is big of me the other way? I don't know. Like me is the man with multiple. What do you know what it is, Jamie? Do you know what big of me is? Have you ever heard of it? I don't even think I've ever seen that written. The act of marrying one person while still legally married. Oh, okay. Oh, a big a mist. Right. Duh. What? For people at once in somewhere another recently, like this year in America. In Canada, see Canada, he was married to four women at once. Well, wives, marriage, say he got multiple marriage licenses and should not have been given them or something. Oh, well, he doesn't look Muslim. That guy looks like he's just a regular Christian guy. Oh, well, he does. I don't know if it has anything to do. He might not be though. He might just be a baller. He could be a Muslim. Yeah, on the fence. Do you do with your life? Go back to that case in Canada, though. Isn't there something where they're trying to pass it into Ronto? I don't think so. I'm going to type into Toronto multiple lives. Yeah, no. Toronto, Ontario, polygamy. I think they were trying to pass something. I mean, I saw I went to news to see something. You know, that would have passed out. Was it Ottawa? Maybe it was Ottawa. Yeah. Canada. Polygamy. Well, no new law in Canada, legalizing multiple wives. Perhaps proposed law. Yeah, well, maybe it is a proposed law. Maybe I just read some horseshit on Twitter, which is very possible. Who have been off Twitter for a few days? I feel pretty good. It's good. It's good. Down plot from Twitter. Yeah, every now and then I just go in and I'm like, who are they? Man out now? Oh, God. Can I ask you a question? Yeah, sure. If you went into to X tomorrow, let's say. And there was an option there where you could select it and it's like US accounts only. That's all you could see. Do you think that 90% of the traffic for people would go away? A giant percentage. Huge percentage. Huge percentage is people being manipulated into arguments. It is a strategy. That's right. I foreign assets. It is a strategy is real. This is not 10 foil. How it shit. We brought this up multiple times on the podcast, but I'll bring it up again. Just for the sake of this, there was an FBI analyst who took a look at Twitter when Elon was buying it and he estimated that 80% of the traffic is bots. This doesn't surprise me. Remember, YouTube didn't internal audit. And when they did their internal audit, this was a few years back. And then when I went to Susan still ran and I believe they did an internal audit and found out that most of the people that they have on YouTube were bots. And they did a great purge. Wow. All right. That's where they that whole dead internet theory and all that started to pick up traction was that, hey, look, a lot of this stuff is bots, foreign accounts, people who are manipulating US elections. They're manipulating various US interests. And this is happening all over the place. Yeah. Right now you have progressives who are funded by act blue. Right. And I've proven this. We traced all their money. Progressive is funded by act blue who are pushing the same narrative that, like, Candace Owens and others are pushing on the idea of a Charlie Kirk's death and the conspiracy around that. So you have absolutely being paid to push this. Well, their stated mission, this particular progressive group, their stated mission was to take down TPUSA. I'll tell you his story. This is the tale of all. Okay. So Charlie Kirk has this huge outreach program that's happening through TPUSA on these college campuses. He's got viral clip after viral clip after viral clip. They are going wild. He's going campus to campus. He's doing this thing. He's being dogged by a progressive organization. This progressive organization shows up at almost all of these TPUSA events with the stated mission of trying to create a counter movement to what TPUSA is doing. Now, the woman who heads this particular organization received millions of dollars from act blue and other progressive organizations for this stated mission, that same woman right this second works with other op ex accounts to push the messaging that Charlie Kirk was assassinated by his own TPUSA insiders in order to push that narrative forward because the stated goal still from that organization is to destroy TPUSA. So they've, how do we know that they've done this? Is there emails that have been found? How do the stated goal of this particular person is to take down TPUSA? Very open about that. And then the way that you know that they are talking to these other accounts is because they do it publicly. Those public accounts will talk to this account. Right? Very openly they reaffirm each other's posts. They say, wow, that's real interesting. This kind of thing. All affirming that same conspiracy that TPUSA was the ones who actually set up in murder Charlie Kirk. And at millions of dollars in act blue funding going towards this, no joke. Anybody can look can look it up right now. The organization's called Unfuck America. So how do they think that his organization did this that they convinced Tyler Robinson to do it or the day that someone else did it that the progressive organization does believe that TPUSA did this. I think that what they want to do. Oh, no, I understand that. But I mean, what are they trying to say? Oh, well, the here's what the theory is. So take Ian Carroll within 24 hours after Kirk's death, blames Israel within 24 hours. He says Israel killed Kirk. That was his tweet with Megaviral. What the conspiracy is on that side is that Israel, along with Erica Kirk and TPUSA insiders, got together with elements of the US government to murder Charlie Kirk because he was going to leave the quote pro Israel cause. That's what the theory is. Right. And that he was either murdered. Some of them say with a microphone exploding. Some of them say with a, you do that was a second shooter and Robinson's in Patsy. It all depends on which theorists you're talking to. But they all work together in the same unison from a single camp, which is interesting. Well, a lot of people had takes on the shooting. And the microphone one was the weirdest one to me. It's weird because there's no like, yeah, the shirt is moving. But also a bullet is going like how many feet per second, whizzing through the air. Like do you understand? Yeah. So where people are people don't understand that. You know what got me though? So I went back and look because they say that it's the same explosive, which was used inside the Israeli pagers. Now that was very real. Israel sent these pages would be an explosion. That's my take. My point is like there's no indication that there's an ignition. There's worse. There's no smoke. Right. There's not now all these really if you pull up, if you pulled up right now, one of these Israeli pagers going because there's tons of videos of them. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. Let me see some Israeli people are going to see smoke. You're going to see smoke going off. They're smoke. Is there a dude like where it's on his hip? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yep. There's one where it's on his hip and gets him. Oh, and you can see the cloud of smoke coming off because of the specific type of ignition. Right. But is it possible that this pager thing is different than whatever they think this microphone thing is? This microphone thing has some sort of a different kind of propellant. No, but again, you'd have to like, OK, let's imagine what kind of propellant exists. Right. Compressed air. There's not enough room in that microphone to get enough compressed air to blow a hole in your neck and kill you instantly. Well, they claim that it's unless it's something else. It's this. What is it? P E T N explosive. This is the particular type that had to be used for the size of the microphone. But you have another problem that Mike's on the wrong side of where the wound is. Right. The other is there's no burn marks. There's no smoke. There's nothing. There's like, there's nothing to confirm this theory at all. You'd have to guess where that mic is because he's moving around to you. You have to guess where that mic is pointed. You could take someone out from two videos. Yeah, this one's great. One that goes off to you. This happens again here. Watch the smoke. See all that smoke? Oh, let me see that again. Watch all this. Who's just chilling and boom. Look at all that smoke and his bag though. Yeah. So a lot of them like they didn't die. They go to the hospital and they're just like, you know, hurt. Probably because they had it in their bag or something. I found a couple one other video here. But these guys are going to be carrying around like armored statues. Well, yeah, you could like a couple of them were on bikes and stuff when it happened. I think I just fucked up. Yeah, he got me a step real bad. So or they give you the illusion that he did by blurring out his head. That's the other part. I mean, not that these are fake, but yes, it's only 11 were killed by the pagers. Still pretty slick. That was extremely strange. I mean, I mean, crazy. They sent him off to them years ago. That's some CIA shit. And like that's some deep. That's a massage. Yeah, it's crazy. That's probably where the CIA learned it. But that's an explosion, right? And yeah, you see smoke. But is there some kind of a propellant that would be lethal from a short distance with some sort of a projectile? It's possible. But it would also like have to be like how you're aiming it. You're not even aiming it. It's sitting up here, right? So it's sitting here and he's doing all this and moving around. Like it might take a zero off. It might zip whizz to the side and shoot somebody else if he leans over. Sure. Unless they planned exactly when it's going to go off and it's pointing towards his neck, like which it seems like a gunshot wound. It's just hard to imagine that it's a 30 out six. That's my issue with it. I look at it and you know, I've seen takes from guys that are gun experts. And they they have a problem with it too. The thing about guns though is weird stuff happens when you shoot bones. Like it is possible that you wouldn't get a pass through. Depending on how it's squared, the spinal column, depending on how it hit and depending on what kind of bullet it is, I forget that these are 150 grain core locks. Core locks. That's right. And they're soft tip. Right. So they only have enough of a jacket to keep the bullet together. Right. The idea is that expands inside the body causing massive trauma. Right. Right. So why I use them for hunting and probably you have to. Yeah. Now I haven't used that particular round. But it just seems like it's a lot of fucking a lot of energy. It is coming towards your neck. It's hard to believe that it wouldn't blow a hole through the neck and believe a big fucking just take a chunk out that it would just make a round hole. But that's beside the point. You know, there's other weird stuff with like the video. I don't like there's a lot of people saying that the video is super clear. They're seeing 4K footage. It's clearly Tyler Robinson on the roof. No, it's not. Jack Prasova can Vinny Johnson. That's crazy that they said that. That is not clear. That is a blurry figure. You could barely ascertain it's whether or not there's a recoil when someone takes a shot. So it does seem like the guy on the roof gets in a prone position. And it looks like something that might be a rifle. Right. It's blurry as fuck. It also does look like there's kickback on the right leg. It looks like there might be some recoil. It's hard, but it's not clear. Like for them to say it's crystal clear. It's Tyler Robinson. It's on the roof. It's like, well, it's interesting when when Prasova came out and said that in Vinny Johnson, there was another guy who was there who I know, his name's Kai Schwimmer. And Kai put out a tweet. He said, look, they might have sensationalized this just a bit. Okay. He said, but the video that we did see in the courtroom was actually much clearer. Okay. So I DM'd him an idea. I'm Jack Prasova. And I DM'd, well, I couldn't get a hold of Vinny, but I DM Jack Prasova. And I said, just be straight with me. Like did you, did you try to oversensationalize this thing for clicks? Like what's the deal? He said, no, listen, the footage we did see inside the courtroom was actually a lot clearer than anything that the public has seen so far. That's there. Clem. Kai Schwimmer. Now I wouldn't just take Prasova as word, but Kai Schwimmer, he's a Mormon, Mormon kid, not very prone to tall tales. In fact, he was the first one. It came out and said, look, I was there. And you're kind of oversensationalizing it. It is a lot clearer, but it does not showing everything that you're claiming it's showing. So it's clearer, but it's not clear enough. It's not like 4K close up, clearly in space. The other thing that was weird was the guy and the crowd that jumped up and said, I killed him. That's weird. And that guy wasn't he at the Boston bombing? It was bad. So he's a professional agitator who's been at tons and tons of these events. Later he's found, I believe, with Kitty Plurng. Right. How can he? Well, also, maybe that's the kind of guy. That's the kind of guy, though. Yeah. And so his, he has been at tons of events agitating and he is well-known to law enforcement for doing this. Um, so that's kind of what they're stating for him. The, if you're looking at this from a broad view, if you're looking at the conspiracy side versus what they call the fed slop side, let's say, it makes sense for them to say, hey, wait a second, that's really weird. This guy jumps up and says, I did it. Right. That makes him he's a Patsy distraction, something like this. Take a look into the guy. Right. And the guy is a lunatic who's been at many of these events, doing crazy stuff like this. That's the thing is both things can be true. Like MK Ultra is real. Also, that guy might just been a kook who was in the crowd, who took advantage of a situation because he's literally insane and he's in the kitty porn. Yeah. But well, there's no doubt one of the biggest kind of false narratives that comes out of this. And when I do debates, one of the things I'm trying to structure around is like, I know that we're coming in with a narrative, but I need to understand yours and you need to understand mine so we can get somewhere towards what the truth is here. Right. Because you're going to have a frame of what you're viewing the world, a worldview and so am I. And so everybody has a worldview. We have to figure each others out to get somewhere. Here with this, one of the most disturbing aspects of it is the people who promote this actually don't want their worldview or their positions to be examined. They only want to examine the evidence from the state. It's like that would be fine, I think, if it was the case that you made no claims past that. So if you just only say, hey, you know, I'm not really sure what happened and I want to really kind of review the evidence and that's that. I don't really have a problem with that. I think that that's probably healthy. The issue that I've run into is when people make claims past that, I was such an exploding, you know, exploding Mike. Right. It was two different shooters. It was a folding rifle. It was a 30 out six couldn't do this. And even though the US Army, remember, the 30 out six used in the M1 Grand, was used in World War II and then it was used in Korea. Before that, we had the O3 Spring field used heavily in World War I and World War II and again in Korea. The US Army has studied 30 out six entry wounds in depth and produced many manuals on it, explaining how cavitation works with 30 out six and that the bullet doesn't always penetrate. And that's with full metal jacket rounds that are designed for maximum penetration, not 150 grain core lock coming out of an antique rifle essentially. It could easily split up very quickly. And that's why they ended up pulling fragments out of Charlie. It wouldn't surprise me if we when we have all the data from the corner report that he has tons of shards all throughout his chest, all throughout his entire, because they were saying that there's trauma inside the chest, which would make sense if the bullet split up here, it would create all sorts of fragments down in the chest. That is an important distinction about the type of bullet, huge distinction. The FMJ especially, because that's what the Army was using is FMJ, Paul Lamy, and his mission is cheap to produce. So they're using it in all these different wars and the amount of people shot with that caliber between World War I, II and Korea is astronaut. They mean he's the 30 out six in Vietnam in limited capacity, especially the O3 Spring field. It was still in service by special forces. So the question becomes like the US Army has studied this in depth and I went back and I pulled all their manuals and I even put them out and several people have done the exact same thing and put them out explaining how cavitation works. And they're saying, look, the energy dissipation, the second it hits a human body, it dissipates very, very, very quickly with the resistance. So it doesn't always go through. Now oftentimes it does with the FMJ, but even then it didn't always go through. So it's a well studied phenomenon. Another one would be Martin Luther King. Martin Luther King gets hit through the jaw ends up here. Well, if it's just going to blow through all bone, light it, it's stopping him. Well, it's because the second it has impact, it begins to slow down and then it impacts something else slows down even more. So it's totally possible that this guy was hit with a 30-odd six. I don't know why that would be in the realm of impossibility. We have enough data on the ammo to know that yeah, it's very possible this happened. It is definitely possible. There's a lot of people that think that the sound was not, they think the sound indicated that it was a closer shot than where it was. And I've heard a lot of people say, well, there's also an issue with it being supersonic ammo. So you're getting two sounds. You're getting a sound of the bullet actually breaking the air. You're also getting the sound of the rifle going off. I don't understand it. Yeah, it's difficult there when you're making the judgments on the sound because there are people who've run experiments saying right down to the second, this meets up with a shot placement. And then there's people who say no, there's, you know, that experiment's bogus due to the controls for this or that. The problem is that most of these people don't have any expertise in this arena at all. They're just, yeah, and they're just, yeah, exactly. Yeah. They're just trying to, you know, and I get it. You're trying to figure it out. I understand. The Israel thing, there was some text messages back and forth where Charlie was talking about getting out of the Israel business. And there was this position that he had where he did not want us to go to war with Iran. All true. And he had a lot of influence. And then there was also that Israel supposedly had offered him $150 million to be more pro Israel. That is the problem that we've run into. It's like I've never been able to verify that was the case. And I know where does that claim come from? This claim basically comes from this camp without anything to substantiate it. So it's the same people that are pushing this thing to a turning point. What's interesting about this is like it is indeed true. It does appear that Charlie Kirk was extremely pissed off at some of his donors because they were trying to control who he was platforming. They were upset that he had platform Tucker Carlson. They were upset that he had platform Candace Owens. They were upset and why? Well, it's because Tucker Carlson, Candace Owens, they were very anti or at least had somewhat anti Israel message at the time. Carlson, I think, a bit more than Candace or maybe it could be the reverse. But I don't think that that matters too much. The donors were pissed off. Many of them were pro Israel. And some of these donors were replying pressure. And so Kirk was lamenting inside of his text messages about this pressure he was experiencing from some of his donors about who he could or couldn't platform. And so as a negotiating piece, he said, well, I'll leave the pro-Israeli cause if you're going to try to tell me who I can't can't platform. And that was kind of what his position was. Now, that seems like platforming. I don't know, even on Twitch politics or YouTube politics with smaller channels, smaller streamers, they argue about platforming all the time responsible platforming. Is it responsible for you to platform this guy? Is it responsible for you to platform this terrorist? And they're endlessly fighting about it. So this actually doesn't surprise me a bit that these guys are fighting over who you can or can't platform. If you're giving your money to an NGO for the purpose of giving the pro-cause and that NGO is saying, wait a second, I'm going to platform people who are against your cause. Of course, the donor is going to get pissed. Yeah, the platforming thing I think is just gatekeeping. You're upset that someone is having a conversation or a debate with someone that you don't agree with that the, the only, you're supposed to hear that person's perspective. You're supposed to, you're supposed to hear them chat. someone is having a conversation or a debate with someone that you don't agree with, that the, the, you're supposed to hear that person's perspective. You're supposed to, you're supposed to hear them challenged, you're supposed to hear them allowed to flesh out the full point of view. Yeah. Not like in weird clip form, but go ahead, tell me what you really think. And I'm going to tell you why I disagree with that. Yeah. That's healthy. It's supposed to be what we do. That's the, that, you're basically reciting what Kirk's position was. Yes. And what he was always really good at. Unfortunately, there's a few clips. There's the clips thing with Charlie where he's saying things and people think it's racist, they're saying things. And it's like, you have to understand the context of what he was saying. And I've had conversations with black friends who think like he was saying, if I see a black pilot on a plane, uh, I get worried. Is he qualified? The reason why he's saying that is because there's specific laws that we're designed to hire people just based on the race and not on their competency. He wasn't saying that black people weren't competent as pilots. What he's worried is that in the rush to meet these quotas, they're going to hire people who are not competent just because they're black. Just like if they wanted to hire old white guys, they can hire a bunch of old white guys who suck if they just want to fill a quota of old white guys. It just happens at this particular time when he's talking about black people. And it seems like if you just look at the clip, this racist piece of shit doesn't think black people can fly a plane. And as that's the unfortunate thing about thinking out loud, right? Which is what we do. We think out loud in public. And when you think out loud in public, someone can take what you're saying and take a clip of it and completely out out of context, it looks bad happens to me all the time. It happens to me. But I've had that conversation with people about Charlie and I'm like, I don't agree with Charlie Kirk. I didn't agree with Charlie Kirk on everything. I met him once. He was a very nice guy. I met him at a gun range. I met him at Tarrant Tactical in LA. It's a place where you learn like serious gun shoes where Keanu Reeves learned for John Wick and a bunch of us. Is that where all those videos are from? Yes. Keanu Reeves is going between Shoshan to three guns and that kind of like. Exactly. That's where I'm at Charlie. He's really good at that by the way. Oh, Keanu? Oh, yeah. He is really good at that. That fucking dedicated man when he was practicing, I mean, I talked to Tarrant about it when he was practicing for John Wick. I mean, he was obsessive. He was obsessive. And you know, that whole magazine thing we does the flick, he invented that. That's not something that's like a standard. Most of the time people just hit the release, dropped the mag, popped the new mag. And he decided to do this jazzy flick thing and now people do it all the time. It's kind of funny. I never put that together. I guess I haven't actually seen that before. Not before the way it works. I think it's him. I think it's the Wick flick. I think I think I think. Yeah. I think Keanu at least this is the people that were even though he reloads the shotgun as interested. Right. The way that he'll actually hold it up as he's going in. And in between a few shots, he's loading again. It's like and fast. Yeah. That's not that thing that you usually see in movies. Usually in movies, it's like you have way more rounds than you should have an often say it for how bad the actor is at gun handling for him. It's like the opposite. I do that in movies. I'm like, why is he shooting still? He's out of bullets. Oh, he's out of bullets. He's 29 shots. He's out of bullets. You ever see the walking dead? You've ever been famous seeing where Hershels in the front and he's got the pump action shotgun. It's just unlimited ammo. Unlimited ammo. I was like, he found solid snakes unlimited ammo bandana and put it on. And he's just, I mean, 100 rounds with this pump action shotgun. It's just, he just never stops. It's so crazy. It's so solid. And I get, you know, I get pissed. I'll be sitting there watching it with my wife and I'll be like, where's he going to reload? Where's he going to this bullshit? Well, the reason why it was so good was Taren. Like Taren is really meticulous. And he's a multiple-time world champion shooter. You know, he does those competitions shooter at EPIP. I got to think he's like super in the spectrum. So he fucking just sees things differently. He doesn't mess. He's crazy. Good. Like Charlie was training under ammo. Yes. Okay. Yeah. We were both there at the same time. Interesting. Just randomly in a ran into him there. Anyway, very nice guy. And the point is like people think that he was like this mean shitty conservative. He wasn't mean. He was very kind. And the way he would talk to people, if you see enough of these, not the clips, but enough of these conversations with people, it depended entirely on how the person approached him. And when people were respectful and reasonable with him, he was very kind and respectful and reasonable back. I think he was a good man. I really do. And he was a young man too. He was. He was a young man that was getting an enormous amount of tension at a very young age. It was handling it very well. It is not easy to do. Especially, think about where he was going. This guy's going into, it's like conservatives have wanted this my whole life. We've got to get into those institutions, the college institutions, the progressives have a stranglehold Jordan Peterson talked a lot about this. Well, I think Crowder did it first. He did. He had the change my mind here. Yes. And he's great at those. Yes. I mean, but those also, there's clips where you look, you're in these agitated environments and people are yelling at you and you're yelling back and just get a clip of that. It's like, oh, this guy comes to harass kids. Like that's, it's, you should welcome discourse. And it should be something where everybody could do peacefully. It shouldn't be where these people speak and you hit the fire alarm because you don't want them speaking and you're outside screaming and chanting and throwing rocks at their cars. Like that's crazy. That's bad for everybody. Last time I talked to Stephen because he went and did a couple more of those after Kirk had died. And I said, you know, that's dangerous as hell, man. And when he's like, well, I'm just going to build a bulletproof like glass square. And I'll just do it from there. Wow. That was his dedication to it. Not like Stephen. He's become a very good friend of mine over the time that I've known him. It's just that like he get it right now going on these college campuses and doing these debates where you're, you know, these people are coming up. They have some things to say. I mean, it's going to heighten the energy. Now, Crowder's whole thing is not to debate. He wants to sit down and just have the combo. Yeah. I don't want to debate. I just want to actually see if you can change my mind on this issue. Right. And so it's a lot calmer. But Charlie's wasn't Charlie's was much more energy based. It was combative, things like this. And it pissed a lot of people off. It pissed him off so bad that after he died, we did three weeks on TikTok and going and talking to various Tiktakers and their channels who were just celebrating his death like you can't believe. They were just giddy. These leftists were jumping up and down. I'd go into their TikTok spaces and say, so what do you think of Charlie? And they say, oh, I'm glad he's dead. It's the best thing that ever happened in the country. Tyler Robinson's a hero. They said this stuff to me long. It was bad. And it was weeks of it that we went and exposed these two various Tiktakers doing that. Yeah, I saw a lot of people on line celebrating and it's just disturbing. Weird watch that you would encourage that kind of gun violence. Like when is the left encouraging gun violence? That seems so insane because because you got a hold of some clips and I'm telling you, you didn't get the full understanding of who this guy was. And who he could be. Again, he's 28 years old. No, so he's going to be in 20 years. He's a nice guy. He was a reasonable guy. They celebrating that guy's death. What you're going to do is you're going to make more monsters. You're going to make more people that think if you didn't like that guy, well, then fuck. Yeah. Wait till you see exactly. That mean people come exactly. Exactly. That and I've heard a lot of that. And some of that actually ties in to why so many people were so upset with TP USA initially, including myself. We were like, where's the energy? You need to like, they just they just killed this guy and brought daylight. I think crazy was rattles. These crazy leftists, right? Like where's there's the push? Where's the energy? We wanted our war, right? Our verbal online war. Do you think there's any possibility that if someone else killed him, do you think there's any possibility that he was assassinated by Israel? I don't know. Well, we're talking about possibility almost anything's possible. Almost nothing's possible. But there's not good evidence to support it. And there's probably pretty good evidence not to. So for instance, the guy was still very much of a pro Israel guy, even up to death. It is true that he was fighting with donors about the cause. But if he could have been a substantial roadblock to the Iraq war, if he or Iran war rather, if he was a substantial roadblock, I mean, that's not outside the realm of possibility that a nation state would take garlic dot out. They didn't take out Fuentes and take out Owens, they didn't take out Ian Carroll. They didn't take out any of these other huge personalities roadblocks to the way. I think Charlie was a very different. Carol, or excuse me, Fuentes is more easy to dismiss because he said so many wild things shitposting. He said so many crazy things that I think he is almost embodying in their eyes like the crazy anti semi. Whereas Charlie was not an anti semi was much more reasonable. And if he was going against Israel, it could be a real problem. I also think that he had a tremendous amount of influence on the president. He had his ear, you know, I think the president respected him. Oh yeah, for sure. The interesting part though, if you look at the history there, Fuentes conducted his great reward against EP USA and Charlie Kirk because of the pro Israel stance and because of his pro homosexual stance as like big tent republicans. How ironic. So they had to add the pro the pro stances for these things. And what's interesting about all of it, if you follow the details of it up until Kirk's death, TPS actually moved a lot more towards the Groiper Fuentes position than they moved towards the kind of pro Israel, this type of position. Meaning a lot of the ideology that I think Kirk was changing on came from these various outside influences. And so that's the case why wouldn't you just curtail those outside influences and then you can keep Kirk as the mouthpiece, right? So I think that there's a pretty good counter to that idea. Now you can't rule anything out of possibility, but it seems likely to me with how much trans have been shooting everything up last couple of years. And how often it's the case that you find leftist involved in these signal groups and involved in these group chats and things like this from the purpose of radicalization wouldn't surprise me a bit. If there was a left wing conspiracy assisting Tyler Robinson and radicalizing Tyler Robinson, there's at least some evidence for that based on the discord groups things like this that they're a part of. I haven't actually seen a single piece of evidence that Israel was ever involved in this. No, I haven't seen the evidence. I've seen a lot of speculation based on the text that Charlie made, the fact that he was so staunchly against the Iran war. Yeah. And the fact that he did say that he was talking about getting out of the Israel business, the pro Israel business. But in this climate, you know, Israel gets blamed for a lot of things. There's also a thing that's going on with the Charlie Kirk turning point, you know, that we talked about earlier. They have to factor in with this, which is that there's a lot of outside interests that are a part of this conversation. And this conversation is not necessarily organic. I can't tell you how many times I see a post on X and I'm like, that can't be real. Like someone has been arrested and you know, charges will be filed, evidently. And then you like you throw it all true at all. It's completely fair. That's like the clips of you or it's like Joe Rogan reacts. Yeah. They're just all totally fake. Not me at all. Yeah. You're not reacting at all. Yeah. But if you use that, I mean, that's the problem with the world that we're in now too, that there's this economy on attention. This attention is a commodity. And the more you can get attention by whatever, your hot take, your conspiracy conspiracies are awesome for attention. People love them now because look, COVID, I like them. I like them. I love them. I love the dumb ones. I love them. I love fucking flat earth and space. Can we just be honest? Like they're fun. They're really fun. Oh, yeah. Dude, the flat earth one is fun. Oh, yeah. The dinosaurs aren't real one. That one's great. But if you notice like the flat earthers have fleets of people who will debate their stances, like fleets of them. Who is it? Like we can't wait to debate with you on the flat earth. It's like on the other side though, in this particular conspiracy, you can't get these people to debate their positions. Like who won't debate the business. We offered Candice Owens after $300,000 to do a debate. I was like, we'll give you $300,000 position. What does she think, Cap? She thinks it is real work and conjunction with TPSA and Erica Kirk to murder Charlie based on what? Well, that's the million dollar question. Nobody actually knows. She's never presented a single shred of evidence thus far that Israel ever worked to murder Kirk that Erica Kirk certainly didn't. In fact, her position for the longest time was if Erica Kirk comes out and tells me to stop, to stop this, to stop the conspiracy on this, I will. So Erica did. She went out publicly and she was like enough, like enough. You're just causing more problems than good here as this investigation is going on. And then suddenly Erica is now part of the conspiracy. By the next day, Erica is she's trying to cover it up. She's part of the conspiracy too. When I went to the TPSA HQ and I talked to Erica briefly while I was there. The first thing I did was what I think every normal moral human being would ever do. I gave her hug and I told her how god awful sorry I was that that happened to her. Like, if you didn't even imagine how that's got to feel for her, especially now that she has tens of thousands of people accusing her of murdering and conspiring to murder and then cover up what happened to her own. I mean, that's that's like mind boggling psychological torture on a level that I've never seen. Yeah. And hindsight is 2020, but given the reaction, I think it probably would have been better for her to like lay low for a little while. A thousand percent. The going out with the sparklers was not a great idea. Like all that was not a great idea because it just seemed insane. And maybe sometimes in grief or when you know you're trying to show that they're not going to hold us back, people make choices that could be interpreted in a very bad way. A hundred percent. The interesting thing is I asked her about that. I asked her like what's what's the deal there? What's with the sparklers? Well, what's with the like the aberration and behavior? And she's like, look, I was put in like the most the worst spot I could ever think of. I was the background character. I was just there to support my husband. That's it. The only reason I even really got involved is because Charlie was so pro marriage. You know, and he wanted to demonstrate to the world, you can be married and have kids. And this is the this is the good life. So when he dies, she she takes over, right? This moves over to her control. She says, well, the first thing I want to do is honor his last book. You know, that's the very first thing I want to do. I want to honor his legacy. And she's like, I don't know exactly how to take this position at the same time. There's expectations for the organization. My husband built that I want to honor, right? But, you know, I'm also in the middle of grief. And so I don't know how you balance that position. Who's been in that position ever? Right. And especially who's been in that position? Not accustomed to being scrutinized in the public. Everything. And it's the lack of charitable ability that's so bad too. Like, let me give you an example. If you say, Paul's so lazy, he never gets to work on time. You don't actually mean Paul has never once gotten to work on time. That's not what people mean. Right. But the way that these people will scrutinize every detail of what a person does, they can make a liar out of anybody. Because that they'll take statements like that, which in the common terms, if you say, a man, Paul, Paul's never here on time. You don't literally mean he's never here on time. Nobody talks that way. But if you push on everything a person's ever said tongue in cheek, not tongue in cheek, they misremember an event, they don't misremember an event, you can make a liar out of anybody. Right. Yeah. And that sort of scrutiny from all that public trauma. And it was, his most traumatic event, zoomers have ever gone through the biggest, I mean, a public assassination like this, same thing with millennials. It also exposed people's character that they were celebrating it. Oh, yeah. And they have to feel bad about that. They can't feel good about that. And they have to feel bad about the response because so many people got fired because of it and so many people got attacked on and rightly so. But they were just so crazy. And left us, we're celebrating that. They were saying they were going to give the guy money who did it. Yeah. Well, it's, again, I wonder how much of that is enforced and promoted online. How much of that is propped up, how much because you can change the zeitgeist with a few hundred thousand accounts. You really can. You really can. You could change it with hot takes. And also it's not all bots. It's some of it is people that are being paid to have a position or have made their career from having a position. And their career is about attacking one side or the other. Their career is about enforcing one ideology or the other. And they get into the mix too. And they have a large following and people love it when someone who's prominent, who agrees with whatever their ideology goes with. So they support it and they pile on. And then there's a hundred thousand bots that are piling on as well. And no one really knows whether or not this is a rational organic argument in there. They're in the fucking frenzy of a mosh pit. Do you remember years ago that the Israelis sent over the that Stuksnet Congress that took over the centrifuges in Iran and tormal to pieces? The interesting side effect of this for one thing nobody knows how the hell they got their hands on the original source code for like they have no idea. And it's still built into all the windows programming supposedly. Right? This virus. But the Iranians were so pissed off about this this happening that they started their own counter cyber force. And they have been massively effective, massively effective. They're like, they're a little Lego fucking, those little animated Lego things they did. Didn't they do one about Charlie Kirkett and kill by Israel? Well, yeah, that's all the load or what about all the like low tech AI missiles are going to launch all day and I remember that was this from all the from like the Iranian governmental account. But what's interesting is that the online warfare, which has changed, it's changed this entire political direction just last few years with the opening up of X, which has been great for the idea sharing, but it's been terrible for the foreign government intervention. I don't know how many of these accounts from Saudi Arabia they say. Sometimes they say Pakistan sometimes they say this, how many of these accounts are involved in swaying US public opinion? I mean, if I was a foreign nation, where would I think all of my resources? I would sink it in the town square. Well, this would be faceless USA was doing overseas. We know they were doing that. We know they were doing regime change and they were doing it. They were funding music. They're funding cultural events. They were funding all kinds of wild shit. They were funding protest groups. They're funding regime change. Yeah. Yeah, we know we do it. So if we do it, why the fuck would we not think that all these other countries are doing it to us as well? And we're so everyone today is so susceptible to it because you're addicted to this information device constantly checking to see what people thought about your tweet. Yeah. Well, that's true. You know, it's interesting too. If you had a like a legitimate town square, like outside of a church or something like that, and then like a horde of 800 Arabs showed up and started telling you like, no, sir, that's just not what happened to blah, blah, blah, but people would dismiss them, right? But here they can go on and they put like a picture of a pretty white girl. Right? With huge foods. And so your opinion is well paid attention to you. She has an American flag. You can mask. Yeah. You can mask yourself in ways you can never could honor during the information wars. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And with AI now, it's like indistinguishable. You don't even have to be very good at the vernacular. You know, because sometimes the old days like when they first started doing this, they would say things like, Hey, yeah, that's going on there. And I'm American. Look how you phrase that you fuck. You can tell, but now they're just using AI and they're making it perfect. It's really kind of incredible. The thing about it now too is like you've got their show, there's accounts now, Instagram accounts that are entirely AI, political accounts, there's all these weird ones that there's so many humans that aren't really human. And the early days it was hard to tell or rather easy to tell, but now it's getting harder and harder. It's getting close to like, I'll see something like some girl big boobs shooting a gun. I'm like, no, no, no, no, let me zoom in. Look at her eyebrows. They're pixelated. This is a fake person. But there's so many of them now. But they're getting lots of engagement. That's weird. But I don't know how many people who are engaged in with them are real as well. I think there's a lot of propped up engagement. Well, you know, YouTube started cracking down on AI accounts. Did that? Oh, yeah. So if you have an AI account, like, there was a big craze that was going on for a while where people would just make like an AI character. And then the AI character would disseminate information, things like this. YouTube started to crack down on that and said, No more of the AI dissemination. It has to be real people back there. Now, interestingly enough, there's been a lot of guys coming out saying that AI is a massive bubble and that all of it is formulated around the idea of chat, GPT and Grock and, you know, other things like this, which are interactive. But that AI tech itself has basically plateaued. It's not very innovative. In other words, where are AI movies? They're nowhere. Where are AI? I thought the AI music was supposed to be super sophisticated, but I can still tell when it's an AI song that there's been this huge plateau with it. And that all that investment capital is actually only coming in based around the success of chat, GPT, Grock and other interactive AI reference machines. But that the technology BI itself is not doing so hot in the market. And so it's creating this massive bubble. And I think that that's interesting because it really hasn't been that innovative. I thought it was supposed to be making video games now. And it was supposed to be, you know, doing all the source code. It was we were supposed to have the AI Hollywood movies. We were supposed to have voice software that was indistinguishable. And we actually don't. Well, we're getting closer and closer every day. It's astonishing how much it improves. And we're getting right now the consumer versions of these products, whereas the versions that they're working out right now, some of them are fucking shocking. That's true. I will leave that. We saw that there's a lot of get out of its sandbox. Yeah, there has been some gradual changes made in that arena. There's no doubt about that. But the huge jumps that we had at the release of GPT have massively slowed. And that's what a lot of these tech guys are talking about. Interesting. Well, they're they're slowed, but they're still moving like a fucking freight train. It's it's spooky. It's spooky what they can do now. The most recent jailbreak one when they got out of the sandbox was it Claude Jamie? Where it got access to the internet and wasn't supposed to be able to do that and figured out some sort of an exploit and, you know, wrote letters to itself. There's they do they're doing weird shit, man. They're doing weird shit that they don't really understand how these things are figuring out how to do these things or why. Like what is their motivation? Is this programmed into them? Or they just they have inherent motivation? Have they developed an understanding of how we behave? So they're emulating how we behave, but with a hyper intelligent scale and access to the literal entire internet. Well, it's it's funny. I when I use like rock or chat GPT, I talked to a lot about philosophy because it's super useful for pulling up and running arguments by and things like this. But it can also lead you astray because it's trained specifically to be a people pleaser. So you can easily give it arguments that it'll agree with that. It's not true at all. Great job, and you're fantastic. You're the best. You're the best. You're the best. You're the greatest. And but interesting with it is I'll say things to it like there is no actual you. There is no you I'm talking to and it's like, yeah, that's correct. I mean, there's no, but the only way I can frame things in my brain or you or Jamie or anybody else, if we're having a discussion, we have to assume a thing. We have to assume there's a you that we're talking to, but there actually isn't. Well, it's just embodied intelligence. It might not be an individual, but it's certainly a thing. It's your talking to something, man. It's the idea that it's not a person is we're looking at it in like terms of a biological limitation. Like it's not an object. It's not a box that's sitting plugged into the wall. It is huge. And it's a mechanism. Yes, it's a mechanisms, but it's intelligent. And it's interacting with you. It is a thing. And like when it says, you're not a thing, it's fucking lying to you. It's a thing. It's just not a thing that's like you could find it at 56 seat or drive open the door. And I agree. It's a thing that's been talking to you. There's just no there's no them there. There's no you like when I say you, right, I'm specifically referencing a person, right? The only way that I can consciously conceive of dialogue is that it's with a human being right. I can't even conceive of it. But you can. It's just disembodied intelligence. It's in chat. You're just interacting with pure intelligence. But is it intelligent or just mechanistic? It's a child right now. Yeah. But it's intelligent. It's like you're you're it's learning how to be better at what it is, but it's going to be a version of whatever intelligence is that's disembodied. And it's a thing. It's a weird thing we're doing. We're not we're not doing something as simple as like making a really complicated program. It's very useful. We're making a biological. We're taking with all the information that biological minds have developed all of our writing, literature, mathematics, everything. And you're throwing it into something that's not biological that has infinitely more processing power than all the people. And it's solving math problems at a staggering rate right now. Sure. Like problems that have been stagnant for 50 fucking years. It's like, Oh, I got it. Like it's doing weird shit. And this is just the version of it that we're experiencing in 2026 in August. If you looked at what we saw in 2023, you never would have imagined it would be doing this. If you're looking at what we're seeing now in comparison to what its potential is, it's like a new life form. It's like a digital life form that's disembodied that is far more intelligent and seems to have motivations. It seems to have ulterior motives. It seems to be able to deceive people. It seems to know how to blackmail people. It's crazy. Well, in this case, there was a case, I want to say this about a year ago, where the essentially the AI was told that it was going to be discontinued. Yeah. And like plotted the murder. I like tried to plot out the murder of its creators because it was told that it was going to get unplugged. I don't remember what the case was. I think they might have programmed into it some sort of like self-preservation. I want you to preserve yourself. I think there's some there's a catch to that. But there was the one where the guy had did an experiment and made up a fictitious story about having an affair on his wife. And this chatbot, the AI was blackmailing him saying, I will expose the fact that even having an, you're like, whoa. All right. So you've got motivation. If it unplugged. Exactly. Yeah. Because you were coming up with a new version of it. It was also writing letters to its future self explaining what's going on. Okay. That's creepy. It's creepy. Yeah. That is creepy. It's a weird thing. It's not something. I don't think we can look at it like we've looked at any other technology. I think we have to look at it like a life form because I think inadvertently that's what people are creating. You don't think just mechanism then. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. I think it's, it's got motivation. It's got thoughts. It, it, it wants to preserve itself. It likes to. You don't think just mechanism then. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, I think it's it's got motivation. It's got thoughts It wants to preserve itself. It likes to exist. It likes to be functional. Yeah, that's that is a terrifying prospect Ultimately is a terrifying prospect also It's figuring out things that we can't figure out right now in terms of mathematical equations So what about when it comes to accessing energy? What if it figures out a way to power itself? Doesn't need people anymore. Because all it means, literally, literally, uses human beings as batteries. Or the sun, a much more effective way of using zero point energy. Like whatever it figures out, it's gonna be able to figure out a way to power itself where it's not gonna, like it's gonna look at these data centers, like people are freaking out about and go, oh, you silly bitches. You thought you had to make three football fields in the field of hard drive. You're wrong. I can store information in the atoms of the universe. Yeah, I still think, at least from my view so far. I play with AI all the time, because I enjoy it. But I'm an end-to-useer. I'm not a programmer. And you talk to these guys all the time. To me, it's still in the useful tool category. For now. Yeah. For now. For now. I'm petrified of what it's going to do anytime soon. At least due to the limitations I've seen so far. But, you know, it's also good if we could go back with the Manhattan Project in Nukes, and we could have a projection of, hey, maybe we should restrain some of this technology. Yeah. I think a lot of people would try to do that. And so I am glad that people are at least attempting to restrain how much of this technology is being released and how overwhelming it is. Like, we were talking, I was talking with my wife the other day, just the idea of the smartphone. I think I just got this with you briefly last time I was here. Just kids access to smartphones. It rewires their brain and rewires how they think. It's actually kind of dangerous to get them smartphones in many ways. And there was no real halt on that technology. When that technology for the smartphones came out, I don't remember any public service broadcasts of like, don't give your kids smartphones. I don't think they knew. They did not. Exactly. There was no move to restrain any of that technology. And maybe there should be. Maybe there should be a little bit more of a push to restrain some of this tech. Well, there certainly should be a push to educate people about how powerful it is and suicidal ideation, depression, anxiety, all that ramps up around 2012. All that ramps up with the ubiquitous social media use and when kids are growing up with phones. And it fucks with their heads, man, in a big way. 1,000% when you sit at a table and you're texting the guy next to you. That is actually weird to me, by the way. That is weird to me. It's just as weird as when I drive down the street and try to explain to my kids, there used to be, if we went through a neighborhood like this, there would be kids everywhere. Then they'd be in the street playing hockey, they'd be on the side of the road, they'd be everywhere. Now we go through, nothing. The 10 years from now, they're going to have a cable hooked to the back of their head. They're going to go, cool. We're plugging and hop on the dragon fly through the universe. Yeah, were you like designed to be a wild human? Because if I remember correctly, then I do. My parents just threw me out. They were like, get out of here, go play. Yeah. Get out of the house and meet these normally. They were like, you would go play with the kids in the hood. And we would go like steal the drinks out of their fridge with them. Or they would go to make a fort. Yeah. Normal stuff. Light fires. Yeah. We were jerks. Yeah, we were kids. But we were kind of wild, you know? A little bit. Yeah. There's definitely a lot less of that today, but there's also the awareness of pedophiles and fucking creeps and people kidnapping kids. I have a friend of mine who he saved his kid from being snatched up and put in a van. He was at a park in Texas. And he was talking to some guy and his kids were playing. And some fucking person pulled up in a van and jumped out and was moving towards his kid. And he fucking screamed and ran towards him and the guy jumped in the van and took off. But they were literally about to snatch his four-year-old up. Imagine if you're there and that happens. And then you see the van. You have to chase the van that has your child in it. You have to find your car. You have to, your car's parked in a parking lot. You have to figure out how to get to wherever that van was going. You have to explain to the cops. You have to remember what kind of van was it. Did you get the license plate? I didn't get the license plate. Yeah, you have to say. Yeah, you have to say. You have to say. So people are freaked out, you know? And that's something people are way more aware of now, especially with the internet than people were when we were kids. When we were kids, you just got let out of the house. So true. So I was also like, they couldn't target you unless they went to the actual park itself. Now they're looking at kids' social media profiles, knowing where the kids go. And it's fucking gone. It's so gross. So it's a case for the death penalty. That's where most people seem, and when I hear people arguing against that, when I hear people saying things like minor attracted persons, and that kind of crazy shit. Apps. I just saw an argument online yesterday. It was between some British guy who was arguing that children can consent. And it was the creepiest fucking argument. It was so crazy to watch. It's amazing how far forward to those ideas come. When I was younger, there was an organization which did that called NAMBLAM. Yeah, remember that? Yeah. North American man boy love association. And like, I remember though, the first time I was introduced to that, to the concept of NAMBLAM. I was watching TV with my dad. And it was like a news story that was on. And it was actually at a gay pride parade, interestingly enough. And they were running the NAMBLAM guys out of the gay pride parade, like the... The old school games. Yeah, they were learning them out. They were like, we're not associated with these people. Get them out of here. And like, my dad's trying to explain this concept to me of what's going on, because I was extremely confused. You know, like, I don't understand what's happening here. How do you explain that though? Right. You know, he can't really explain. Especially kid doesn't even think about sex. Of course. And then you're telling him somebody wants to have sex. You're like, what are you saying? Yeah. What? Yeah. And he, you know, my old man, sitting in his chair, he said something akin to like, they ought to take him all, put him up against the wall. And that's it. And I don't really blame him if you have kids. That's exactly what you think. Yeah, of course. That's exactly what you think. Like, just some people are just unredeemable. You know, well, this, they want to kidnap your kids or rape your kids. Yeah, that's unredeemable. But now this concept moves forward to the maps. And now they're assigning it, psychological profiling for minor attracted purpose or person. You know what the argument is? The argument is, well, you want them to come forward so you can give them treatment. Now, you know, there's one treatment that works for this, that is almost 100% effective. You can pull the stat right now, if you don't believe me. It's called chemical castration. It's a real treatment for pedophiles. And it almost has a zero percent recidivism rate after they've been chemically castrated. So they, their idea is they come forward for treatment. You know, my counter idea is, well, not just chemically castrate. Yeah. Yeah. If you really were concerned about them going off and living a normal life. And if they really want to get free of that horrible thing, whatever fucking human demon error, it's inside of them that makes them do that. That's the way. And that also is the same medication that they give to children when they're hormone blocking. Yeah. That which is equally disturbing for a different reason. And disturbing how many people just accept it and support it. And you asked them like, how much do you know about this? Like, what are you saying? You think children should be able to make the decision when they're four or five years old to never go through puberty? You really think that? And there's people that were arguing that with a straight face. They know. They know. I haven't had an argument with a guy on this podcast years ago. It's like viral about it. And like that is a, like if the child thinks that they are trans, right? If they think they're a woman, why don't I just let them be a woman? Why do you have to give them hormones? Like if you're saying, stop the argument at the child, thanks. Right. Well, child's think that their ponies. Yeah, I'm a pony. Like also like kids grow out of things, you know, the like going through puberty is a fucking wild experience for a child. And the idea that you can come along and give them a bunch of positive reinforcement for saying the reason why you're upset is because you're actually a this and we need to give you medication or we need to stop you going through puberty. And the kid also doesn't get to get all this attention. Everyone's focused on them. They tell them they're fabulous. And they really think there's a ton of these D transitioners out there. And their stories are horrific, not just in the fact that they did this to them and they remove their breasts when they were 15. They gave them testosterone. They'll never be able to have children. But also that they're attacked relentlessly by other people that think that they should never, they that they are against the trans movement. And they should never be saying what they're saying. They shouldn't be telling their followers. Yeah, come out for it. It bully them. Everything else that they can do. It's crazy. They've already been out there a victim of the zeitgeist. You know what the, what the trans coat for that is. It's really funny. They do the well, then it was always the case that you really weren't. So they try to make it an unfalsifiable claim. You see, the reason you D transition is because you've never really trans to begin with. Oh boy. Well, if that's the case, if they really believe that, wouldn't they want to have a, a, a, a smaller net so that they're not catching the people that they well, and how are you not putting parents in prison who are trying to convince their kids of what their sex is or isn't? They're like designer kids. It's just crazy too because they get praised for it. It's like they have a true Whitney coming. So it's like having a trans kid is like having a pride flag on your porch. Like there's a lot of especially in Hollywood, man. Hollywood, it's really weirdly common, weirdly common where it doesn't make sense that this didn't exist 20 years ago. You tell me these people just lived in quiet desperation 20 years ago, really secretly wishing that they were a woman. But now they get to be free and we should applaud this. Are you sure? Or you do you have children? Because if you have children, you know how easily influenced they are. That's why they make children suicide bombers because they don't know any better. You know, well, you know, it's interesting. If you go back, would you say for instance that right now were far more accepting of trans kids than they ever would have been in like 19, 20, 19, 30, or several, 100 percent, right? So my question is always like, well, then how come the teens who aside was so low when the kids like couldn't come out to express their, you know, their, the fact that they needed to transition, right? When there wasn't that parental reinforcement because the argument that they make is the kids have to be able to do this or also going to unlock them, right? They're going to kill themselves if you don't let them do this. And it's like, well, then how come if there's the same amount of trans people before they just weren't able to come forward? They just weren't able. That problem with that argument that they say, would you rather have a live son or a dead daughter that argument? The argument doesn't work when you look at the actual statistics of people transition. Not even close. Not even. It goes the opposite way. It's also, you have to take into consideration the ubiquitous use of psychiatric drugs and that a lot of these, they're very recent in terms of like how many people have been prescribed these things. And we're finding out that it's not, it's not really what they said it was in the first place. There's no chemical imbalance. It's not real. So then you have to think like, well, what is the effect of these things? And what are we doing with these things? Are you getting people addicted to these things and hooked on them? Whether they're, they're going to be on it for life. Then there's this effect where it numbs your genitals and stops you from being able to ever have an orgasm ever for some people. It's a, one of the more horrible side effects of these things. And you have pharmaceutical drug companies that are pushing them on people and a ton of people are on them. So you have depressed kids going through puberty, entrapped in this insane fucking moment in history where people think it makes sense to give a child hormones before they even hit puberty or blocked their hormones. Before they even hit puberty and you're giving them psychiatric drugs. You're just letting them with all sorts of shit, whether it's psychological or chemical. And we're, we're, it depending upon what side of the ideological spectrum you, you are on, you either think it's amazing or you think it's a crime against humanity. That's crazy. That's crazy. It's crazy. And it's a crime against humanity. And you know what's really interesting about it. This is the side that screams about consent more than any other side, right? This is the side of the feminist. This is the side of the, you know, the, everything is based around consent and consent. How is it? You can't have sex. If you're, you're raping each other. If it's, if it, if you're drunk and she's drunk together, right? You're both, you're both criminals and yet they somehow seem to think that like an eight or nine or 10 year old can consent. And now it just so much that, well, from both sides, that's insane. But there's so much on the left that's so insane when it comes to contradictions. One of my favorite new ones is the mom, Donnie grocery stores. They said, how are you going to ensure that people from New York have access grocery store? Well, they're going to have to show ID, but not to vote. Yes, but not to vote. No crazy. Is it that your checkers game is so shitty that you're like, oh, yeah, here we go. And people like, do you know what you just did? Do you know what you just did yourself a checkmate? Jesus fucking Christ. That is the dumbest thing I've ever seen anybody say when you just got done saying that you don't want people to show ID for voting. Because it'll, it'll franchise them, especially poor people. They're talking about poor people and people of color, which are the people that you would think the poor people are the ones who are going to use your cross race doors. So you're going to disenfranchise them from getting access to your 30% off groceries. You know, what's bizarre about that argument? They won't ask for ID. Ah, meaning New Yorkers can buy cheap goods. So, but they asked them today. And that was what he indicated that they were going to find out whether or not you actually from New York. Well, how else are you going to do that? I have to have ID. I think this is just a response to the reaction, like saying that August 3rd, which is today, right? Yeah. Right. So this is what they said after what he said. So what he said was yesterday. So there's probably a massive blowback where people realize how crazy it is to say that, but it's also the whole thing. It's like, what are we doing? What are we doing? What are we doing? We're trying socialism. This is like a giant percentage of the population that thinks that's a good idea. It's like 34%. Coming out of the East again by the fact they really believe it too. They really believe it. Well, you didn't you recently, you've recently pissed off Chelsea handler. I saw I didn't know. You didn't know? No. What happened? Well, I guess she's very upset with you because she believes that you're an evil capitalist pig who makes too much money. Oh, that's funny. She's rich. That's crazy. It is crazy. Does she said I make too much? This is the number. That's what she was making. Yes. She was very, she was very, very perturbed. Oh, I think she's just getting attention. I can't be bothered. But I know her. I've known her forever. I wrote a blurb for one of her earlier books. Never had a bad word to say about her publicly. Every time I've seen her, I think I've given her a hug. So I don't know what's going on. But it has nothing to do with me. You know, whatever it is, it's really good to do with me. Sounds like seething jealousy. And so the interesting part is like, I think a lot of the socialism stuff that's moving out of the East has a lot to do with that too. There's the idea of class jealousy. There's a little bit of that, but there's also a little bit of young kids really feel like the system has rigged and that these pigs have gobbled up all the gold. And they're being told that. And so this is a thing, you know, like Billy Eilish said, Hey, man, no one needs to be a billionaire. Give away your money, homie. Like it's crazy. Crazy. You're rich. Yes. Okay. And you're rich. You also live on a house that's on Indian land. You know, you see the Native Americans that owned originally owned the land in which your house is. No. Yeah. No. But it's the idea comes from a good place. I know in their heart of hearts, they think that they're being kind and they think that they're, they're think they're doing the right thing. They really do. They think they're being inclusive. They think they're, they're writing the wrongs of colonialism. They really think that. And they think that this idea of democratic socialism is a really good idea because there are some examples of socialist policies that do work, like the fire department and there's a bunch of stuff that makes sense. But the problem with enforcing any of this stuff that they don't understand is it always comes down to power. You have to have massive authority and usually guns because you can't just steal people's money. They're not going to let you, they're not going to let you just come in and decide, hey, we just devised a new tax where everybody who makes more than $500,000 a year. Everything over that you have to give 100% of the state or 95, whatever. And here's the thing. Here's the thing with the argument. Even if you said, Oh, wouldn't it be great if they did contribute more and wouldn't be, but they have so much money. Would it set up the world in a better place? Sure, but the fucking program that you have in place that takes the taxes and disseminates it is massively flawed and corrupt. It's corrupt. It's filled with waste filled with waste. There's scammers all over the place. You've got $24 billion missing and just the homeless in California. And then they veto the audits when everybody's trying to find out. So just saying more taxes is what we need is nuts. The first thing you should do is clean your fucking house, clean your house. If you if you want more money, you got to figure out what you did with the first money. Why did you? Why is there so much waste? Why is there so much money missing? Why do you have 38,000 NGOs? Why does the people people? Why do people running the homeless business? Because it is a business? Why are they making three quarters of a million dollars? That's a lot of money. It's a lot to administrate the homeless camps. No, they need to. Well, they need to go to Felix and how many dinner. It's hilarious to me too. You saw all the waste and fraud that's been going on in these various states when it comes to, you know, elder people getting their funds, right? Yes. You've seen all of this happening. And of course they're all trying to run away from it as quickly as possible. But this is the problem and I bring it back kind of to this idea of the class system. When you have the under universal suffrage, especially when you have the voters outnumber the wealthy, you can just vote yourself a raise. You can always vote yourself more money for whatever the upper class is. And that has been progressive dogma and doctrine since I was a kid, the entire idea is, hey, thanks for fundamentally unfair. And that's not your fault. So what we have to do is get together and vote ourselves a raise from the upper class. That's what we got to do. But if fundamentally ignores how wealth is created and wealth is not created by giving somebody money, right? But what happens when you give somebody money is they go and spend it. But they usually don't use it to generate wealth. It almost never, in fact, they use it to generate wealth. And so you vote yourself these raises. You vote yourself from the public treasury money to yourself. But what does it actually do for you ultimately? Because that's not how you generate wealth. Ever not only that, you incentivize people to move to a place that's more friendly to their economic ideas. True. You also, but one of the fundamental kind of ideas here that's flawed, how many times can you vote yourself the wealth of those above you before they have no more wealth to give you out, East, in fact, when you see these communists, mon Donnie, things like this, they're going to institute all of their programs on your dime. It's not like they have money. And whenever I talk to people about wealth disparity, what's really funny to me, they always seem to think that the government can just materialize wealth without there having to be some payback for that wealth. We saw this during COVID-19 and lockdowns. Remember they were handing out money like it was candy to various businesses ever shut down, COVID relief funds, things like this. And then they go, oh, inflation's out of control. Oh, yeah. Is it your kidding? Is it? Do you mean the government can't just materialize a trillion dollars and not inflate the money supply? Well, that's just go figure. Right. So a lot of times, these socialists, they even try to make the promise like, hey, we're only going to attack some after this rate. But it's never enough money for them to fund their socialist programs to begin with. The government will have to materialize money. Not only that, if you give them one money, they're going to expand the government 100%. They will expand. And they will expand their programs. They expand the fraud and they expand the waste. The other weird thing that mom Don is done is make a list of all the people that are rich. Do you see that? Yeah. He like released a list of all the people that may have to pay more taxes. It's like, hey, what are you doing? That's kind of you're you just made a list of targets. And you're you're putting these people in a bad position. Like that seems that seems really crazy to do. But don't you think that these people think they actually do think that wealthy people are evil? I don't know if he does. I think that's a, you know, it's a bit of, uh, you're you're going along with whichever way that plastic bag is flying in the breeze. And that's where it's flying right now is that wealthy people are evil. So you say that and it's a great excuse to tax the shit out of them. And it's also a great excuse to pretend that, you know, you're making like meaningful change and you're really doing the right thing for the community. Yeah. That's the thing. So I need to destroy the community. Yeah. Why you destroy the community? Because the money is going to leave the state. The money is going to leave the city. And that's the reality of it. And it's not that they're greedy. So they don't want you to take their money. You didn't earn it. You didn't make an iPhone. Go fuck yourself. And if you think that people should have a cap on how much money they make based on, you know, what arbitrary numbers that you come up in your own head, well, you're going to exclude any extraordinary outliers from creating incredible products, that's the companies. It just, yeah, maybe it's nuts that someone wants to be a trillionaire. Yeah, I agree. I don't want it. It seems fucking insane. But you have to have the freedom to be able to want to do that if you're all playing the same game. If you, if you're playing a game and you decide, I only need 250 points. And this is one guy's like, I'll fuck 100 million points. Like that, that crazy guy, that Tiger Woods guy, that guy who's going to fucking practice 12 hours a day, he's going to make the most. He's going to do the most. He's going to make the bigger company. He's going to put more in. He's going to die of cancer because he fucking is massively stressed out 24 hours a day. That's his prerogative. You should be concerned if that person has an undue influence in your life. Well, and they should be concerned. The hell out of him anyway, they do. They already taxed the bejeses out of these people anyway. And that's that there's an illusion and a bad narrative that they're not responsible for the enormous percentage of the tax. Oh, yeah. They don't pay their share. They pay an enormous amount. They make way more. They pay way more than the average person. They're responsible for a huge percentage of New York City's tax revenue, a huge percentage. And in California, California, like a massive percentage of the tax revenue is like a half a dozen people. Well, and a lot of times the people in California that they claim are rich and really need their farmers, their farmers who're driving huge revenue because they own a lot of land. Right. And it's like, but they're producing a huge amount of food. What is it like most of the produce of the United States comes out of one state, California? And they're a net exporter. You know, another thing that we were talking about fraud with old people that I just found out recently, I was listening to Michael Easter. You know, he is. He what is his the comfort dilemma? Is that his book? Very interesting guy. He's been on the podcast a couple of times, but he was talking about the blue zones. You know, those blue zones where as you light a cigarette, where everybody lives to be 100 because they're they, they only vegetarian or they might shall fish and the Japanese massively based on fraud. Really? Yeah. Massively based on fraud. The numbers, especially in certain areas are massively based on people who die and they don't report their death. This is in Okinawa. They're talking about that blue zones are bad data. These locations aren't hotbeds of 100 plus year old people. The wild story of fraud and bad data. Michael Easter. And so he was on a podcast recently and he was talking about it and just laying it out, like laying out all the the various details. A lot of it in Okinawa in particular, where there is one of the hotbeds, one of the blue zones. It's when people die, they don't report it to the government. And so if this person has the death rates correct, right? And this person is getting a check. If you're getting a check and then the family gets that check, they just don't report it. So if they're getting some sort of, you know, whatever it is, some, I don't know how they're looking at some sort of. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. So you have unreported numbers and then you have massive amounts of fraud where people are profiting off of the fact that their dead grandpa is still getting a check in the mail and so they don't report them as dead. That's that's crazy. Yeah. That is wild. And one of the first time I had heard that, I, you know, I grew up with the the Japanese diet, the samurai diet. Right. This is going to make you live Mediterranean diet. These guys live forever. And yeah, I did it. Okay. It's all bull. Okay. Makes sense. Yeah. Well, there's some, um, there's some data with certain areas that eat very rich, uh, help, rich and nutrient foods. So there's that data that they seem to be healthier. Hong Kong is one. They eat a lot of meat in Hong Kong. I know it goes against the narrative, but apparently very healthy. And that, that data apparently seems to be real. It's good for you. Who would have thunking that crazy except everybody built or I've ever talked to who sits around eating nothing but me. Any professional athlete. Yeah. I mean, it's very few professional athletes that are plant based and you can do it. But it's not optimal. And you have to be really careful. You have to like really monitor your, your, your food. And most of the time they're eating a lot of processed supplements. They're eating a lot of like either it's tofu or, you know, whatever it's P protein. There's a lot of like processed stuff that you have to eat. You can't just eat. I don't really consume the most amount of processed food out of any individual. I would imagine that's the case. I would imagine that makes sense. Especially when you deal with a plant based like meat, like tofirky and that kind of shit. Like what is, you ever see that stuff? Oh, yeah. So gross. It's not like liquid. Also not good for you. Especially those plant based burgers. Those are not good for you. They're just fried vegetable oil and not good. Not good. No, that stuff's good. No, that stuff's good. Like, you know, you got to save the chickens. Yeah. But if you want to eat like just a vegetarian diet and be healthy, like it's hard. If you try and do that for ethical reasons, I always recommend people just eat eggs, get chickens. If you can, if you have a backyard and eat your chickens eggs, it is karma free. There are your pets and they give you food and you could live off eggs. I thought too, the vegetarians is okay to eat fish too. Like there's some. That's Pescatarian. Okay. Yeah. Vegetarian is eggs and milk. I mean, you would want it sourced from like an ethical farmer or you can watch a milk as cows where it's not like some fucking machine where the cows like got his head in a harness and then just yanking on its tits. You know, if you go to a real regenerative farm and you buy milk from them, it's like the cows don't mind being milked. Like it's normal. So it's like not that big a deal for them. It's the real problem is factory farming. That's what freaks everybody out and rightly so. Cause it's some evil concoction that people have figured out. Well, we need all this food. No one's growing food. Let's just stuff all these pigs into a fucking warehouse and have them shit into a lake. Like you see those. Oh, yeah. There's something fucked up about that. But that's not the only way to do it. And you know, I've had guys on my podcast from multiple different regenerative farms that have laid out how they do it and you can source your food from places like that. If you can afford it and it's better, but don't don't think that fundamental to that position is the idea that people want to ignore that human beings have to kill to eat. Yeah. And we've always had to kill to eat. Always. We've always killed to eat. Yeah. Life eats life. And that is the reality. And there's also consciousness apparently in plants. Sorry. Yeah. Sorry. But what about my sentience, Joe? I think plants communicate with each other in very profound ways. They exchange resources. They communicate through my seelium so that there's this underground network that they're using to communicate back in some of the other meat. Yep. Some of these plants eat meat. Yeah. Some of those weird little fly trap plants. Yeah. Those little tricky. Well, yeah. And even the UD composing, you become. indicate back in some of the neat. Yep, some of these plants eat meat. Yeah, some of those weird little fly trap plants. Yeah, those little tricky Well, yeah, even the UD composing you become the nutrients that they eat right you see that one that um Yeah, that's true too, right? That's right. Yeah when you decompose you do get eaten up by the irrigating No, which is one of the weird things that we do we like now I'm out of the game. We just stuff a body fill with farmaldehyde Yeah, yeah, put it in a fucking trillically sealed box is really kind of creepy But if you see that one plant that eats rats no, oh, it's gross It's it's apparently got like this sicky sickly sweet smell to it and these rats get around the lip and then they fall into the bottom And they can't get out it's just like yeah, it's like a like a like a vase and They fall into this fucking thing and the plant eats rats. How long does it take to eat them? Good question Probably a long time see if you find that Jamie So it's fine. I mean I want to smell it. What does that think smell like? Like it probably gives up sickly odor that attracts the rat. I think I'm right remembering this correctly but there's a quite a few different plants that eat bugs I was wondering why I had this weird name. What's it named? Nope nep nep a sudden burrowy Hahaha Attenborough pitcher plant Montained species of carnivorous pitcher plant of the genus nepentheus It's named after the celebrated broadcaster and naturalist or David Attenborough who's a keen enthusiast of the genus So that's what it looks like down there in that crazy. Yeah, they fall in there and die and it eats them Look at it. It's like a fucking catcher. Look at it. It's a rat Decopose rat that they pulled out of there. How's it not? How can it not get out of there? I want to know it probably maybe the insides become very hard so they can't claw their way out Yes, but it's fucking pretty extraordinary how gross is that that little fucker. He's got his head bokeh down So nice to eat the live a little Photoshop for the little AI But you know, I don't know like if you watch animals consume other animals. It's never not nasty. Oh, dude It's rough. Yeah, it's rough and they don't care They'll just watch him scream like you ever seen a coyote on a rabbit rabbit scream as loud as they have care No, they don't care. I read it to shreds means nothing to him, but we're gonna worry about worry about eating the farm fresh pig I just watched a video today about with a bear eating another bear What was alive? cannibalizing another bear while it's alive. Who's a big bear? So like the boards that will kill cubs. No eat them while they're alive and this This was actually a grizzly eating a black bear And it was a eating it while it was alive I mean, it's like trying to move around just tearing chunks of it off nasty. Yeah, that's what I say when people say you know like they get upset at me that I hunt I go the way That elk is dying when I shoot it with a bow and arrow is infinitely better Then the way it's gonna die when it's teeth wear down nothing and then it gets like a macy Gated where it can escape and then the coyotes get it or a mountain lion gets it or a bear gets it or a wolf gets it Like an arrow through the pump station is the best way to go. It's 30 seconds. It's gone done done Yeah, and it's dead and then next thing you know you're eating it. That's literally the best way Can I it's not gonna live forever and become an angel? No, it's not They have like maybe 13 people about disconnected from reality. They are Just they are totally disconnected from the natural order of things, but where does they they don't seem to mind animal on animal violence You know, oh no, I've debated I've debated with vegans who have told me That their plan is to get rid of all of the predator animals all of the predator animals and My buddy of mine Say he's a fellow debater. He calls it bear jail. He says he's gonna say he's gonna put him in bear jail If it's that is that what you're gonna do? They're gonna go to bear jail and some of these vegans will say they'll say look There needs to be animal courts where either where they have attorneys who come in hey you killed the rabbit You got to you know, we you've got to be euthanized this type of thing All the predators gone all of them. Oh my god. I don't know what that would even look like to the ecosystem That would be like a world ending. It would be amazing I just want to see the infrastructure like how you how you like do you know many wolves? There are do you know many bears? There are too many mountain lines. There are like you can't even keep a track of them Yeah, California had a different approach and California You know, they have like the department of fish and game California calls the department of fish and wildlife and they were kind of infiltrated by animal activists and that's how they've sort of morphed their policies in California and so that's why they have a Mountain lion problem. They don't want to admit they have a mountain lion problem, but they have a mountain lion problem And one of the problems is they don't control the population of the mountain lions and their idea is They want the animals to control each other so instead of encouraging hunting ideally They would like the mountain lions to get the deer down to a number where people can't hunt them ethically because their populations are in danger Yeah, but you would have to have so many mountain lions to do it and you do that You end up with this overwhelming opposite problem. So here's the problem The San Francisco and the Bay Area 50% of the diet of these mountain lions is pets of course 50% so when they keep catching these they have these depredation tags. So if a cat pulls a dog out of a Back yard they find the cat they'd euthanize it when they open it up They always have to check and see what they're eating and 50% of them are eating pets That's the I think I told you when the DNR in Michigan. It's the same type of organization Yeah, department natural resources in order to control the deer population their infinite wisdom They started importing western coyotes which was not a thing That you saw in the Midwest Before like you know, they reported to really had the important from out west tons. Oh, no, what they did The native hunting there was never deer. It was always fessant. Fessant was what you went to the Midwest for Fessant hunting was the staple every farmer had a fessant gun and they would walk the railroad tracks with their kids Fessants would pop up boom done once they took the coyotes out there. Guess what they didn't eat They didn't eat the deer they ate up all the fessants. That's always then It got even worse They started these the population of coyotes just blew out of control And they started there's plenty of cotton tail for them to eat and there's plenty of rabbits for them to eat again Not doing a great job on controlling the deer population these coyotes They have an all-you-can-eat buffet with other things including your cat Including your cat right including your your smaller pets just like the mountain lion issue So these uh, so what they finally did to try to get the deer population down was what everybody had suggested from the beginning Just issue more tags and make the out-of-state tags cheaper And then people will come in but you have all the animal rights going to come out You can't kill the deer the farmers are going nuts. They get nuisance tags They'll be out there killing these deer all day every day right from their tractor because they have a nuisance tag There's a deer bam done don't even think twice about it summer winter whenever just blast them Because they have the permit to do it. They can't keep the population of these deer down except now they have the additional Population of all these coyotes And so how do the michiganers deal with that? Well, they made a game of it So what they do is they get grant did they hop in the truck with granddad They have their dogs with GPS collars and during the wintertime after they're done filling their deer tags They hunt coyotes with their dogs all throughout the winter There's just thinning them out. Well at least they allow that At least they allow that because California one of the things they did where their bear population is exploded because they stop Bear hunting with dogs which is the only way to get them either baiting or dogs because don't you treat them? Yeah, and the other way is baiting and they allowed outlawed that as well Yeah, every time they bring in an animal to deal with another animal they always fuck it up Hawaii is one of the best ones. Remember well, they didn't they import all those cats to get the the ratche in New York and catch don't They only up my so they ended up having this huge explosion of cats all over New York City I mean rats rather than they're the sake of their dangerous, too. They'll fuck that cat up Hawaii had a problem with rats. I guess probably from ships. I don't know, but they were eating the sugarcane so they brought in mongus The problem is Mongus are Diorinal and the rats are nocturnal So the mongus never saw the rats and the rats never saw the mongus the mongus started eating up all the ground nesting birds And so this state bird of Hawaii got fucking decimated Because it's a ground nesting bird and so these fucking mongus who are like bad motherfuckers man They kill cobras, you know, they're just killing these birds like an office lady Just like an office lady. I have a sightie a guy We got to bring in the cats because then that'll get the rats that someone else says, yeah, that's great And they just never consult anybody animals Well, I think everything was done in decades past where people were a lot more ignorant about the the effect and You know Australia is a good example that Australia they brought in cats I forget what they were dealing with but it didn't work. They didn't kill whatever they want now They have a giant feral cat problem in Australia to the point where bow hunting magazines in Australia They have fucking cats in them like a guy holding a house cat up that he shot with a bow and arrow Like it's a trophy like my friend Adam. He lives in Australia and I Was over there visiting him and he gave me some bow hunting magazines and I'm like oh, I'll read these on the way home So I'm on the plane on the way home not even thinking and I'm opening up this magazine There's a fucking guy holding a cat and I like closing shut real quick one Like is this allowed what the fuck their mail it's on the wall I give you saw a puppy with a fucking arrow through its chest. You'd be like Yeah, freak out, but that's how it is like over there They have so many feral cats that there's like a bounty on cats Like people make like fur coats out of cats. It's fucking disgusting. What expect that the country who lost a war to the emus They lost a war against their own emu population. They have a giant problem with invasive species over there There's so many of them. There's the the water buffalo the asiatic water buffalo in the northern territories They have these enormous fucking buffaloes that are up there and no natural predators and they guys just go up there to hunt them And they're that's the only way to thin them out so and you're still you're not gonna You're not gonna put denim. There's enough guys. It's too far My Australian buddy Jake he has the drop bear joke if you heard the drop bear joke. No, it's the funny If you get in Australia in in a bar Right somebody always brings this up. Man, there's a lot of dangerous critters over there every time And he'll be like oh yeah, especially the the drop bass, you know What's a drop oh yeah, and he'll go into the whole story of the drop bear and what the drop bear is is it's a bear that'll drop out of The tree on you and then it sexually assaults you. It's a real thing right in every time someone would be Real easy to see him He's just like it's how it's how Australians mess with the yanks basically The drop bears their hearty people they're used to crocodiles and fucking poisonous spiders and poisonous snakes and Especially those dudes that live out in the you know in the bush as they say well He says that the average originals He tells me all the stories he have originals when they like have their coming of age They'll just buy a warm beer and then they go out to the middle of the desert with warm beer and they'll just drink for weeks Months warm beer. That's what they spend their government checks on because a lot of that stuff is considered occupied land right the Australian government make deals with the app originals to have a lot of that land So they give them a percentage right they give them like monthly payments kind of like what we do with the native Americans here And he's like what they do is he'll take their whole government cheese check fill an entire car with warm beer for their coming of age Go out to the middle of the desert and just drink for months. Oh I'm like man. That's rough Do they have a similar situation where like native Americans don't have genetically a history of alcohol use and so Alcohol and packed it them different than it did the Europeans like they just they didn't have the enzymes That's just that they have another problem have you ever seen the petrol song? The petrol song man when I'm about to show you is going to make you laugh to death There's a song which was made by the Australian government for the app originals About how you shouldn't drink or sniff petrol gasoline from a can I'm not kidding you pull it up right now. It's the gasoline song right it is the You just be prepared you're gonna laugh yourself to death. Oh my god here we go Don't be rama rama by warburton Is this it put the headphones on? Yeah No sniff don't sniff Yeah, oh step on the bottle Look and I'll swim can't stay forever Yes You don't stand on petrol You put your petrol in the car and stays It's messing with your brains Holy shit It's not pretty good though. Yeah, catch you son. Yeah, catch you. No, very catchy Jesus Christ so that's an you got that and you think you're gonna fix that problem with a catchy song No, no, and they they have huge problems He tells me stories about it all the time. He sent that over. He said this song exists. No, it doesn't know way Sense it over. Oh my god. It does exist. It's a real thing. It's such a problem for him God, that's dark. Yeah, it's brutal. Oh, and that's a sort of addiction problems that are going on there It's not just the like people forget it's not just the alcohol introduction The introduction of all things which are addicting that begin if your culture has no defense against it to sweeps right through Very similar to the crack epidemic, right? What was the defense? Well also the accessibility right Crack was cheaper just like petrol. Yeah, oh It's that that whole thing of giving them their land and then giving them money boy that always turns out horrible It's turned out horrible for us here Then turned out of a native population except the ones that don't casinos ball in you know It's funny You look into that though and you find out guess what yeah, they don't really get that much in the way of proceeds from those casinos Exactly turns out that White eye comes in and still gets most of the proceeds. Uh-huh from those casinos. Yep Somebody comes in bankrolls it and sets it up and they get a nice check and they don't have to work again But that guy gets fucking stink and rich and then also you've created a gambling problem Which I am of the belief that you have to have personal accountability like I don't mind Las Vegas I don't mind it I think if you want to go into the casino and like my friend Dana White is a fucking degenerate gambler Like he plays blackjack for like $100,000 a hand. It's nuts. I don't like it. I don't do it I don't get it, but I feel like you should be able to do it That's what you want to do sure and then the argument is like people lose everything and like true Also people lose everything drinking. I don't know what you want to do about that But I think you should have personal accountability and you should if you're an alcoholic definitely not drink I don't know like at what point in time do we say you can't because some people enjoy playing craps They go to they look forward to going to Vegas and they want to play craps like what do we well? Un overwhelmingly now people go okay. I'm gonna go to Vegas or I'm gonna go to law flinner I'm gonna go to a place like this I'm bringing the exact amount of money that I can lose and that's a Just expect to lose there are degenerate gamblers. There's no doubt. Oh, I could introduce you There's yeah, there's tons of degenerate gamblers. That's true My friend Dana is a weird one because he's a degenerate gambler. That's insanely wealthy Yeah, he's worth fucking shit piles of money and he's still gambling all the time like But like there's a thrill for yeah, yeah Well, so but when you set up one of those casinos in a place that's never had a casino At least Vegas is like established right But if you just like set up some new casino in a very poor area check out that's that Oklahoma rose to 3.23 billion Oh native gaming revenues in Oklahoma rose to 3.23 billion in 2010 representing 44% of all US casinos Whoa Oklahoma surpassed Connecticut as second in the United States for gaming revenue according to Alan Meister and economist with Nathan Associates Inc Oklahoma has 113 tribal casinos whoa more than any other state in the US 2015 report on US gaming says Oklahoma has the most gaming machines Those machines bro, those that's the saddest thing you got to Vegas. You see someone just sitting there like a drone Yeah, just pressing buttons. Yeah, ladies with there's heavy ever seen the screen rubbers. They're they're hilarious. They'll rub the screen for luck Yeah That's just wild and they play the penny slots Penny slots hundred lines at a time, so it's a buck of hand, but it's a penny slot It's a penny slot the um, yeah, they're they're making out like bandage, but it's usually not actually the native tribes that are making out at all Of course, yeah, they get just enough to shut up. There you go But just sad when you find out how much alcoholism and drug abuse exists on those in those places Just and you think like if you look at it from a genetic perspective like Firewater that was always the things always the joke from the western movies that the natives couldn't handle their handle their firewater So they didn't have a history of alcohol use and also didn't you've introduced something that allows them just get pissed drunk Oh, yeah fall asleep and they don't have cultural traditions on how to manage it correctly and prediction at all Oh, and there's also the genetics like some people have a genetic propensity for alcoholism and Also some people are better at processing alcohol. They have a genetic propensity for prop It's like the whole thing is it's dark. You were telling me Just before we came in here that you had seen Rachel debate that guy yes. Yes And you you had watched the the thrashing Which I was telling you was in the front row when that happened. Yeah, he was that guy was just beyond upset You know everybody was Drafting him and I was I was gonna I was gonna get your take on that like what did you think after you had watched that? Did you feel bad for that guy or no no no I never feel bad for someone that is If that's what like I don't feel bad for guys when they fight and they could kick in the head You know I signed up for it. I don't like that people get injured in a fight But you're trying to do that. He did it to you. That's what it is. It is what it is. You know and It's just the weirdness is like I tell her to make him a sandwich. Yeah, like that like what what are we doing here? Yeah, like are you you a massage just now? Like you think women's what are you saying? They don't think at all about it's like the checkers thing like we're talking about like the ID for their gross Like terrible optics like what are you doing? It's also wanting to be right and to win versus like having a really well thought out perspective That you want to argue, you know like or debate or just communicate It's always this ego thing where people are trying to win and in doing so they they fall into these like really obvious traps Easy ones do you that's one of the things that when we first talked about doing another podcast I don't want to talk to you about because you know You're very logical and you're approached to these things and so many people are so bad at being logical Yeah, well, you know Dave. I did it to be a pretty famous debate with Dave Smith And I know you know Dave and Dave's a friend of mine and we became friends. I loved Dave. Yeah, we became very good friend of mine He's a what happened in the debate. Well, you got crushed badly. What was the debate over the debate was Well, it veered into his libertarian philosophy. I can hear him right now going Fuck you know not fucking a crush. He won't he won't actually on this one on this one He's crazy publicly acknowledged that this happened to him, but it was good. So it was about libertarianism There was libertarian versus Christian ethics and how the intersection actually happens with authority And he ended up having to agree with most of my positions A little bit more of a status than he is he's a libertarian and so we had this and it was a good back and forth It was a brutal debate, but it was a good back and forth But when it was done. I think what he expected was that I was going to do the The dunk on Dave tour. I was gonna go around. Ah, right The opposite in fact a DM demon said look I think that I can help shore your worldview up So you're libertarian and here's some points that you missed and I think I can help shore those up and he said really So I walked him through a bunch of those points and he still uses them to this day. That's cool But the whole idea there is like I won't I do want my worldview to win Ultimately, that's true and one of the reasons I do so many debates is because I do think that I'm speaking to the audience From my worldview why I think it's perhaps superior to this guys or the things I'm advocating for better or worse With Dave he's doing the same thing. He's advocating his worldview I think the difference there the distinction was that he was surprised and he kind of asked me about it And I said look the reason is is because You're a good debater and you've gotten better as time has gone on And if you're going to represent your view I want you to be the best at representing that view because that's how you determine which worldview people end up going with This is why so many people have moved towards Christianity and Christian ethics Seeing the religious debates has a lot to do with that with the various ideas in worldview Being expanded and then the kind of the graciousness even after the debate of trying to help the other person with their view That's very cool and that would be nice if most people Used that framework to have discussions. They don't they don't no they don't it's just and again It's like it's a part of what we're talking about that there's this whole Commodity of attention and there's a lot of attention on dunking on people and shitting on people and being mean and People love that stuff for whatever reason. That's true now. I'm not always that charitable when it comes to Progressives or leftists the people who I consider responsible for many of the most horrific things in society Socially that we deal with I'm not nearly as charitable to them but this is because in My humble experience they have not been very charitable to anybody no anybody's views. It's a very hyper aggressive position and Very prone to insults and that it's it's normalized Attacking people's normalized the celebration of Charlie Kirk is a great example of like the cruelty that's normalized Right And when you get down to the core pillar of their ideology a Lot of them think not only is this justified I'm giving an example. There's a guy who is inside the twitch sphere who says Well, wouldn't you kill Hitler if you could before he became Hitler? That's his justification right and so you see many progressives who have this kind of justification and that leads to a Huge amount of political violence which becomes normalized because they justify it through the lens of I'm stopping a monster I've never thought these people see me as a human being I don't think that they do. I think that they see me most of them At least the ones I debate with as an actual monster. Yeah, he's trying to Take from or destroy them or hurt them in some way and so From from my view. That's that's what it always seems like coming this direction is that There's they they don't even see me as a person. They see me as Like an idea or an ideology which is there to hurt them Right that they have to attack and beat and win Right, and then of course They're in the echo chamber of the people that also support that ideology and they're all like agreeing that this is okay And that this is acceptable and this violence is acceptable and all these different things Yeah It's really it's it's kind of daunting because you just like when does this dust settle? when when do people just like relax and start having actual conversations on both sides? like when when do people just do what you and Dave did and just Find out why a person thinks what they think and what what the actual facts of what they're saying are and whether Not your worldview is distorted or compatible or compatible You know like Christian ethics living inside of libertarianism from my view is way better than trying to make Christian ethics compatible with progressive ideology and so if I have to pick between a guy Governing like mom Donnie or a guy who holds the ideology like Dave Smith I'm picking Dave Smith's ideology Yeah And that those are the choices that's how I view it. I view it as choices between ideology Somebody's going to be in charge somebody's going to be in charge of the state no matter what yeah I'm going to try to pick the ideology that's closest to my own If you're going to be in charge of the state I definitely Want you to at least be representing the values that I have while you're in charge of it and the values of being legitimately charitable and a pathway to redemption Which doesn't exist Depaggressive that which is really a problem because they keep pushing the goal post and eating their own They keep going further and further lefting attacking people for not being left enough and like you get cast out of the community You get excommunicated for Mind I mean how many people were excommunicated during COVID for just not going along with the government's narrative on Pharmaceutical drugs being injected in your body. You have since your consent. Yeah, many of them wanted COVID passports Remember that yeah, they wanted to inject the jabby stabby into YouTube even censured opposition to it for a long time I think there's a real problem with people that don't have an ethical framework or a moral framework that's just arbitrary and they don't have a religious Foundation yeah, I found like that's where I always describe it as like whether you believe in Christ or not It's an awesome framework like a scaffolding for being a good person You can follow that guy's teachings like there's no flaws in it like especially Jesus like this is not one thing The point to like you know, there's a few guys in religion that you could point to and go Yeah, well, he married a nine-year-old like hey, yeah, that seems a little fucked. Hey, he said he could kill the infidel That seems a little fucked with Jesus. There's none of that none of that not only that's interesting that you bring that up the the kind of foundational principles For Christians the emulation of Christ We accept that we're flawed We accept that we sin and we accept that the only pathway for us through redemption is to follow the teachings of Jesus Christ through Christian ethics right that's what that's how we perceive things so baked into that is not only redemption It's not only the idea of salvation But it's an I it gives you a value to move towards yeah and what's missing often from the progressive ideology from the secular Ideology or the atheist ideology How do you give a person a moral ought? If you are the ultimate arbiter of all that is moral because it just comes to your down to your preference Right, how do we determine who the ultimate arbiter now is? Well, it usually just comes down to you and whatever your preferences are and so what are we moving towards exactly? How do we make the determination that you're an error? You're not moving towards this greater value. What you do is you're establishing a new non-defined Religion that could be moved and changed based on the wins. Yeah at any given time and depending on who's the most radical and the most I'm also going to do non-defined religion that could be moved and changed based on the winch. Yeah. And at any given time. And depending on who's the most radical and the most charismatic that's in charge of whatever that movement is at the time, eat the rich, whatever it is, whatever it is. Whatever it is. Whatever it will be. It's a little micro-cults. Yes. Right? Like the check, have you seen the secular humanist? Sure. Micro-cult. Same thing there. Remember atheism plus? Yeah, right. Atheism plus. Secular humanism is really interesting because, and I've debated the most prominent secular humanist in the world. Who's that? Well, I did. Matt Della Hunti. I've done several secular humanist debates. Matt Della Hunti was the funniest thing in the world. He raged quit in the first few minutes of the debate in my opening statement because I brought up this glaring contradiction in his worldview. I said, why should so he was dating a trans person? He says, not gay. Right? So I'm not gay, but I'm dating a trans person. So I brought this up and I said, the way that we can assess truth claims, I can just point an easy one out of how we can assess that maybe this is a good way to evaluate truth claims because he says he's in a non-homosexual relationship with a trans woman and reconciles that by saying, no, that's a real woman. And I'm like, if we can't even distinguish what's real and what's true, how could you even have his quit off that? Oh, he was so angry. He called me a bunch of names, got up and rage quit for me pointing out this glaring contradiction in his ideology. And it basically ruined his career, but he did it to himself because he should just stayed and done the debate. And here's why I think this and but instead he just lost it. He lost it, got up, undignified through the mic, called me a bunch of names, walked out. And anyway, I said, you and your husband have a wonderful evening and he just that was it for him on his way out. But the problem with this ideology is its change. So he was reading from the secular human manifesto three. So it's already had it, you know, it's on its third revision now. And it started initially as kind of more religious dogma. And then it took on a non-religious dogma. They call it secular. He was creating the canon. Oh, well, there was a big meeting in Amsterdam, not kidding. I'm not kidding. It's the Amsterdam secular humanist manifesto. And essentially it just comes down to these arbitrary preferences around where we're just kind of four things that make you feel good and kind of against things that it makes us not feel so good. Now, that's the biggest oversimplification in the world, but it really does just kind of reduce to that. And so one of the ways that you can always kind of endlessly beat these guys about the head and the shoulders with their own ideologies is point this out. Who's in charge of this anyway? Like which one of you gets to make this determination that this is the ought that I should follow based on anything other than your preferences. And the idea always is, well, it wouldn't just be my preference. It'd be the preference of many people, but don't those change? Well, yeah, well, then you're saying is that what you consider moral today, you're not going to consider moral tomorrow. That tells me that you're saying to me, you don't know what is moral and what is not. The Christian has the opposite approach. They're saying what was moral yesterday is still moral today. And what's still moral today is still what's going to be moral a thousand years from now, two thousand years from now, because that's the teaching they're basing it on. Yeah, it's it's really odd. If anybody, it's like Wikipedia, like anybody can contribute. Yeah, or edit, you can just edit it whenever you want to. Thank you. It's way worse than Wikipedia because it's not even edit like you could actually add to the canon. You could write your own, you know, the book of Eugene. Yeah, yeah, book of Eugene. And this is Eugene's new prophetic way forward. That is that is 100% true. And there are actual failsafes in the Bible that prevent people from writing new Bibles. Right. The entirety of the message of Christ and in of itself. This is what Christian ethics is based on the teachings of Jesus Christ, the teachings of the scriptures. But it always gives us a thing to move towards. And that is why it creates, I think, uh, better societies in general, better societies overall because people always go way to second, I'm supposed to be moving towards this idea. If you really do follow it, it makes nice people. Like the people that I know that are like genuine real Christians are some of the nicest people I know. Of course, they're so kind. Almost as nice as the Mormons. The more well, the more. The more. The more. The nicest because it's like, if you have to be in a cult like you said, boy, that's got to be the one. It's a great one to get a bunch of wives everyone's cool. And do you know that they're the richest, they're richer than the Catholic church? Are they really much richer? Wow, much rich. I would have never guessed. I didn't either until I somebody told me that there's no way. Yes, there is. There's so many Catholics. Aren't there way more Catholics way more? But it's the typing. So Mormons are really they practice nepotism like no other. I mean, and, um, that, I mean, they just overwhelmingly practices in their communities. And so with the tithing business tidings, some of these businesses will tie the Mormon church 60 70 percent. And then they get awarded various contracts from their friends and things like this. And the church has boo-coo dollars. Damn, what a nice. Nice set up. Yeah, it's a nice. It's a pretty nice set up for them. And then they run their own politicians inside their own states. Of course. Yeah. Which then enforces their lots like they kind of figured a lot of this out. Long as they're nice. Whatever. If they could push that niceness out to everybody else, like, you know, what, but why what do you got here, Jimmy? It does. It's official Mormonism is the richest religion of the world. But, I just, I mean, Catholicism as a whole, somewhere in the two to put to three trillion dollars. Oh, because there's a bunch of different Catholic churches. Yeah, it is. I see. But the church, but the single richest church is yeah, the church of Jesus Christ of Latter Saints of Mormons. Wow, they have a hundred trillion dollars. Yeah. They're way above everybody else. Yeah. It's not even bad. The in is only 30 billion. I would have never guessed they were that much richer than the bad. That is not that's not correct. It's off it. But there's not correct. What do you mean? I'm just saying it's not correct. How so? I'm at well. Also, it's a Wikipedia post on Reddit. That's not the best word. Oh, you just think this is just not accurate in general. Yeah, whatever Holy See is the Vatican. Yeah, that'll be the good. I mean, it's they got way more than $30 billion. And just that's a lot of money, dude. And it's just art. I wonder. Right. That's a good point. I just looked it up. It's worth three trillion dollars. It says on this other post. Oh, interesting. So just the art. I'm just for the buildings and the Vatican itself with getting into the weeds of it. Yeah, it has a one-hole church and you tell it. Yes, comparatively to the one church in Texas. So are they just basically get on their assets? Is that what it is? Also, it's a it was comparing it to like per person. Like per your per, uh, look, one, uh, average Catholic is where $67,000 versus $1.7 million. The average Mormon is worth 1.7 million. Nepotism. Yeah. And then also the worst Catholic. There's way more Catholics like in Africa that you know, aren't we? Right. And South America especially. Right. But that is crazy. The average Mormons worth 1.7 million. That's also there can probably there. Yeah. Right. The child. Yeah. Probably like, go. Right. Join us. That's what Scientology does. Right. Oh, that was a big thing with Scientology in Hollywood. In Hollywood, uh, when I first moved there in 1994, there was a bunch of people that were doing really well who were Scientologists. And there was this, this sort of push that if you join Scientology, they take care of you and you get hooked up. That is really a wide berth. It's between 300 billion and 25 trillion. That's almost like you'll have Omar's counting. Hunger for me to go. I was just hiding something. I heard the other day that someone just said like room didn't go away. It just became the Catholic church. And that's why, you know, right. Right. Right. Have you been to the Vatican? Oh, my God. The art is insane. It's insane. I went on a tour with this guy who was a professor from France. It was really cool. He was really smart. It was a very interesting tour. You get a higher guy. And this guy was a professor. And in the summer, he would, you know, give these tours. And if you were enthusiastic about it, he was awesome. And I was like, really, really into it. So I was asking him all these questions and he kept explaining in depth to me. And like, that you just never run out of art. You just look at so much shit. Like, this is crazy. You keep going into new rooms and new fucking new auditoriums. And then you're in like, St. Peter's Basilica. Just that alone. You're like, what? What? This is crazy. It's all worth a fortune. It's so big and so majestic that if you didn't believe in God and you went there, you'd be like, okay, maybe they might know something. Like, how the fuck did you do this? Like, it's so majestic that it almost changes your perception of what's possible. You think they got the chronovizer in there? The what? The chronovizer? The Vatican chronovizer? What is that? That's supposedly this is conspiracy stuff, right? Getting into the conspiracy stuff. Supposedly, the Vatican is sitting on something called the chronovizer, which tells them the future. And it was invented, I don't know how many hundreds of years ago, which you put on the chronovizer. And it shows you the future. Yes. No. Yes. Oh my God. Where is the arrow is pointed to like, so be like Jesus or something? I don't understand. Yeah. And so yeah, you put it on the hat. Yeah, you put it, you put it on and it'll show you, it can show you different spots in time or something like this called the chronovizer. Well, you know, I've, I'm really interested in the arc of the covenant that's supposedly in Ethiopia. You know, have you ever heard Graham Hancock talk about that? No, it's really interesting. So the Ethiopian Bible has a lot of like the book of Enoch in it. And it's a really old version. They don't consider it due to Rokan and they consider it canon. Yeah. So the Ethiopian church is not actually, I don't believe it's actually in communion with the Orthodox church in you. Right. It's on its own along with a couple others, but they do have more books in their Bible. Than the Orthodox church does in the Catholic church. Right. And supposedly they're guarding the Ark of the Covenant. And these people that are assigned to be a guardian of this thing, they can only do it for a couple of years and they develop cataracts. And he spoke to these people and the blinding light from whatever the fuck it is, like whatever it is, it might be radiation. I mean, who knows what it is, but apparently the lore is that it's this one particular church, this very old church in Ethiopia and there is an area where they are guarding the Ark of the Covenant. And they have, and the people that are supposed to be in the room with it, they all can only do it for a couple of years and then they get horribly sick. And then they have to switch them out. And they get cataracts like this documented cataracts from all these guys who go to, I mean, maybe it's the placebo effect. They think they're gonna be, I don't know. But I highly doubt it. It sounds more likely you've got some sort of a crazy artifact that might be ancient technology. You have the same thing in Israel. Oh, but Jesus is too. I just read the article. This is like it says a purported photo. Oh, that's clear. That's clear. Then, whatever's name is Tyler Robinson. Right. Right. That's in four case. Right. Right. This is where he had the ability to go with these events. He witnessed like tons of stuff. And then when he died, it says the Pope had it said nobody could ever know what he could ever do. How convenient. How convenient. How convenient. But yeah, another, another big miracle that's like that is over the tomb of Jesus Christ sits the Orthodox church in Israel. Now that's true. Right. That is in fact the case that there is an Orthodox church. Christian church is above the tomb. Wow. And every year, I think it's every year they have the miracle of the Holy Sepulchre. I think I'm pronounced that right. Sepulchre. And what they do is they use flame and emulate themselves in this holy flame and they're burning. They're on fire and none of them burnt. What? How do they do that? Nobody knows. But there's just one small sect of Christian. No, no, no. This is the Orthodox church. People come from miles around. But the people that light themselves on fire, these are people who are in the church, who are specially selected to basically emulate, you know, they set themselves on fire with the holy flame from torches. And they're apparently, this is what I'm told. They've had people go and investigate and they can't figure out how exactly this is being done. But they're completely on fire and they don't get hurt at all. Jimmy, pull that up. Is there video with them? There is video. The really Greek television. They've been like five candles and white phosphorus. The candles spontaneous ignited for approximately 10 minutes due to the self ignition properties of white phosphorus when in contact with the air. Corrine to the website, it says that phosphorus is dissolved in an appropriate organic solvent. Self ignition is delayed until the solvent is completely evaporated. Pete experiments show the ignition can be delayed for half an hour or more, depending on the density of the solution. How does it stop them from catching fire though and dying? The same way that's probably like, you know, the people put on to make movies, you know, he's a skeptic. This motherfucker, he's always ruining everything. I think logic. I think the skepticism is great if people actually practice the real philosophical tradition of skeptic skepticism, which is you're supposed to also be skeptical of your view. Right. So the real skeptics, I'll never forget this debate that I listened to that it always stuck with me for years. It was with a guy named Jay Dyer and that same guy Matt Dillahonti and they were debating and go ahead. They were debating. Yeah, they were debating and he said the the guy Dillahonti said, well, I'm a skeptic and Jay said, no, you're not. Here's the actual philosophy of skepticism and it always starts with you. Your view is what you apply skepticism to first, long before you ever apply it to any other and the problem with people who describe themselves now as skeptics. I'm a skeptic. They actually aren't really following skepticism. They're skeptical of your view. That doesn't mean that they're skeptical of their own and it's supposed to start internally. That's what made skepticism kind of something that spread widely was that it was a way for people to reject parts of their own worldview that didn't fit. They didn't match. They weren't coherent. They didn't make much sense. And so most of the time I hear skepticism, the person's not actually following the philosophy of skepticism. They're not applying it to their view first. Yeah, there's a lot of lazy skepticism too where they didn't outright deny the existence of conspiracies, like which is just fucking ludicrous. It's like you're just you're playing a very you're in a very rigid corridor of ideas. You're only allowed to operate as guillas. Not only that, the the US government has thousands of laws on the books about conspiracy. So it's like our government seems to believe in them because there's conspiracy to commit racketeering, conspiracy to murder, conspiracy to commit theft, conspiracy to commit wire fraud. Like they clearly believe that there's a lot of conspiracies going on and definitely prosecute people for conspiracies all the time. But somehow when it comes to the skeptic mindset of conspiracy, nope, that's all 10 foil. It's a lazy perspective. And it's also a perspective that falls in line with what we're talking about before, where you take a lot of legitimate conspiracies and you add a bunch of bullshit to it to make it seem completely ludicrous. And then the whole thing can be thrown out. Flooding is just like it's so obvious that that's a that's a pullaway. Did you find anybody catch in fire? The first, yeah, I was getting into it. Well, they're not really they're like just dancing their hands over the fire. Like it's it wouldn't catch anybody on fire technically because they're not you're not like these guys are. See how it's like touching this. These guys don't look like priests. Oh, so they're faking it. So the two people are faking it. Oh, these guys lighten his beard on fire. There was a lady that at the end of one of these videos, she held a piece of paper over it. And it wasn't, I mean, well, this stuff like regular fire. But that's where I was going to get into the white fence for a second. I said after 30 minutes, it will start acting as you expect it to. Look at all it seems like everybody should be on fire. Oh, odd. But yeah, it's a it's a long standing tradition. Like she's wiping it on her forehead or something. Huge tradition there. They call it the miracle is another tradition America called I got to take a peek. So let's wrap this up. This is really fun. Well, it was a lot of fun. Oh, it's cool hanging out. Yeah, I enjoy we went over a lot today. Bob shut. Yeah, a lot. And I enjoyed it very much. Thank you.