Well, here's a story you probably haven't heard a lot about, the Chinese mafia is exploiting rural America to create a drug empire. This is not available on cable news. The networks not telling you about this, but it's totally real. Communist affiliated drug gangs destroying parts of the United States, the parts that Washington ignores, to sell drugs, laundering money, and building a black market network inside this country's most beautiful but least served areas. We've got a brand new documentary on this. It's called High Crimes, The Chinese Mafia Takeover of Rural America. It's available now on Tucker Carlson.com. It's excellent. The purchase of churches and schools to aid the operation, the jerry-rigging of power boxes to steal electricity, foreign pesticides, collusion with the Mexican cartels. It's It's unbelievable. By the way, one of the drug houses is like walking distance from my house. I didn't know that. It's a layered and fascinating story. Head to TuckerCarlson.com to watch now. We think you'll love it. Mr. Secretary, thank you. Thank you for doing this. I I remember the night that Trump won um talking to people in Washington, and their doomsday scenario, the thing that they feared more than North Korea getting the bomb, was you becoming Secretary of Health and Human Services. They really were afraid because they felt it was a threat, not just uh to them, but to the whole business of the city. And I think a lot. I mean, I there's a reason they felt that way, and they probably still do. So, what's that been like? What's the opposition been like? The organized opposition to your program? Well, you know, the the irony is I'm not really getting opposition directly from the industry. Most of the industry um wants things from this department. And we want to get, you know, we want American industry to profit. The pharmaceutical companies, everything else. And so, um and I think they know that, and they know that we're working with them. We're not They also know they've been getting away with stuff up till now, and that that era is over. Um I get opposition from proxies to the industry. Yes. And I get I I think the major opposition that I feel is from the mainstream media. And from Democrats, which is really That is an interesting phenomenon because these were people I was friends with my whole life. And, you know, I have not changed, and my values have not changed, and um the policies that I've been advocating have not changed. But the party has just a knee-jerk reaction against anything that is Trump. And you know that. And, you know, President Trump's in this kind of really paradoxical position where he not only has completely taken over the the Republican Party, um and dictates its platform, but he's also dictating the platform for the Democratic Party. I've noticed It's totally if you know, if if I I remember I I saw this for the first time on NAFTA. The Democrats traditionally were against NAFTA, and as soon as President Trump came out against NAFTA, all the Democrats, you know, were now for NAFTA. Uh the Democrats were the anti-war party, but as soon as he expressed his opposition to the Ukraine war, they became the war party. Um the Democrats traditionally were the biggest critics of the CIA and the intelligence agencies, and um as soon as President Trump started complaining about the power of the intelligence agencies in Washington, they became bonded with the intelligence agencies to the extent where they had for the first time in history a former CIA director uh speaking at their convention um immediately before Kamala Harris. Uh they were the party of free speech, and they became, you know, when President Trump started advocating for free speech and his ability to uh to talk, you know, the shutdowns of him on Twitter and and these other really crazy uh um efforts to suppress his the speech of a former president. Um he became a, you know, a major advocate of free speech, and the Democrats are now openly for censorship. The Democratic Party was the party of women's sports. My uncle wrote Title IX, you know, making sure that women had the right to and had the equal access to the resources uh that they could play sports. And uh and the Democratic Party has become, you know, the the party of that is uh that is now the enemy of women's sports. And you can go on and on with those uh those examples, but President Trump is literally dictating the platform of the Democratic Party. Anything that he says, they're going to be against. And, you know, my uh that is also a departure from tradition. My father was very critical of partisanship. I remember him telling us when we were kids, I I don't vote for the Democratic Republican, I vote for the person whoever's supposed best for the job. And um and you know, that partisanship, I its nature is dishonest, and it is the enemy of democracy. And that in Washington, George Washington's farewell speech, he said that. He said he was very scared of the ri- frightened about the rise of the political party because they would become self-interested rather than patriotic. They would be interested They would become interested in promoting their own agendas, and rather than the agenda of the country. And he thought that that would that was a real threat to American democracy and to the you know, this great exper- experiment that we have in democracy. I remember your first break with the Democratic Party and with personal friends, even members of your family, was a Rolling Stone piece that you wrote about autism, asking why have autism rates risen? And you were kind of written out of places to play for doing that. One of the first things you did as Secretary, I think, tell me if I'm misstating it, is commission a kind of study of autism. Can you tell us what that is? What are you seeking to do with that? Yeah, I mean, you know, they the studies uh there there are a handful of studies that CDC has generated on autism. They were all epidemiological studies. And they all say what the CDC wanted them to say is they couldn't find a link. The problem is that the Institute of Medicine, which is part of the National Academy of Sciences, had said in 2001 that the link between autism and vaccine is biologically plausible. And uh they they were highly critical of the way that um CDC was making decisions about the vaccine schedule, that it was, you know, the the this group, ACIP, which is an external panel, which has the responsibility of deciding which new vaccines will be added to the schedule. They essentially been captured by industry. The people who serve on that panel, almost all of them have uh financial entanglements with the industry. And the Institute of Medicine recommended a a litany a rent new of studies, including animal models, um observational studies, bench studies. And um and epidemiological studies. It's You need this this whole rent new to answer this question. CDC never did those. Instead, it commissioned uh the creation of these six epidemiological studies, and none of them does what All of them were They used fraudulent techniques. You know, they say statistics don't lie, but statisticians do. And epidemiological studies are very easy to manipulate. And none of those studies did what you would want what you would do if you wanted to find the answer, which is to compare outcomes in a fully vaccinated group to health outcomes in an unvaccinated group. And CDC did that study in 1999. They brought in a team of um of scientists under a Belgian researcher named Thomas Verstraeten. And they looked at the data. They looked at uh children who had received the hepatitis vaccine within fir- first 30 days of life, and compared those children to children who had received the vaccine later or not at all. And they found an 1,135% elevated risk of autism among the vaccinated children. And it shocked them. They kept the study secret, and then they manipulated through five different iterations to try to bury the link. And you know, we know how they did it. They got rid of all the older children essentially and just had younger children who were too young to be diagnosed. And they stratified that stratified the data and they did a lot of other tricks. And and all of those studies were the subject of those kind of that kind of trickery. And so what we're going to do now and meanwhile the external literature is showing, you know, over 100 studies that show that there indicates that there is a link. Um but um what we're going to do now is we're going to do all the kind of studies that the Institute of Medicine originally recommended. And we're going to do observational studies, retrospective studies, and epidemiological studies. Uh we're going to do real science and the way that we're going to do that is we're going to make the data bases public for the first time. We've gone into CDC. We've gotten the data from CMS which is Medicaid and Medicare. We're getting the data from the vaccine safety data link which is the biggest repository for um HMO health records. So those records would have all the uh records of vaccination and then the subsequent health claims and you can do a cluster analysis and look at see if there's an association. But and we're going to do some in-house studies ourselves or more importantly we're going to make this data available for independent scientists so everybody can look at it and then we have already put out uh requests uh grant requests the general scientific community is of it any scientist with credentials can apply for a grant and tell us how they want to go about studying these. And so we're going to get, you know, we're going to get real studies for the first time. And we should have some answers by September, some initial uh indicator answers. And then it'll take over the next 6 months all these large studies by independent scientists all over the world. We anticipate there'll probably be about 15 different major teams who are all trying to answer this question. And within 6 months we'll have definitive answers after September. So you get home from work on a Friday night, you're psyched cuz you finished the entire week of work. It's time to reward yourself. So you go to the snack cabinet and 10 minutes later you've consumed an entire bag of chips, your typical American chip brand, and you feel like garbage. Of course you do. You just stuffed hundreds of calories of chemically laced seed oil infused crap into your mouth. This is not a good way to start the weekend. And who hasn't done it? Cast the first stone. But there is a better way. It's called MASA chips and we have mountains of them in our house. Actually we have so many they're in our garage. We bring them in every day and hit them hard. And they're great and you can feel good about eating them. They're they're delicious and unlike the rest of this country's corrupted food supply, MASA chips have no seed oils whatsoever. In fact, they have almost nothing in them except a few basic ingredients. Check the label and you feel the difference. So they're not bad for you and they are delicious. So the total package. They're beloved by thousands and endorsed by nutrition experts around the country. MASA is the way to go. MASA. Visit masachips.com/tucker. Use the code Tucker for 25% off your first order. masachips.com/tucker code Tucker. You're going to love them. And is it your expectation that those answers will differ from kind of status quo understanding? I think they will. Um you know, my opinion I always tell people is irrelevant. Um we you know, peop- people we need to stop trusting the experts, right? We were told at the beginning of COVID don't look at any data yourself. Don't do any investigation yourself. Just trust the experts and trusting the experts is not a feature of science. It's not a feature of democracy. It's a feature of religion and it's a feature of totalitarianism. And democracy is we have the obligation and it's one of the burdens of citizenship to do our own research and make our own determinations about things. Mothers when they go shopping they don't trust the advertising. A good mother does not trust the advertising. They don't trust what they hear. They do their own research and it's much harder way to live but you know, that is one of the burdens of living in a democracy is that we you know, we do our own research. We make up our own minds and uh and that's the way it should be done. And we're going to give people gold standard science. We're going to publish our protocols in advance. Um we're going to tell people what we're doing and uh and then we're going to use data and we're going to publish the peer reviews which is never published by CDC studies. We're going to publish anytime that we can uh the raw data and then we we're going to allow and then we're going to require replication of every study which never happens in NIH. Now that's something new that we're bringing in. Is that every study will be replicated. I thought that was like a basic precept of science. We can't know something unless it can be unless the experiment showing it can be replicated, right? Yeah, that that is a basic precept of science and uh unfortunately it has uh the kind of science that was done by NIH. You know, when NIH was the gold standard agency when I was a kid. Um but they stopped doing that and it it encouraged incentivized a lot of cheating. And the reason it incentivizes cheating is that um if you're a scientist, your career depends on how much you publish. And so if you have a hypothesis and you say this is my hypothesis, this is the study that I want to do and you get a grant from NIH. And the hypothesis turns out to be wrong, you know, it doesn't it does the science that's unsupported. A lot of times you cannot get that study published. That's science. It's science when you when you you know, a null hypothesis is science and it ought to be published but the the journals won't do it. And also the journals won't publish anything that is uh is critical of vaccines. They just they won't do it because the there's so much pressure on them. They're they're funded by the pharmaceutical companies and um and they'll lose advertising. They'll lose uh revenue from reprints if you don't do that. So even Marcia Angell who was a long time, I think 25 years of the New England Journal of Medicine, she said you can't believe anything that's in the scientific journals anymore. Richard Horton who was the long time editor of The Lancet is the same same thing. He says we've become propaganda vessels for the pharmaceutical companies. And the pharmaceutical company now you have to pay to get something published in these journals. And so the pharmaceutical companies pay for something. They give a you know, they hire these you know, these mercenary scientists. We call them biostatitutes. They do a study that will validate their product and you know, say that this statin drug works against heart attacks and they'll mess with the data cuz they want it published. They're being paid by the pharmaceutical companies. And then once it's published the the the journal will make available preprints. The preprint is a little like a little magazine with the logo of The Lancet on the front. And it has that one article that says this statin drug works or this SSRI works. And they have tens of thousands of pharmaceutical reps who will take those journal articles and go to every doctor's office in the country and say, you know, and they're usually let me put it this way, hot looking women or you know, and they'll go Really? Right. They'll go take the doctor out to lunch. They'll say, you know, why don't you just start prescribing this drug? And they'll incentivize the doctor in all kinds of ways to do that. And so the doctors also have their own incentives, you know, perverse incentives. Uh Uh there's a published article out there now that says that 50% of revenues to most pediatricians come from from vaccines. And then there's a whole structure where Blue Cross and the other insurance companies pay bonuses to the pediatrician to make sure if for example, 95% of their if their clients are fully vaccinated, they get a huge bonus. It could be tens of thousands of dollars. And that's why your pediatrician if you say I want to go slow on the vaccines or I want to have a little different schedule, your pediatrician will throw you out of his practice. Because you're now jeopardizing that bonus structure. And these are all perverse incentives that stop doctors from actually practicing medicine and caring for the client because they're looking at the bottom line. Um 20 years ago, 20% of the doctors in this country worked for corporations. Today, 80% do. And that corporation is telling you, you know, we don't care what happens to your patient. You know, we care about how much revenue you're generating. And you know, these doctors are coming out of medical schools with ginormous bills. And that will bankrupt them if they don't have a job. And so, they're under tremendous pressure just to to keep generating those funds. And the whole system, as you know, is because it's just a bundle of perverse incentives. Um that, you know, that where everybody is making money by keeping us sick. You know, and I'm not saying that's deliberate or purposeful or or, you know, planned in any way. It's just the incentive system that everybody makes money. Insurance companies make money if you're sick, ironically. They make more money if the population is sick. And you know, that may seem counterintuitive to people. And a guy said to me once who worked for AIG, one of the big insurance companies, he said, I said, I said, I want to go with some data to AIG and show them that, you know, what they're doing is actually I can show them on paper what they're doing is actually making their people sicker. And And they're the one group that you would think would want healthy people because they'd have to pay out less. And this guy said to me, think of it this way. If you're Lloyd's of London and you insure all the shipping in the world, is it better for you if one ship sinks a year or if 500 sink a year? And I would say I said to him, it's it's better if only one sinks. And he said, no, it's better if 500 sink because then everybody has to get insurance. And what the insurance companies are collecting money money is friction. They're taking a cut of the revenues that come through them. The more people that buy insurance, it doesn't matter what the claims are. If the claims are high, they just raise their premiums. And and the it's the amount of money that flows in the system that gives them money. So, they're making money that way. The doctors are making money from keeping us sick. The hospitals are making money from keeping us sick. The pharmaceutical companies are making money from keeping us sick. So, every level of the system is is is incentivized financially. No matter what your intention is. If you're a doctor If you're a doctor, of course you don't want sick patients. But there's tremendous pressure from every angle of the system to actually, you know, to keep us all sick. And we're now the sickest nation in the world. Last year we did an interview with a woman called Casey Means. She's a surgeon educated at Stanford. She's the nominee for surgeon general right now. She really is one of the most amazing people I have ever met. The interview made me emotional. In it, she explained how the food that we eat, produced by huge food companies in conjunction with pharma, is wrecking our health and wrecking this country, making it weak and sick. She's the co-founder of a health care technology company called Levels, and we're proud to partner with them. And by proud, I mean actually proud, for real. Most of us are not metabolically healthy. Even worse, we're not aware that we're not. We have no idea where our health stands. As we speak now, we don't know how to improve it. With Levels Labs, you'll get insight into your health to help you understand where you are, to measure and optimize your well-being. It is the best thing you can do to get a picture of where your health stands and how to make it better. The Levels app works with something called the glucose monitor, CGM. And now the Levels membership comes with a 28-marker cardiometabolic blood test, giving you a comprehensive view of your health with clear guidance on how to improve it. You can also get the extended panel, which gives you an even more detailed view with 100-plus biomarkers, real-time personal data. So, you take control of your health for the better. You know what happens when you eat certain things. We just got word that Levels is offering this show's listeners annual memberships with an additional two free months through the website. The website is levels.link/tucker. That's levels.link/tucker, two months free. One of the reasons that there hasn't been much of a discussion. You said there were signals in 1999 that there was a connection between autism and vaccines, the response from the American media was just to throw you out, take away your New York Times presence, ban you from Rolling Stone, etc. Attack you as a Nazi. You made the point years later that the reason that happened was because pharmaceutical companies are the single biggest source of revenue for a lot of media companies, and they're buying their protection with that money. That's another perverse incentive, right? Absolutely. I think we're one of only two countries in the world that allow that. Can that be stopped? Um There those That's the question that we are looking at right now. You know, and it Um there's a bad Supreme Court case from a couple of years ago that um that gave uh that essentially anointed pharmaceutical advertising with First Amendment protection that there The First Amendment protects political speech. So, if you have If you're saying something, you know, political, you should have absolute protection under the First Amendment. Um If commercial speech has a lower level of protection. And uh and the pharmaceutical advertising was regulated as commercial speech, and it was until 1990, really around 1992. Um it was uh you didn't see pharmaceutical adverti- There was no direct-to-consumer advertising on TV. And after that, and then there were new more changes made in 1997, uh that's when it became uh you know, it exploded. And today, Roger Ailes, who both you and I knew, you know, I had this very Roger Ailes, for your audience who doesn't know him, which I assume think most of them do, was the founder of Fox News. And I had this odd relationship with him because politically we were at loggerheads, but I had spent when I was on 19 years old, I spent 3 months with him in a tent in Africa. And I And we developed a friendship then. And as you know, he was very, you know, he was very engaging guy. He was very witty, really fun to be with. Um very paranoid, but at the same time brilliant. Yes. And um he And so, he was very kind to me. He was a very loyal friend to me. And he would make Sean Hannity and Bill O'Reilly and Neil Cavuto and all the other hosts, who your former colleagues, would me on TV to talk about the environment, even though he didn't agree with me on it. He made them put me on. So, during the '80s and '90s, I was the only environmentalist who was going on Fox News. And but I brought him one time this uh this uh this Around I think it was like 2014, I brought him a a documentary that we had done about mercury in vaccines. And um he had he watched it. He was completely sold on it. He had a family member who had been affected. He felt And um he said, but I can't put you on because if I did, I If any of my hosts allowed you on to talk about this issue, I would have to fire them. And if I didn't, I would get a call from Rupert within 10 minutes. And he said, for the evening news division, about 75% of the advertising revenues are coming from pharma. And then he told me something that if I remember it correctly, he said that on a typical evening news show, there are 22 ads, and 17 of those are pharmaceutical ads. And so, this was the principal source of revenue. And for a lot of these television networks, it's keeping them alive. As you know, they're all, you know, kind of collapsing financially. Collapsing due to lack of popular demand for their presence. Right. Um so, could you end that? Do you have the authority as the Secretary of Health and Human Services to say no more pharma ads on television? Well, uh um You know, a lot of the pharmaceutical ads are are um misleading. Yeah. And uh and even the music and the and the, you know, the the the video, the photos or the that they show, the scenes that they show are That's kind of speech, and it's misleading. It's sending a message. And if you take this drug, you're being going to be riding jet skis and playing volleyball and, you know, and uh water skiing and uh and spouse. Right. Happy kids. The side effects, meanwhile, are rolling, you know, at 80 miles an hour, and that's misleading. And so, one of the things that we uh you know, that we're we're looking at is is making them be more honest about what they what they show. So, that they public is, you know and you know there's a pharmaceutical advertising is insidious for a number of reasons. That's why they they don't allow it anywhere else in the world. New Zealand has a very very limited allowance of direct-to-consumer advertising. Very very highly controlled compared to us, it's nothing. People come over here from England or Europe and watch our TV are shocked by what they're seeing on it and it it's insidious because it is the pharmaceutical advertisers are advertising the most expensive version of every drug. They're not going to advertise the generics cuz they're not making any money. So, they're advertising the ones that are the highest profit margins for them. And normally if you see an advertisement on TV like for Coca-Cola you then have a choice to go get that and then you're paying out of your pocket for it. When somebody buys a pharmaceutical drug, it's it's Medicaid and Medicare that are paying for it. It's us it's the taxpayer. So, they're advertising something to the consumer where the consumer has no skin in the game. And then the consumer and we're paying for the ads because they're tax deductible. So, they're we're paying for them to advertise and advertisements are getting people to buy drugs that may be ineffective um that um may be the least effective drug of the ones that are available. And they go to their physician. The physician is is told by his boss who's the you know the corporate uh bean counter you have 11 minutes with each patient and that's it. And the physician then can spend that 11 minutes trying to talk the patient out of something that they want and then the patient's going to go away unsatisfied. Or the physician can just say, "All right, you want this prescription? I'll write it for you." And then you know that patient is then going to come back cuz he's happy. The doctors hate it. The American Medical Association has been against it for you know for 30 years. And nobody thinks that this is good for public health. It is hurting us and it's distorting the markets and it is not it's not a you you can't even call it a a free market because everything's paid for by the federal government. So, here's a company we're always excited to advertise because we actually use their products every day. It's Mary Weather Farms. Remember when everybody knew their neighborhood butcher? You look back and you feel like oh there was something really important about that. Knowing the person who cut your meat. And at some point your grandparents knew the people who raised their meat. So, they could trust what they ate. But that time is long gone. It's been replaced by an era of grocery store mystery meat boxed by distant beef corporations. None of which raised a single cow. Unlike your childhood, they don't know you, they're uninterested in you. The whole thing is creepy. The only thing that matters to them is money and God knows what you're eating. Mary Weather Farms is the answer to that. They raise their cattle in the US in Wyoming, Nebraska, and Colorado and they prepare their meat themselves in their facilities in this country. No middleman, no outsourcing, no foreign beef sneaking through a back door. Nobody wants foreign meat. Sorry, we have a great meat, the best meat here in the United States and we buy ours at Mary Weather Farms. Their cuts are pasture-raised, hormone-free, antibiotic-free, and absolutely delicious. I gorged on one last night. You got to try this for real. Every day we eat it. Go to maryweatherfarms.com/tucker. Use the code Tucker76 for 15% off your first order. That's maryweatherfarms.com/tucker. So, if and starting in September when we start to see the results of the analysis of these massive data sets that you're putting out there in public um and if we if it becomes clear that there is a connection between autism and vaccines, vaccines the government promoted in some cases effectively required that's a tort. I mean that means there are a lot of injured people who can now show they were injured by this product. How are they made whole? What happens to them? Well, that's going to be complicated because in 1986 Congress passed an act the vaccine act the on national vaccine injury compensation program that and that and they gave the uh vaccine companies immunity from liability. So, you no matter how reckless the company is, no matter how uh toxic uh the product, no matter how egregious your injury, you cannot sue them. And that's one of the problems is and that actually is why we one of the reasons we had this explosion in the vaccination um program. When you know when I was a kid, we only had three vaccines and uh by 1986, the year that act was passed there were were 11 doses of I think uh five vaccines. And today there are a child to to to go to school in the states like California and New York and many other states where you have mandates the child an American child now has to receive between 69 and 92 vaccines between conception. So, some of those are given to the mom during pregnancy and age 18. And the reason it's 69 to 82 is some of the vaccines have are the different brands have different dose requirements. So, some will require three doses, some will require one dose, some will require four doses. Um but that's a lot of vaccines for a kid and each one of those is calculated it is is designed to permanently alter your immune system. And so, we have now this epidemic of immune dysregulation in our country, you know, and uh there's no way to rule out vaccines as one of the key culprits. And if you look at all of these diseases that have become epidemic um uh diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, all of these seizure disorders, neurological disorders like ADD, ADHD, speech delay, language delay, ticks, Tourette's syndrome, narcolepsy ASD, autism, all the diseases you and and I never saw when we were kids. And suddenly they're in uh this generation is damaged is incredibly damaged by all these diseases. The auto-immune diseases like diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, the allergic diseases like peanut allergies, anaphylaxis um eczema. I know did you ever know anybody with eczema? No. Right. So, and now it's ubiquitous in every classroom. And all of those injuries are listed as side effects on the manufacturer's inserts of those products. So, um we would be have to be blind to not say we have to look at this as a potential culprit. We have to do the studies that the Institute of Medicine has been telling the CDC to do for 25 years. The Institute of Medicine told CDC in 2013 there are 151 158 injuries that are suspected to be vaccine injuries. Only 38 of those have been studied and almost most of those it was positive it was yeah this is a vaccine injury. The other 120 what whatever and I'm not doing the math in my head but the others have never been studied. CDC's job is to study them. And yet it never studied them. And that was purposeful. And I'm not saying that out of speculation, I'm saying that because I've seen the emails. And CDC deliberately um uh derailed any study on that. And then if somebody does independent scientist does do a study, they can't get it published. The scientific publishers will not publish a study that is critical of vaccines. So, we need to change that taboo and that's one of the things J Bhattacharya is doing at NIH is we're going to remove the taboo about talking about this issue and we're going to be honest with the American public. It's pretty clear from the VAERS the self-reporting vaccine injury system federal system that vaccine injuries with the COVID vax like jumped you know to multiples of what had been reported before. Do you there were more injuries reported from VAERS by the um by the COVID vaccine than all other vaccines put together for the past 36 years. And I'll I'll tell I'll tell you something else. There's a lot of people out there who say, you know, this is part of the the the the the consensus is you'll see this on every mainstream Anderson Cooper, Jake Tapper, all of these guys say it again that the um the link between autism vaccines has been debunked. Right? That that's been studied. But those studies that I was talking about earlier, the epidemiological studies they only looked at one vaccine, MMR, and one ingredient, thimerosal. The none of the vaccines that are are administered to children during the first 6 months of life have ever been studied for autism. In fact, the Institute of Medicine said that they looked at this issue, you know, has it been debunked and they and they said no, these studies have never been done on the vaccines that are the most likely culprit, which is you know, DTaP HepB and pneumococcal the the vaccines given in the first 6 months, none of them They said the only one that has ever been studied is DTaP. And which is diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis. And they said that the one study that was done showed that yeah, there was a link with autism, but we're not going to count that study because it was based on the VAERS system and which is CDC's only surveillance system. And they said that that system is too unreliable. So, they what they were saying the Institute of Medicine which is part of the National Academy of Sciences said that the only system that CDC has to study vaccine injury is so bad that any study done done on it we're not going to count. I'll tell you something else. David Kessler who is a very famous surgeon general who you remember and many many many other people have said the VAERS system does not work. And you need a new system. So, in 2010 CDC designed a new system and it was a machine counting system. The problem with VAERS with the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System is that it's voluntary. Yes. And so, the doctor has to if he sees a vaccine injury he's required to report it to VAERS, but there's no penalty if he does. It takes him a half an hour to fill out the paperwork. So, there's a big incentive for him not to do it. There's another incentive though. He doesn't know if something is vaccine injury. If you get if you get a vaccine and then 4 months and 4 years later you come in with a food allergy how do you know will any doctor in the world say that's a vaccine injury? Or seizure disorders. And the other thing is so, they don't know you know, what to look for. They've never been taught that at medical school. There's no course on vaccine injury in medical school in any medical school in this country. And then the other thing is he has a big emotional incentive because he told that mom to give that child that vaccine. And if the child has a seizure 3 weeks later and she comes back and and she says I think it might be the vaccine. A lot of doctors will say no, that's normal for that age and they're not going to call that in to VAERS. So, CDC designed a machine counting system that would do essentially a cluster analysis. They would look at the vaccine and then they would look at clusters of injuries that were unique or anomalous to that vaccine. And it was a very accurate system according to the you know, the group that designed it. It was a team led by a guy called Lazarus. And CDC paid for the whole thing millions of dollars and it was a long-term study and they looked at one HMO which was Harvard Pilgrim up in Massachusetts. And they did on they did this this machine counting system for Harvard Pilgrim. And then they compared what the machine counting system had gotten you know, had yielded and collected in terms of vaccine injuries. They compared that to what VAERS had collected during the same period at Harvard Pilgrim. And they said that VAERS was capturing fewer than 1% of vaccine injuries. And they had a system now that would capture over 95%. And they were very proud and they brought it to CDC and said our system works. Here's the data. And the data showed injuries in about 2.7% of of vaccines given Of all vaccines? Yeah, all vaccines about 2.7%. Wow. Which I think is something like one out of every 37 vaccines you get um there's an injury. And um CDC saw that and said we're not going to use the system. And they shelved it in 2010 and they've continued to use VAERS now for you know, 22 years when they know that it doesn't work. When they knew it was designed to fail. We're going to absolutely change VAERS and we're going to make it we're we're going to create either in within VAERS or um supplementary to VAERS a system that actually works. And you know, that right now even that system is antiquated because we have access to AI. And one of the you know, we are creating here at HHS an AI revolution. We've been able to attract the the top people from Silicon Valley. People have walked away from billion-dollar businesses and they don't want prestige, they don't want position, they don't want power, they want to change. They want to make the system work. And we're we're going to we are at the cutting edge of of AI. We're implementing it in all of our departments at FDA. We're we're accelerating drug approvals so that you don't need to use primates or even animal models. You can you know, you can do the drug approvals very very quickly with AI. And we're also implementing it at CMS to detect waste, abuse, and fraud which is it's extraordinary at that. But we're also going to you know, use it on the at CDC and and throughout our system to look at the mega data that we have and be able to make really good decisions about interventions. For example if you look at the population as a whole and say okay, we're using three different diabetes drugs or five different statin drugs or all these SSRIs and others you can then look drug by drug and you can tell on the population whether it's working or not and which one is giving you the best bang for the buck and which one has the most side effects. We have a potential now to use AI in ways that are going to revolutionize medicine. You've probably heard about Eight Sleep. Lots of people are talking about it. It is a company with one mission, improving your sleep and it's changing the way people do that, the way they get a good night's rest. We just got word that their team is launching a new product. It's called the Pod 5. It's an original and innovative mattress cover plus a blanket that uses precision temperature control to regulate your body's sleep cycles and give you the perfect sleep which really really matters. It can range all the way from 55° to 110°, meaning that you're covered no matter what. It's like electric blanket to the next level, but also a cooling blanket. So, it makes you sleep better. Temperature is a massive effect on the way you sleep. By the way, it also detects snoring. And then it adjusts your bed position to reduce or completely stop it. So, there are a lot of ladies in America who are going to be grateful for this product. Everybody who works here will tell you because they all use it that there's no better way to be alert, productive, and happy than by sleeping well and Eight Sleep really does help. Visit eightsleep.com/tucker or use the code Tucker to get 350 bucks off your Pod 5 Ultra. If you don't like it, you return it within a month. That won't happen. We think you'll love it, but you can if you want. eightsleep.com/tucker. What What about all the people who are injured by the COVID vax? There are a lot of them. I know a lot of them. Um some died, some were permanently disabled. Nobody seems to care. You never hear about them and they don't seem to be getting any help. What will that change? Yeah, that's going to change. I mean as I said, the big impediment is the 1986 Vaccine Act. Yes. And um so, it it's complicated about how we fix this, you know, so that we can get compensation to those people. We just brought a guy in this week who's going to be um revolutionizing the the vaccine injury compensation program. Which is a program that you know, when when Congress or when Congress passed the Vaccine Act and gave immunity from liability to vaccine companies it recognized that that vaccines were in the word of the in in the in the description the characterization of the American Academy of Pediatrics were unavoidably unsafe and some people like for every medicine some people are going to be injured and killed. And so, it set up a program that's in the federal government called the vaccine courts and they have a trust fund. The trust fund is endowed by a 75% surcharge on every vaccine. And that program is supposed to there's supposed to be a vaccine court that's supposed to be generous and fast and and give the tie to the runner. In other words, if there's doubts about you know, whether somebody's injury came from vaccine or not, you're going to assume they got it and and compensate them. And it's paid out over $5 billion now to about 12,000 people. And we're looking at ways to enlarge that program so that COVID vaccine injured people can be compensated. And we're changing the program so that you know, we're we're looking at ways to enlarge the statute of limitations only 3 years. A lot of people don't discover their injuries after that. Um and the there's no discovery in that program. There's no rules of evidence. The program has devolved into lawyers from the justice you're not suing the vaccine company. You're you're petitioning the my agency and it's represented traditionally by the Department of Justice. And the lawyers in the Department of Justice, the leaders of it were corrupt and they were they saw their job as protecting the trust fund rather than taking care of people who made this national sacrifice. And we're going to change all that and I've brought in team this week that is starting to work on that this week. So, you know, that's one of the things we're doing but we're looking at everything. What's the status of the COVID vax now? Who gets it? What are the recommendations? And why? Um the recommendations now are um children under 18 are not recommended to get the vaccine but they can get it if they want. You know, it's through a a joint consultation with their physician. So, it's available to them. There is a and you know, there's there's a new version of the COVID vaccine that just came out. That was approved by FDA and that vaccine is going to actually do real clinical trials. So, and it's being given to people who are 65 years older or have, you know, profound comorbidities. But the agreement with the company is that everybody who takes it will be part of the clinical trials. So, we'll actually get some real data and as you know, there was just data chaos with the other vaccine. In fact, you know, that the Pfizer vaccine when it came out it it should it it had a higher all cause mortality. So, more people died in the placebo group. I mean, more people died in the vaccine group than in the placebo group. And 20,000 people who got the vaccine, 20,000 who didn't and after 6 months they looked at it and there was 23% more deaths in the vaccine and group from all causes than in the placebo group and the the efficacy was kind of dubious because Well, yeah. There was only two people who died from COVID in the placebo group. And there was one person who died from COVID in the vaccine group and that's the whole data set they were were looking at and so they said you remember they were saying the vaccine is 100% effective. Well, that's why they were saying it because there was there was two two is 100% of one, right? 100% larger than one. So, that but that's what they had what they were telling the American people it's 100% effective and that when people heard that they thought if you get the vaccine you can't get COVID which of course now we realize now everybody realizes was wrong. Cuz everybody got COVID whether they got the vaccine or not. And you know, what they really should have been telling people is that in order to prevent one death from COVID you had to give 19,999 vaccines. If any of those vaccines were killing people, you would cancel out the effect of, you know, the beneficial effect. think the COVID I mean, net net as we say in business just kidding. Do you think overall the COVID vax killed more than it saved? My opinion about that is irrelevant. We're going to try to do is make that science available so the public can look at the science. Yeah. And I would not say one way or the other and the truth is I don't know and the reason I don't know is because um the studies that were done by my agency were substandard and they were not designed to answer that question and there's been a lot of obfuscation about about covering up as you know, that's surprising any kind of uh uh discussion of vaccine injuries. I mean, Mark Zuckerberg publicly said that he was ordered by the White House to suppress anybody on his platform on Facebook or Instagram who mentioned vaccine injuries. Oh, he was ordered by the Biden administration to and he said, you know, I he said I was stunned. I was being ordered by the federal government to deny facts. And anybody can look him up on YouTube saying that. So, and we know that too because I sued the Biden administration and we got all these discovery documents that showed that he was 37 hours after he took the oath of office swearing to uphold the Constitution he opened up a a group in the White House who were whose job it was to suppress any dissent about, you know, this government policy. And I was the first person that they went after. 37 hours after he took that oath, they were telling Facebook to take me off of Instagram which Facebook did. I had almost a million followers and there was no vaccine misinformation on there. I asked Facebook again and again, show me one fact I got wrong. Everything I put on there that, you know, was vaccine related was cited in source to government databases or to peer-reviewed publications. And but they were, you know, it was not it wasn't misinformation. The word In fact, they had to invent a new word which is because Facebook was saying to the White House, this isn't misinformation. It's actually true and the White House said well, it's misinformation. Malinformation, this is an Orwellian kind of construct and you know, malinformation is information that is factually true but it is nevertheless inconvenient for for the government. And they were, you know, they just said all the people who are now running this agency were censored. J. Bhattacharya was censored. Marty Makary was censored. Dr. Oz was censored. Vinay Prasad was censored. We were all sent I was censored. I remember well. What's what's the status of the COVID vax pregnant women? The recommendation has been removed now for pregnant women. Are you satisfied that mRNA technology safe for people? I'm not satisfied. Now, again, you know, my opinion about that is irrelevant but we will be doing those studies and I would say there's a lot of skepticism in this agency about mRNA vaccines. Yeah. You know, about mRNA technology, about the status of it now. About whether it's safe and we do not you know, the safety studies have simply have not been done but there's enough anecdotal reports of people um getting profound injuries that may or may not be associated with it and we're going to answer those questions. What happened with the vaccine board? I keep reading you fired all these eminent scientists on the vaccine board. Yeah, I fired all these what? All all these important highly credentialed scientists. Yeah. Well, we fired that board because they were it was utterly it was just an instrument. It was a sock puppet for the industry that it was supposed to regulate. So, um you know, they in fact, you know, and this was a long time coming, Tucker. In 2002 the government oversight committee in the United States Congress held hearings about that board which is called AIDS advisory committee on immunization practices. And they said that 97% of the people on that board had undisclosed conflicts. Many of them had disclosed conflicts as well. They said that Congress said that it gave an example. It said the rotavirus vaccine was approved by that board. And there were five members of that board at that time and four of them had direct financial interests in the rotavirus vaccine. They were working for the companies that made the vaccine or they were receiving grants to do clinical trials on that vaccine. They all had overwhelming financial interests. One of the people on that board was a guy called Paul Offit and who is one of the big voices for vaccines and they CNN goes to him all the time when it wants to know about vaccines. He voted to add the rotavirus vaccine to the schedule when he had a rotavirus vaccine in development. Because it's now on the schedule, his developing vaccine is virtually guaranteed to get on the schedule. It's a competitive product, but once you say rotavirus vaccine has to be vaccinated for his vaccine is now guaranteed to get on the schedule. The one they voted on that he voted on within a year it had to be withdrawn because it was causing this really disastrous disease in kids that is often lethal called intussusception that is agonizingly painful when you're intestines kind of tie up against each other. It kills children, you know, on on occasion. That vaccine was pulled the following year and his vaccine then replaced it. And he was still on the committee. He didn't vote on that, but he was still on the committee. But he voted to make rotavirus vaccine mandatory for the schedule. And he he uh he then he and his business partners um Stanley Plotkin and you know, a couple of other people sold that vaccine and to Merck for $186 million. He told Newsweek that he won the lottery. Oh, you know, it's been said of him that he voted himself rich. So that and that kind of conflict was typical on that committee, but the most Did Did Did people know this was going on? That That's such an obvious It You know, the the Office of Inspector General in this department I investigated and they said this is a disaster, you got to change it. Congress investigated and said you got to change it and they did nothing. That's the most most sort of glaring example of medical malpractice by this by the group is that they approved all these vaccines. We went from 11, remember, to 69 to 92. 11 vaccines in '86 and not one of them had except for COVID. COVID's the only one that had a pre-licensing safety trial that involved a placebo. A true placebo. And so all of those other vaccines were ushered in without safety studies. And that means nobody understands the risk profile of those products. How How can you do that? That's they did it. It's corruption. And it's, you know, it's because of agency capture. It's because the companies that were making these products had if you can get your vaccine on the schedule it's it's a generally typically about a billion dollars a year for your company. Because you now have a trapped market. With no downside. No You've got an immunity First of all, the federal government oftentimes actually designs the vaccines. And NIH would design it. It would hand it over to the pharmaceutical company. The pharmaceutical company then runs it through ACIP. It runs it first through FDA, then through ACIP and gets it recommended. If you can get that recommendation, you now got a billion dollars in in at least revenues by the end of the year. Every year forever. So um So there was, you know, there was a gold rush to add new vaccines to the schedule. And this And ACIP never turned away a single vaccine. Every one that was that came to them, they, you know, recommended. And a lot of these vaccines are for diseases that are not even casually contagious. You know, how you you know, I mean you know, they recommended the hepatitis B vaccine um for for babies when they're an hour old. The first day of life they get that and you know, hepatitis B, if your mother's got it, you you should get it. And you can you know, you can pass through maternal transmission. But every mother that goes to the hospital in this country is tested for it. So we know which ones, you know, are vulnerable, which aren't. Oh, but the mass vaccination of the entire population including well children, this is a disease that you get through sexual transmission or you get it from sharing needles and particularly it was prevalent among promiscuous gay men. And but a one-day-old baby had the the risk to a one-day-old baby was one in 7 million. Very few of whom were promiscuous. Very few of them are, you know, involved in prostitution or drug addiction. So, you know, but it was a financial they were all financial drivers. So and a lot of the diseases um that they target are not diseases the vaccine itself does not prevent transmission. And so, you know, the justification for having it mandated is is very ephemeral. And you know, these are all things that we need to look at. We want to protect public health, but you know, that means protecting against chronic disease too. And you know, these vaccines have There's nobody who will contest that they cause that they can cause chronic disease, chronic injuries that last a lifetime. So one of the reasons that the system has become so corrupt, I think it's fair to say, is Anthony Fauci, one of the longest-serving federal employees who was the subject of one of the best-selling books of a couple years ago which you wrote, The Real Anthony Fauci, amazing book. And all this information about him was exposed to the world and he gets some sinecure at Georgetown and still has Secret Service protection. He seems to be thriving. He doesn't have Secret Service protection. Any longer? No, President Trump uh took that away from him, but Good. um he uh he you know, he is he got immunity. Uh why did he need immunity? You know, why did he need a pardon in advance? I'm What What do you think the answer is? I you know, I would be speculating, but I think he I think they're um I think he was vulnerable. I think he had a lot of liability on creating coronavirus. You know, he was funding precisely that research at the Wuhan lab. Yeah. And he was giving them the technology. He was giving them uh you know, he gave them not only the technology, the precise technology for developing that pathogen. And published about it, by the way. And you know, they the publications credited NIH for the for the for the uh for the financing the studies, but he also gave them it one of his fundees, Ralph Baric from the University of North Carolina developed a technique called the seamless ligation technique which is a technique for hiding the laboratory origins of a of a virus of a manipulated virus. So that normally if there's a virus manipulated, you can look at it, you know, the science researchers can look at it. They can look at the DNA sequences. And they can say this thing was created in a lab. Uh uh Ralph Baric had developed a technique that he called the no-see-um technique and its technical name was seamless ligation. And it was a way of hiding evidence of human tampering. Uh what is the public health rationale? You would If you were interested in public health, you would want to be doing the inverse of that. You would want to be pinning red flags all through it and say this was created by people. That's what you would do if you were creating viruses for biological warfare. Right, that's right. And but And that's another question is why would he give it to the Chinese? I mean, that was a military lab was run by the military. It's hard to even understand that. What do you What would be the rationale for doing that? I, you know, I I try not to look in other people's heads. I try like in the Fauci book, I never look in and and speculate about what his motives are. I just say this is what he did. But I do think that there's this among a lot of the people who were doing that kind of research, the gain-of-function research their big career, economic, and professional incentives to break ground, to break new ground and say, you know, I just uh one of his um one of his fundees created a avian flu virus which can be very deadly to humans if you can make it to human-to-human transition. Uh um uh transmission. And he developed one that could jump to mammals. Why would you do that? You know, you just you're inviting a catastrophe. And And they published it and bragged about it. And I think there's this kind of um this kind of I don't know whether I would call it a god complex or something where, you know, some of the people in that field seem to have um this uh this kind of gets some kind of sense of omnipotence or something from, you know, developing something that can kill all of humanity. Yes. But I don't know. That's That issue is speculation. That sounds right to me. Um, so it sounds like Fauci is beyond the reach of the law at this point. Uh, yeah. There I I think generally unless there was a truth commission, you know, which they did in, as you know, in South Africa. They did it in Central America after the you know, the 1980s wars there. And And they were very, very helpful to those societies. And, you know, I think we should probably do something like that now. And in those cases, what happens is you have a commission that hears testimony on what exactly happened. Anybody who comes and volunteers to testify truthfully is then given immunity from prosecution. And but so that at least the public knows who did what. Yes. And people who are called and don't take that deal and perjure themselves, they then can be uh, they can be uh, prosecuted criminally. We don't have a good track record of um, revealing the truth in a timely manner. Uh, as you know better than anybody, the president on January 23rd issued an executive order ordering the full declassification of files related to the murder of your uncle, father, and Martin Luther King. And um, you know, we we haven't seen all of them yet. Where Where is that process? Have your conclusions about any or all of those three murders changed on the base of new documents? No, no, nothing changed. I mean, you know, as you know, there was already millions of pages of documents out there. And I think you know, in um, in terms of my um, my uncle's death, I think that uh, you know, that that ship has sailed. I I I don't think anybody who actually is willing to read the evidence now will question the fact that my uncle was killed by a conspiracy. And that um, in fact, Congress in 1973, when the Church Committee looked at it, I think it was '73, the Church of five, yeah. What? '75? Yeah. Church Committee, they said it was conspiracy. That was the conclusion of the congressional committee. So, the Warren Committee, that was uh, run by Allen Dulles, who was, you know, uh, had a lot of reasons to lie and did lie throughout. And in fact, he said at one of the sections, "Yeah, if we were involved in this, we would lie." Oh, he said that. Uh, and he and he got himself put on that committee. And he was really should have been called the Dulles Commission or you know, he said it's a single shooter. Uh, um, but um, but then, you know, in '75, that was '64, so 11 years later, Congress investigated and they had a much larger purview and much more data at that time. And they said it was a conspiracy. And but since then, there's been million documents released. And And probably 30 people who were involved and made confessions, including many of the prime actors. And so, I don't think there's any doubt um, that my uncle was killed by a conspiracy. My father is um, is uh, more difficult because we just don't have the data. It's never been investigated. And you know, I've been trying to get an investigated. There, you know, one of the women who played potentially a key role in it was a woman a woman called the woman woman in the polka dot dress, who was who was who appeared to be Sirhan's handler. And that woman is living openly in Tarzana, California. Nobody's ever talked to her. And um, she, you know, people should this should be investigated and people should talk to her and, you know, really uh, investigate the crime. Um, so um, and And as you know, and I think I I've talked to you about this before, that my father, you know, Sirhan um, was there. There were 77 eyewitnesses in the kitchen at the time. And he took uh, two shots at my father. One of those shots hit Paul Schrade in the head. And Paul Schrade survived. And the other one hit the doorjamb behind my father. And it was later removed by the LAPD. And then Sirhan was grabbed by six people, including Rafer Johnson, Rosie Grier, uh, Karl Uecker, who was the uh, the the the manager of the Ambassador Hotel. And they they turned his gun they bent him over the steam table and they turned his gun away from my father. But it had six more shots in it. And he emptied the chamber. So, they Sirhan or Rafer told me that Sirhan had superhuman strength. Sirhan is a little tiny guy. You know, and I've met him and and talked to him. And but he's a very He's kind of a frail I mean, he's frail now cuz he's older, but even then, he was just a little tiny guy, you know, and was not particularly strong. And Rafer said he had superhuman strength and he could not pry the gun from his hand. And he fired six more shots. All those shots hit people. We know what happened every every shot has gone. And my father was shot by four shots from behind. One of them passed harmlessly through the shoulder pad of his This is what Noguchi's autopsy said. Uh, through the shoulder pad of his suit. And all the others were contact shots, meaning the the barrel of the gun was either touching his body or less than 3 in from his body. The the last shot that killed him was behind his left ear. And that shot he Noguchi says was from 1 to 3 in from him. And he Sirhan was never behind him. Sirhan was always in front of him. And they the guy who almost certainly took those shots was a security guard who had just gotten his job um, within a week before. And he was the he was a um, my father fell down and my father must have known that he was being shot because the last thing he did it was he turned and he tore off the clip-on tie from Caesar. Caesar had him by the left hand and had steered him into the ambush. And he had his right hand he had his right hand his gun in his right hand. And he admitted that he was seen, you know, my father fell on him. And he pushed my father off him and he had his gun drawn. And he was the gun was not taken away from him the by the LAPD, which did a terrible job and you know, not only terrible, but a malevolent job because they destroyed 2,500 photographs that were taken that night before the trial. So, there were photographs, you know, 2,500 photographs in that kitchen and the and the ballroom. And the LAPD collected them and destroyed them all. And you have to ask, why would they do that? And a lot of the other evidence was also destroyed, including the doorjambs. And they, you know, we have pictures of them. Um, but we we don't have the real thing. And then they never confiscated the gun from uh, from um, Caesar. Caesar said that, "Oh, I had the gun out cuz I was going to shoot it." Sirhan. And so, you know, that should be questioned. Um, He documents that I'll just say this. Thane Caesar was working at that time. His His job was working for um, Lockheed plant in Los Angeles. And he had a uh, top security classification at that end. Lisa Pease, who's one of the researchers and authors who's written extensively about this, went through um, his background. And the only employer that he ever listed officially in his background was the CIA. So, there are a lot of questions and we don't know the answers to them. You know, I was in contact with Caesar in uh, 2019, 2020 negotiating with him. He had moved to the Philippines. And I was trying to see if he would talk to me. I was going to go over there and talk to him. And he said, "I'll do it for $5,000." And then when I got close, he said, "$10,000." And he said, "$20,000." Then he said, "$30,000." And uh, you know, and then he just said, "I'm not going to meet with you." Oh, you know, he and then he since he since passed away. So, you know, again, we don't know, but there are enough kind of flags on it that you would, you know, that if you were actually wanted to know answers, you would be asking questions. And those Are Are confident that I know there's been some frustration um about getting all the documents relevant to those three murders, those three assassinations? Are you confident that all of it will come out by the end of this trial? I'm confident that President Trump will release anything that he has access to. Uh I'm but you know, I don't expect anything groundbreaking to come from those documents because uh first of all, with my uncle, we've already got everything. There may be little things like you know, the calendar for uh for Bill Harvey, who was one of the people who was in the CIA who is almost certainly involved and uh and other things like that that would be I and then more evidence. I mean, that you know, the evidence that came out a last tranche. The New York Times had to finally admit that that Lee Harvey Oswald was a CIA asset, which they've been denying for 50 years. They finally admitted, "Yeah, he was working for the CIA." And so you know, there may be some more validation of what, you know, he was doing and how he was recruited, etc. Uh but I don't think it's going to be anything groundbreaking. I don't think you need anything groundbreaking. I think Listen, I was a prosecutor. If I had to try the case right now, you know, I guess a lot of a number of the people are dead. I believe I can win in front of a jury with it just with the evidence that we got. Yep. Right. With my dad, um you know, it was never investigated and then that was deliberate. So, last question. You left what You were born here. Obviously, your father's attorney general of the United States when you were young. He's murdered 1968. You leave Washington. You haven't lived here since. You just came back as secretary. What's it like? What do you notice? What do you think of it? Well, you know, I didn't expect to love living in Washington. I when I was a kid, I couldn't wait to get out of Washington. Um but you know, I'm my my wife is happy here. We found kind of a community in a neighborhood and um the I love the people that I'm working with at this agency. It's the most gifted, committed group of people that I've ever worked with and they're, you know, immensely talented and committed. And then I really like the cabinet. I think that you know, President Trump's cabinet has put together extraordinary cabinet. Um the I'm friends with a number of the people I never thought I'd be friends with, but they're, you know, How do you like I I mean, I really I really get along with Pam Bondi and and, you know, Cheryl loves Pam and and her husband John and then I really and Marco Rubio. Marco Rubio is the funniest guy in the cabinet. He He says things that make people belly laugh every cabinet meeting and he's you know, I I I always I never was very let's say approving of of Marco because he was kind of a neocon war hawk, but now he's had this incredible transformation and uh you know, I think he um you know, I I think he's very aligned with me on most issues on Ukraine, you know, and just the fact that we should not be the policeman of the world anymore, that we've got that you know, we've got to withdraw from that um from that role, but I get I really I you know, Scott Turner is my friend. Sean, you know, and all of them I get along Linda McMahon. I get along You know, one of the things with President Trump is that he really knows how to pick talent and he and I'm not talking about me. About the other people on there. When you sit in those cabinet meetings, and every one of those people is incredibly erudite and just fluid in the way that they speak and very, very comfortable and they're One of the things that President Trump did when he picked the cabinet and I was on the transition team, so I watched what he was doing. For every of one of the positions that he picked, he wanted to see three clips of them performing on TV. And so you know, he's very conscious of the way of of that these people are going to be out selling his program to the public. And that he needs people who are, you know, good sales people, not only good administrators, but that they're that they can communicate a message to the public. And I think this time around is I you know, everybody tells me it's completely different than the last administration because he he's you know, he had so much time to grow and learn and to, you know, figure out how to do this right and uh we need a revolution in this country. We've got you know, we've got a 34 trillion dollar debt. We've got We're spending two trillion more a year than we got. We're borrowing it from China and from Saudi Arabia and Japan we have a 1.2 trillion dollar trade deficit and you know, a lot of people are businesses are hurting because of the tariffs, but over the I you know, I admire President Trump because he is looking over the horizon and he's looking that, you know, we this is unsustainable. And we need to do something radically different and um you know, you need to particularly at the beginning when you have momentum and when you have your most power, you need to do a lot of things that are going to be very, very disruptive to many, many people. Uh he still has tremendous support from the American public and I feel it every day. I walk down a block and, you know, people are ecstatic. They, you know, come to me and they say, "Thank you for what you're doing." And they they feel good about this country again. You know, I'll just tell you another anecdote if we have if we have time. My my Uncle Ted Kennedy really didn't personally did not like Jimmy Carter. He On every level He famously didn't like his politics. He didn't like him personally and, you know, Carter did a lot of things that my uncle was just I mean, one of them was he banned liquor from the White House, which you know, my uncle didn't like and then he and he put, you know, the what was it? Fresca or something on tap at the White House. And so there were just little things like that that you're and wait a minute, but he also when Carter came in, he talked about the malaise in this country and how bad everything was and um and it's like what Starmer did in England. You know, to tell and and that people take those messages from their from their leader and um and my uncle and then Reagan came in and Reagan was dismantling everything Teddy had done over, you know, 40-year career. And but Teddy really liked him. And I asked him one time, "Why, you know, this guy is destroying everything you believe in?" And Teddy said, "I like him because he makes people feel good about being American." Yeah. And he's able to inspire hope for the country again. And you know, President Trump does that. Whatever you think about him, there are there's a new feeling in America now that, you know, we're we're back on the upswing again. You know, as he says, the country is hot again, you know. And all around the world people see that, too. And you know, a lot of things have surprised me about the president because I, you know, bought into this fact that he was this one-dimensional character, that he was kind of a bombastic narcissist and all this and you know, and part of it is hearing it all the time on TV, but also, you know, the the way that he conducts himself sometimes validates those. If you have that narrative, you can find things in what he does that validate that narrative. Uh but what I've been surprised in getting to know him is what a kind of deep, multi-dimensional, and thoughtful character he is and and how well I also thought he doesn't read and, you know, he he's not interested in anything. He's immensely curious, inquisitive, and um immensely knowledgeable. He's encyclopedic in certain areas that you wouldn't expect like music and, you know, he gets very emotional about music and and and he has and he knows the whole story behind every song. Pavarotti and James Brown. Yeah, he cries when he hears Pavarotti. He said he said to me one night when we were at Mar-a-Lago with the Amarelles, he said he said, "Amarelles, you understand this cuz she loves music, too." And he said, "But most of the people here, they don't understand it. They don't get it." And and in terms of sports, he is uh he just he's an encyclopedia. He knows everything. And and, you know, on Wall Street, he knows how everybody made their money and and they the stories and he's, you know, an incredible raconteur about telling all these stories and then uh and also, the most surprising thing is because I had him pegged as a narcissist. Well, narcissists are incapable of empathy, and he's one of the most empathetic people that I've met. You notice whenever he talks about the Ukraine war, Yes. he always talks about the casualties on both sides. Every time he talks about noticed that. And he does that in every theater. He talks about how human beings are affected by it, you know, whether it's vaccines or Medicaid or Medicare, he's always thinking about how this impacts the little guy. And you know, the Democrats have him pegged as a guy who's sort of sitting, you know, in the cabinet meeting talking about how can we make billionaires richer. He's the opposite of that. He's a genuine populist. And you know, like all of us, we're we're all flawed characters in one way or another, but um I think he's really the uniquely right person for this country right now. Because uh we were in a death spiral, and not only just you know, morale, but also just what you know, the the deficits are, you know, who could ever Would you believe we'd ever have a president in our lifetime who would actually be addressing, you know, the cost of government in a dramatic way? No. And and the trade deficits. How could you ever cure that? It's too entrenched and so many people, you know, making money and uh uh and but mean uh uh uh uh it's all going to hell in a handbasket. And you know, so I think he's doing stuff at great political cost to him that is going to benefit this country 10 years from now and 20 years from now. And you know, I'm really proud to be part of it. Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr., thank you very much. Thank you, Tucker. So, it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics, with the wars we're on the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could whine about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So, we hope that you'll do that.