Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. My friend Joe. What's the good to say, man? Pro. It's good to see you. So I've been saying new stuff because like we've been I knew that you were coming on and I sent you that one that video of the guy who got a trail cam photo of a black Panther. Yep. So is that just a melanistic mountain lion? Like so is that it's a great question. There's never been a melanistic mountain lion. Nobody's ever seen one ever never hit one with a car, never born one captivity. Nothing. Whoa. So mountain lions by definition puma's, you know, whatever you want to call them. There's never been a black one ever. But every year, I mean, I got a buddy in Florida swears blind that he's seen a black mountain lion in his backyard. And yet that photo that you sent me that photo circulates like once every three years. It's bullshit. It's bullshit. It's a real photo, but it's a trail cam photo. Oh, wasn't this one, but that's I think that's the first one. And then there's another one with the cat gets like right up to the ones. Yeah, that one. So that photo is a real, I want to say Jaguar, it's hard to tell, but either Jaguar or black leopard, both of which aren't do become melanistic. Right. And you can tell that because you can see the spots barely like the rosettes. So all these melanistic cats like like jags and leopards and things that do get melanistic, they still have those resets under the black coat. Yeah, so not a mountain lion. Too bad. And now it's such a bummer. One day if somebody finds one, that'll be like a huge thing. So basically funny that we want it to be different because just a mountain lion itself is amazing. I mean, if they were all black and there was like a tan mountain lion, be like somebody saw a tan. Now 100%. It's like whatever is different in rare is what people just are like, I want that one thing. I've always said that about Bigfoot. Yeah, the Bigfoot is kind of interesting, but not as interesting as an Orca. Like 100%. Right. Like we have gorillas that are cooler than Bigfoot's. Well Orca's in particular because they have languages that we can't decipher. Languages specialize diets some kind. I'm sure you know this can't even talk to each other. Right. Yeah. It's unbelievable. Like it's the same as if you or I went to India or Africa. It's like we kind of communicate. We don't eat the same food. No. We look different and yet us and Orca's and Orca. Right. Yeah. And it's super smart and huge brains and don't kill people for some strange reason. Except when they're in captivity. That's right. Yeah. Which is so crazy. I did a thing in Baja, Mexico maybe three years ago where we were just cruising on this little pong at this little fishing boat and we saw these Orca's go by. And now people seem to be doing it a lot. But at the time it was like nobody had really just tried this and this was a transient population, which means they primarily eat seals and sea lions, not the stingray eaters. And so we're like, fuck it, let's just go. And we like ran the boat up ahead and jumped in and the Orca's came up and the bull never came up. So you know the bull has a huge fin like he's the biggest like the dominant protector of the pod, but the cows and their babies came up and the boat like drifted away and me and my buddy Mike and they just circled us like just looking at us with their big eyeballs. And it was me to you from Orca's and they did like two circles around us like what are these things then we're just like, man, boring and kept swimming. They they they must know right. If they're that intelligent and have language and they communicate, they must know that what what a person is, right? I think it is. Oh, dude, I saw the guy that filmed this. This is so crazy. Orca head butts a sunfish. So hard it explodes. Boom. Turns into pieces. So this is a newly documented behavior. Just in the last maybe six months, they've found that Orca's will literally explode fish from impact, whether it's a game or what, but they're they're finding that this is not the first time this is done. They're doing this. They're starting to just explode these fish on impact just because how are they doing that? Like how fast are they going? I do not know the answer to that, but it's impressive. I would have never imagined that that would actually be possible, right? Like how fast can you try? Like what does the starfish look like flat like a stingray? A sunfish. It's like a mola mola. Those ocean sunfish with the big, they're pretty huge. Some of you huge. 600 pounds. I get huge. I literally turned a dust. Dude, I think those are the Orca equivalents of like a red neck that wants to hit a turtle on the road. And they're just like, we're bored. Let's explode. Or those guys that do that have you seen that game? What's on game? But it's I guess whatever it is, an activity where these guys just run at each other full blast. Dude, RNC, R&C, R&N nation. I love that. It's our favorite things. I'm such a huge fan. You love that. I love it. Because I play rugby. So it's rugby boys that are doing it, right? It's like an Oklahoma drill except for rugby guys. And that's a drill that when I was playing rugby, we used to do all the time. Just run at each other. You just run it. It's my favorite, R&C. It's my favorite thing. I watch everybody. Look at these guys. I would have never given it. They both just won unconscious. Look at that. They both won it. Well, that guy's that guy's fine. I've such a fan. But I've seen it where they both get unconscious. I want to bring these guys to the US and see how they stack up against like NFL line backgrounds. Jesus Christ, they both had butted each other. Dude, you love fight sports. What are you talking about? Not a fight sport. This is just retarded. I'm such a fan. Oh, they're so silly. I don't want to do it to be clear. You see that you like that. I know too much about brain damage. And you should too, if you like rugby. I've had too much brain damage to know too much about brain damage. No, I'm just kidding. But how long did you play rugby for? Well, I grew up in Zimbabwe. And so like Southern Africa rugby is life, right? So it's like probably deep south football kind of culture. So I still play, believe it or not. Except now I play very intermittently because one game puts me out for weeks. Have you ever got your brain examined? No, I have not. I get everyone concussion in my life. So I think I'm okay. Oh, that's silly. Because you guarantee you'd have subconcussive trauma. What is subconcussive trauma? Well, you don't go unconscious, but you get rattled. And then you have some brain damage. You're probably right. Yeah. Soccer players get it. Really? Yeah. Soccer players get it. Yeah. Yeah. Chronic traumatic and stuff. Well, it's a full-op of thing. Yeah, that's soccer players get it. I did not know that. I'm heading the ball. So is that, and you know a lot about UFC, is that brain trauma worse than UFC? Type trauma? Well, it's all brain trauma. Yeah. And it's dependent upon many factors. It's dependent upon how many times you've been hit. And also there's a gene variation. It's APOE4, is that what it is? If you have this one particular gene, it makes you more susceptible to CTE for some of the interesting things. So like, because a concussion is when your brain sort of impacts against your skulls, is that right? There's that. And I mean, I think it's also, it's not just that. It's like if you get hit in the neck, you can get a concussion. Also, yeah, also a lot of people don't realize you can get a concussion from getting hit in the body. How does that work? Because rattled. Cause rattled. Yeah. Also another group of people that seem to get CTE are people who ride jet skis. That's wild. So yeah, that's that work. Well, my friend Mark Gordon, he's a doctor who specializes in traumatic brain injuries and treating football players, soldiers. And he's treated some fighters as well. He said that any repeated stress, any banging, anything like that. Head banging. Like if you're a fucking head banging, like you're probably going to get brain damage. No way. Yeah, legitimate brain damage. Like I can't remember what I was doing five seconds ago. Where's my keys? I forget what I'm talking about mid sentence. Did you scare me here? These are all things I enjoy doing. Well, I sure, I enjoy running straight at people for the last. Yeah, I just, like those guys are animals. They're tough guys, no doubt about it. And those Pacific Islanders, like cause those are the guys that are doing it primarily, right? Like they play rugby league and stuff. They're built different. Oh yeah. Like they're so hard. It's insane. You're a little bit too. No, I'm not. David Tuah was a heavyweight boxer back in the day who was like one of the most ferocious guys that ever fought in boxing. And it just just built like like a, your prototypical island warrior guy. Yeah. That's David Tuah. Yeah, I mean, just a tank. You don't want to run it at that guy. I'm telling you what. Yeah. I mean, just a monster. He's knocked people out and you knocked out John Ruiz like famously in the first round. Like something like 30 seconds or something like that was crazy. Different breed man. Crazy left hook. Yeah. That kind of guy. I mean, we've got a bunch of the Mark Hunt, who's a famous kick boxer, who's another guy that built like that. Yeah. Just just wide as a fucking barn. Yeah. There's like no waste. Yeah. It's just like a brick. So I was a rock. Yeah. Yeah. Again, playing rugby. I played rugby against guys like that. And it was the worst. Well, those are the dudes that have the balls to get in a little tiny boat making across the fucking ocean. You know? You know? You know? Kick your ass. You see the super robust survived. Right. So it's like nature just weeding out any possible weakness. Only the strongest human beings made it. Absolute natural selection. Absolutely. Absolutely. I have freaking Americans that we have in North America. Like those are the strongest best guys that came over here. Right. Right. And that's why they're all the most incredible athletes. Yeah. Not at all. But you know what I mean? Yeah. I know what you say. Yeah. I mean, it's also like when you look at like guys from Iceland, the strong men. Yeah. So how many strong men are from Iceland? The organ Vikings were from Iceland. But let's get it. Yeah. Right. It's weird when you think about it. That like nature finds its way. It's the same thing. It's like we think we're so different and above like animals and stuff. It's a natural selection. We just bring the biggest, the best and the strongest into some area whether that's Vikings, colonizing Iceland, or the Simones on their islands or whatever it happens to be. And you're just like, well, here's a superior population because we all the biggest best and strongest have made it and all of the weakest have died off. Isn't that weird like you as a guy who studies wildlife biology? Isn't it weird that we want to think of ourselves as being a different thing? We are clearly not. We're not. We're not even at the top. That's the thing that people never understand. And intellectually we are obviously look what we've built. But like we're not even, we don't even sit at the top of the food chain. But we kind of do because we kill everything else if we want to. Because we are brains. Because we are brains. Yeah. Well, not even our brains really. It's other people's brains that invented guns. It's like us not to do it you and me. True. No, no, that's just interesting. It's like our brains are our evolutionary advantage. It transfers over to people that don't have good genetics. Yeah. Right? Because you could be built like a bag of shit, like a literal bag of shit and you can kill a grizzly bear with a rifle. That's right. Kind of nuts. Yep. It's crazy. He's just sitting there on a ridge with a scope of boom and you kill a 1200 pound Kodiak brown bear. Because all of our biological energy goes into this thing. Instead of being physically big or intimidating or any other thing. We can transfer what we figured out on the other people. Yeah. Which is no other animals ever figured out how to do that. No. Isn't that crazy? Wild. Yeah. It's really wild. Yep. When you think about it, it's like what if you were studying us, if you were coming from another planet and you were studying us, you'd be like, wow, this one animal is fucking weird. Yeah. This one, this one's doing something different. Yeah. Absolutely. But they would still look at us and go, oh, well, they're definitely animals. Like, look at them. Oh, yeah. If you looked at the earth from an earthshot, you'd look at what we've done and be like, this is the top animal, but they're parasitic and colonizing the whole planet and changing things and manipulating things. Whereas all the other animals are just getting by. Yeah. If we found out that they're where we're actual visiting aliens, that there was actual intelligent life from somewhere else visiting us, I think there are a lot of us would probably be like, why didn't you help? Yeah. Why didn't you come along and say, hey, cut the shit. It reminds me of the, I don't know, do you watch South Park ever? Yes. There was an old South Park episode where earth was like a reality show. And so let's see who's getting along this week. The zebra's are fighting with the giraffes and the people are doing this and it's like, it's like, we're just like a reality show for the universe where you just put a bunch of species. We're like a big, big brother situation. Well, we are kind of that for us. Oh, tell me where we are. That's what a reality show is. A reality show for us is the world. Yeah. You know, Lindsey Graham, did he die in a rocket accident? Or did he die? Was he poisoned by Russia? Let's tune in to Twitter and find out. Exactly. Exactly. And it's hilarious. We are locked in on whatever the fuck is happening all over the world all at once. And that's one of the weird things about social media now is that we're constantly being inundated with new things to occupy our attention. You know? We know attention span to watch anything for more than five seconds. But yet at the same time, this is the rise of podcasts. Yeah. Which are long-form. Right. So it's clear that that's not really the case with everybody. There's enough people that are interested in actual fascinating things and have an attention span. It's just like we're all susceptible to the brain rod that comes with just scrolling. It's so hard not like I've tried to make conscious decisions because you know, you can imagine what my Instagram feed looks like. Right. It's animal after animal half of its AI now, whatever. And I still try and make a conscious decision to not look at it. And I find myself just reaching for my phone and doing this. It's just we're wired into it now. Yeah. But dopamine hits crazy. And it's not even really rewarding, which is really terrifying to me because it's not something that's like really feels great. And you barely retain the information. Like even if you watch an educational one where you're like, wow, that was amazing. You barely retain that information because it's such a quick thing until you're onto the next one, at least for me. Yeah, there's a little bit of that in there for sure. But I think I've gotten a pretty good algorithm lately. So lately for whatever reason, my algorithm has been really excellent. It's really dialed in where I'm only getting like really fascinating things. Well, that's a couple of weeks. Yeah. Oh, it's been great. And then every now and then some retarded shit comes on. I just skipped through it real quick. And I'm like, I keep this algorithm going good. Or you text me a bigfoot AI thing. Bigfoot butts are so silly. They're so bad. You actually texted me the bigfoot one. What was the same guy? You said the same guy texted you back. I was like, I don't think so. He's like, this guy raised a baby bigfoot and secrecy for 10 years. So bad. So obvious is like a shitty AI photograph of like a blurry Polaroid photograph. And then you read the comments and there's like 400 people going like, oh my god, I can't believe this happened. And you're like, come on. Oh, dude, Duncan and I back in the day, like in 2012 or 11, whatever it was when I did that sci-fi show, Joe Rogan questions everything. We went and hung out with bigfoot people. We actually went bigfoot hunting. No way. Oh, yeah. We were with them for a couple of days. How was that? What was the Pacific Northwest? It's kind of sad. Yeah. The way I describe it, I was said, here's what you don't find when you go looking for bigfoot, black people. You're more likely to find bigfoot than you are black people looking for bigfoot. It's just such a crazy white eye. Fuckable white guys out in the woods, staring at shadows. Making something out of nothing. Right? Look at that leaf. It must have been here. It's just unfuckable guys. It's really what it is. It's unfortunately that's really what it is. It's not that there's not something to the story because I think there is something to the story. I think it's an old story. And it's only back to Native Americans. Well, not just that. How many we looked this up before? How many different names there are? I think it was more than 50. I'm not going to see this guy. I guess that looks great. This guy was dead big. By the way, you imagine sitting that close to that thing how bad that was smell? Yeah, it's revolting. I mean, the thing's been dead for who knows how long this guy's just hanging out. Yeah, I never take you a picture. How long does that look? Fun fact, this guy was on your mom's house like 12 years ago. Was he? Yeah. What? Is he like a fun guy on Instagram as a dog trainer? That's hilarious. That's a way that Tom found his videos a long time ago and they brought him in to do a podcast with him. No way. I know who this guy is. No way. I don't know. I got in a Bigfoot. He has Bigfoot's body. No. He helped bad that looks. It's so bad, dude. Oh my god. Look at these. Look at this. Look at this. Look at this. I mean, he's, he could be just a full-on fearful troll with it. Oh, he's sowing into it. Look at this. It's a cake. It's going to be like cake. Oh my god. He saw it into it. Look at this. Oh, he found a foot. Oh, yeah. Very real. Very real looking foot. That's real. Also, if you can't trust a guy in over holes with no shirt, who can you trust? By the way, guys, a great shape for his age. He is. Looks ripped. Something lifting up fake Bigfoots all day. It's like they're heavy. I think there was, you mean, obviously we know the gigantic pithacus was real. But we were reading about this the other day that it seems like gigantic pithacus wasn't bipedal. And that there was some dispute as to whether or not it was bipedal. But apparently there's some biologists that are saying, you know, it was most likely walked around like an orangutan. Interesting. Interesting. Interesting. Just, oh, wow. It's like huge orangutan looking thing. No, I've heard of it. I didn't know that it wasn't bipedal though. Yeah. That's fascinating. I think it's under dispute. I think it's been disputed. That's interesting. It's hard to say. They don't have a lot of bones, right? They only have like a few jaw bones and some stuff like all of them. Yeah. Dude, I learned something pretty interesting this last week. I just got back from India, literally flew in here from India. And we were doing some elephant rescues with Ventara, that big Indian wildlife rescue place. This elephant got hit by a car that we went and rescued. So it's leg was all jacked up. Speaking of non bipedal things. So you would think just the elephant would walk with a limp. Well, having that trunk, it's incredible. They use that trunk as a limb. So I was watching this elephant walk. I wish I had photos or video to show you. But I was watching this elephant walk and it wouldn't put weight on its leg that was hit by the car. So it would walk with three legs and its trunk as its fourth appendage. Oh, wow. Which is an amazing thing to see. Because you think of the size of an elephant's cranium and its head and the weight. And in order to move that distribution off of that broken leg, it was using this trunk as a limb. It was just, it was incredible. It was really sad. It was incredible thing to see the way they sort of figured out how to maneuver using that fifth appendage. This episode is brought to you by Zippracooter. Who go that little extra step like your ride share pointing out the best local places to eat goes a long way. If you want people who are going to make a positive impression for your business, use Zippracooter. In fact, try it for free at zippercooder.com slash Rogan. Zippracooter's latest feature lets candidates go above and beyond to tell you why they want the role. Then it shows you the most interested qualified candidates first. Try Zippracooter and meet great candidates who'll go the extra step for your job for out of five employers who post on Zippracooter get a quality candidate within the first day. Try it for free today at zippercooder.com slash Rogan. That's zipper crooner dot com slash Rogan. Zippracooter. Meet your match on Zippracooter. Is the elephant allow people to set its leg? So in India was a broken. I don't know. It went. So we went to basically, so I work with this place called Ventara, which is the world's largest wildlife rescue and rehab center. It's unreal dude. It would blow your mind. I mean, like on a whole nother level, all privately funded by a not in Bonnie, this Indian billionaire guy, the guy who had the huge wedding. If you remember that, it just debrecing it is wedding and stuff. He's a great dude. Him and I are buddies now. So he's funded this world's largest wildlife rescue and rehab. It like it makes a San Diego zoo look like a roadside attraction. I mean, it's like crazy big. And so he does all these rescues, right? So the reason I'm telling you all this is they go and respond to these rescues and then take it into this gigantic world's biggest animal hospital that they've built. So we went and rescued the elephant and now it's probably by today back in Ventara. Yeah, here you go. And they'll be treating it. So this is long toy. This is the other one. He's this one was born with, um, splay legs and then went into logging. And so all the weight and stuff from logging. See the splay legs on the front there. Ouch. Yeah. So anyway, I was just incredible. But the short answer is they do let people treat them because these animals are raised by in captivity by what's called mohoots, which are elephant riders. And it's a really, the whole dynamics really fascinating. So you grow up with an elephant as a mohoot in Indian culture. And then there's usually one or two mohoots that spend their life dedicated to the elephant. And all they do is ride them, log them, they use them as tools, but they still love them very much. It's just they use them as a tool. Elephants obviously aren't made to do that. So they break down over time. So that's why it's legs are like that. It's from carrying the amount of weight that comes from logging. So that one would have been born with a deformity. Okay. But then yours of compounded weight and everything else makes its legs like that. Oh, it's crazy. And then yeah. And we take the elephants in, plus the mohoots and take them all back to ventar, give them a hoots a full time job. These guys are sleeping on mattresses on the floor, right? And then take them back and it's a whole thing reform everybody. It's amazing thing. Yeah. Oh, wow. So when they treat the elephants, like what do they do for an elephant that has a broken leg? So most of it's just pain management, right? Because you can only get so far. So the one that got hit by. Can you set them in a cast? Not really. No, you know, it depends. I guess it depends on the fracture. I'm not of that. It depends on the fracture. But what they do is they have, and Jamie, you might be able to see it. It's incredible. They have this giant jacuzzi. Like imagine a jacuzzi the size of your building here for elephants and it's their hydrotherapy pool. So these animals that have terrible arthritis or fucked up feed or bad legs like that, they just spend all day in the water because then there's no weight on their limbs. Oh, wow. Which is really cool. Do they have medication like anti-inflammatory for elephants? Everything, man, this place uses unbelievable Eastern medicine, Western medicine, this crazy hospital. There's a lot of guys talking on their Instagram unfortunately. But yeah. This was kind of a prosthetic leg. Yeah. Look at that. Isn't that crazy? So they do these amazing. It's fine. Oh, fuck, man. But yeah, it's a really, really cool place. And we got to do some fun stuff. So I was really privileged to be part of those elephant rescue. He's really emotional when you see an animal like an elephant that has so much like intelligence, like you in the eye and be like, I'm in so much pain. And then you like start to relieve it. It's cool. I went to visit this place in Thailand a few years back that has wild elephants. So they're wild elephants, but you can ride them and that you feed them. So you have, you'll make friends with them first. Yeah. Like if you feed them sugar cane and you hang out with them, you pet them. And then they let you ride them. And they put their arm out like this like good. Yeah, to walk up to step on. Go ahead. So let's, you know, like, okay. Yeah. I think part I felt wrong to me is just like, it's a thing that like all the tourists did by my family wanted to do this. I said, okay. Yeah. But it's okay. But the animals themselves are so sweet. Yeah. Like when you're hanging around with them, they're like, they're so, one of them, I got a video of it on my Instagram. She was just like eating a log. Yeah. She kept chewing on this log. And I'm just hanging out with her. And I made this like video with me. I'm like, she's eating a log. I don't know why she's eating this log. But she's really sweet. It wasn't, it was, it was a weird relationship that they have. And then you wash them at the end of the trip. Yeah. So you get them in the, they get in this pool, this big pond. Yep. And you could just wash them and hang out with them. And they'll grow like it. And then you do that. So it feels good to them. And I thank you. And they're, well, no, thank you for carrying me. There's good and bad. It's like, I mean, elephants have been used through history, right, in war, in logging, in circles, everything else. But now I would say in the last 20 years, we're finally sort of waking up to, hey, a lifetime of being on an elephants back, like you can see the deformities, you can see the bed sores, you can see the hip display or hip issues. Oh, from carrying people? Yeah, they're just, they're just not designed for it. You know, they look, you think they are when you look at them and you're like, what could it, you know, we're like an ant on that thing's back. But it, it's pretty hard on them. And the hardest part is actually not you or I or anybody riding them. It's walking on concrete. Oh, because elephants have the soft padded feet. They're not designed for rock hard ground. So the impact of walking on pavement is actually that compounding with weight, added weight. That's what's actually so bad for it. About the heat of the asphalt too. And they're dogs like dogs hate the heat of asphalt. It's horrible for them. And the weirdest thing about an elephant foot, if you look at its anatomy, they're one of the few animals that walk on their toes. So they don't have toes splitting out like we do. They walk on top of their toes. So that, you know, imagine that compounding on heat plus weight. Close up, I guess. It's weird. It's a weird animal. Yeah. Isn't it cool that they thought that that's what a cyclops was when they found the soils? Yeah, because the skull. Yeah, that's why they thought cyclops was a real thing. Dude, have you ever seen, have you ever been to the explorers club in New York City? No. That's worth a visit. Yeah. You would love that they have the champ a lot tiger there, like the most famous man eating tigers. Oh, that's the one that killed like 476 people. Yep. Is that what the number? I actually have it on my YouTube and I don't remember the name. It's more than 400 people. It's crazy. And then Jim Corbett went and shot it. Yeah. And she almost named my son Corbett because I love that story so much. But, but they have the only four-tusk elephant at the explorers club in New York City. Whoa. I'm sure Jamie, you can find a picture of the skull. Nobody knows why. Total anomaly. Nobody's ever seen it. Nobody knows why. I think it's the only one in existence. And it literally has four tusks coming out of it. Just a weird genetic thing. I think so. I like it one. I think sometimes with elk, they'll get an injury when they're young and then they'll get weird deformities of their, their antlers. But is that different because they shed their antlers every year so they grow back in weird ways? I don't know. I don't know. I think it's an injury to the skull. Yeah. So an injury to like the area where the antler is, like sometimes they just have one sword. Yeah. Like there was a ranch that in California that had this one elk that was killing all the other elk because he didn't have antlers the same way. Oh, they got a yeti skull. Did you find that, Jamie? The 11 big interesting things you can see there. Oh, it is more. Oh, interesting. Oh, sure. That's legit. Yeah. So this one elk had on one side, he had like normal antlers. Uh-huh. But the other side, he just had a spear. Oh, wow. And so he was just stabbing all these other elk. And it was killing the other elk. Because this guy doing. was like, they're used to their antlers interlocking. Of course. And this is the thing. Yeah. They get together and they clash. Of course. They try to impress the ladies. Yep. Well, there he is. Wow. Wow. Wow. The tusks. Isn't that so weird? Very weird. I wore it. And they're weird the way they're going towards each other's weird. Which makes you realize it's a genetic deformity. Right? Because it's not like this perfect symmetrical nature made it. It's just it's a mutation of some kind. Well, that's just weird about genes. where like things go wonky all the time. Someone's born with an extra arm. You're like, OK. Yeah. Exactly. Sometimes people are born with tails. And you're like, oh. So so weird. Dude, you and I talked about Barbara Russo one time. The pigs that have those crazy. Yeah. They go into their own skulls. My buddy, who's a vet, he just cut a horn out of a sable. You know, sable antelope. Yeah. That was growing into its own skull. Oh, god. It's great. I have a video of it on my Instagram game if you want to see it. But it's, so it got an injury. So it killed part of the horn. And you know, their antelope, they're not deer. So they don't shed their horns. Right. So they grow forever. So this guy had this giant horn just circling back, punching into its own skull. Ah. Can you imagine that? It was gnarly. The pigs are nuts though, or whatever that animal's called. The Baburissa. Is it a pig? It's technically a pig? Yeah. Yeah. It's like a Indonesian warthog. Yeah. But the way it goes into its own skull, no matter what, like it always happens. Yeah, because they have to fight and break them off. And if they don't fight and break them off, it's just, it's just so weird, man. Yeah, you guys fucking crazy. They're so cool. I wonder what those things taste like. I bet they taste great. I think all the swine tastes great. I had to have a lean of you, which is not technically a swine. It's a peckery. Uh-huh. It wasn't that good. Not good? No. Huh. That's unfortunate. It's odd. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, oh. No, just not the best. Like, well, you gotta think of what they're eating. You know, for what I know about happening is a garbage primarily. Yeah. I think that's part of the problem. Yeah. Because that's the case with bears. Right? Like my friend Steve Ronella cooked a bear steak or a bear ham on his friend's smoker. And he said to his friend, he said, hey, you should probably clean that smoker. It smells like fish. Yeah. He goes, I've never cooked fish in that smoker once. Yeah. And it was just from the bear. The bear had eaten so much fish that as he was smoking the bear, all you could smell was fish. Yeah. It's disgusting. It's like eating a seagull. Whoa. Look at this one. Yeah. It's going right into its head. That's the guy. Yeah. Wow. Wow. That's nuts. And it's, yeah. He like cuts the horn off. And you can see because the horns are living thing. There's always that animal still alive. Barely. Like they had millimeters of growth to go before it punched right into his brain. That's crazy. Some of them gnarly. That's so gnarly. Yeah. Digging in. Like they he had millimeters of growth to go before punch right into his brain that's gnarly that's so gnarly Digging and imagine that like every day just a tiny little amount more is growing in your brain It's got to be this constant pain where like it just it just gets tiny bit worse all the time I'm on through it. See how much into the skull it went like it was right there. That's crazy. So gross. I thought you'd like that I don't know if this is about me. Yeah, you don't like that I don't know it is gnarly man At poor dude now he doesn't have any antlers. Yep or horns right is it technically horns horns. Yeah, but he still got a brain so that helps Carry on bro. Yeah Nature's a motherfucker dude. Dude. It's crazy Where's the thyl scene man? It's going on. It's gone pretty cold. Yeah, I mean So we're hoping you'd come in with new evidence. I wish I was there's a group That I've been working with the cult mammal watching like if you heard a bird watching And they've been going into western pop one pop one in Guinea, which is as you know where I think there could still be a tiny population and So I'm working with them. They're giving trail cameras out to guys. They're still hearing legends here and there But it's just I don't know It feels like the legends are getting fewer and further between like almost over-generational time It's disappearing if that makes sense. Oh, that's a bad sign. Yeah I mean whatever's left is probably dying off right if at all Yeah, and I mean I still hold out hope it's something I've always wanted to be and I like I want it to be there But it just it feels like those bits of evidence that were Compounding have all sort of started to fade. That sucks. I know really So a very interesting thing with the incredible variety of wildlife that we have that we're so fascinated by the ones that might not be alive This that like the things like the thylosine or the giants law. Yeah, like I remember I watched this documentary on The giant saw through this one Scientists as biologists to it spent an inordinate amount of time like years in the Amazon Looking for a giant saw and just realizing at some point in time during the documentary that he might have ruined his career Overdoing it. Yeah, it might have been chasing something that doesn't exist and it's this wild gamble If he listens to these people and they're telling him the truth right because all the natives like oh, yeah, bro Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, right around the next year. We'll find him tomorrow. Yeah Yeah, I've been there But you know if you don't follow those leads like do you know what the soula is the Asian unicorn I've heard that Yeah, same thing same story But real animal and you know there was there was basically one ever seen by Western science An animal named Martha and for years scientists western scientists were going into Vietnam and last they're going Yeah, yeah, we we have this thing called the sallow the Asian unicorn and they're like shut up You know and then all of a sudden turns out here's this giant bovid that still exists Wow cool look at animal too. Yeah, and nobody knows whether they still exist now or out right there That's it. Yeah, so basically there's been three or four maybe more that have ever been seen Most of them caught in poacher snares like this one, but then really cool guy named Bill Robishod Got a call once from a prince and he had caught one and it was in his village and he flew in there and overnight the poor thing died And that was the only time a single westerner in history has ever seen a live sallow Oh wow And this guy had it and then and then he's like can we please preserve it and the king was like now we're gonna eat it and they ate it Whoa got nothing out of it. Yeah He's got pictures and stuff. So you know it's all it's all real But they call it the unicorn because its horns are so symmetrical that when you look at it from a side profile looks like one Horn come on in the tent like that exactly. Yeah, that's weird. Yeah. They're very cool But it's a bovid. It's a it's a cattle. That's that's not one. I don't know why they're using that photo Oh, how odd yeah, but that's the same thing as these You know these things around giant sloths and thylosine and Bigfoot and everything else. It's it's they are out there You know some of them not all of them But they are out there and if you don't follow the lead if you ignore it then you miss things like that Well, this is also like when you think about things like the Amazon like if you ever see footage of the Amazon from above You go oh There's no way you know that's so big you look you look down and you go oh well There's no way you know now this is this is way too big because no way there's bunch of people Scouring every inch of that place. I mean given there are still groups of human beings uncontacted You know a lot well. My friend Paul Rosley. Yeah, I know Paul. Yeah, he's coming contact with them. Yeah multiple times Yeah, see if you can get some aerial footage of flying over the Amazon I mean it's it's in multiple countries. It's what is it? Oh, it's crazy. Bolivia Where else Brazil Argentina So yeah, it's huge. It's so fucking big and I had a similar experience in New Guinea talking about thiosine where we got on a plane in place Called two feet and flew to another area like look at this. It was just like this for four hours We didn't see one building Amazon in 4k So just a matte like there is no fucking way You know you know what's in there no way there's probably a bunch of shit in there that no one has found and then there Undeniably there are and then there's stuff, you know like you'll get a kick out of this Loch Ness monster Hmm, what do you think it is? Maybe a sturgeon or something like that Jamie? What do you think the Loch Ness monster is? I mean, I think they know but I don't know Probably I don't know whale dick what whale dick whale dick whale dick not a normal Loch Ness monster versus whale dick look at this and tell me this isn't what they think is the Law The photos that the the hoax photo of the one that's poking out of the water That one I mean you'll see it in a second here I think but there are these photos of a whale's penis compared to the Loch Ness monster and I mean I that's certainly not proof But it kind of answers a lot of like that's a whale dick right there. That is a whale dig Yeah, that photo. I'm pretty sure is a proven hoax that one is yeah I think that photo is like a guy like made something at a wood and like floated it in the water and took a picture Is that what the story behind that? There's something along those lines No Loch Ness monster isn't a whale penis professor says. Oh, okay. Well if the internet professor says it Oh Oh, let's take him seriously. He's out there. No whales there if you're the type of professor that they call upon When they try to figure out something's a whale dick Maybe sir, would you please study these nine whale penis and tell us your thoughts on this? That's what happened to the His claim and then he said he was just like I'm messing around I'm sticking with it. I like it. I like the way he's what the guy that proposed it. Oh Oh Darn it. I like this. There's walked back his salacious claim That's so funny. Maybe that's the guy that was looking for the the giant sloth. Yeah, I think I need a new angle Does giant sloth thing did not pan out? I like it big if you're if you're a guy looking for a giant sloth in the Amazon like where do you look like? Good luck finding it you have to find geographically isolated areas You know because they're little pockets, right? If the pockets of okay people aren't coming in here animals aren't going out There's a big ring of mountains. There's whatever it happens to be I Met a guy who said he guaranteed he knew you know all these people like this But I always enjoy the story of it that there was this pocket in Peru That was completely geographically isolated by the mountains and that's where they were and the idea is that these areas remain unchanged Right, it's like an island basically right in the Amazon like things just don't change because it's so isolated from everything else Well, I think the idea also was that Giant sloths where where we know they existed in North America that whenever whatever happened that ended the ice age the Younger drier's impact that it didn't affect things Below the equator at the equator was more of a northern hemisphere thing. Yeah because the climate shift was so much stronger Exactly and so the most of the animals that died off Well, if you look at like the this I think it was 65% of North American Megafauna died off during this very short window. Yep That that didn't happen right in South America, right and that we're just guessing that they're dead Yeah, right because if there was a healthy pop like think how many tigers are there in the wild? I think there's 5,000. It's something like that. Yeah, it's gone way up by the way It was down to 400 fun fact more tigers in captivity in Texas. I know then there are an all of the wild of the world It's crazy man People's yard. Yeah, yeah private collections in Texas. There's more tigers than all of the wild of the world It's such an insane statement that should not exist. Yeah, I love this day It's just a way with it. It's just it's just a wild place Like for all intents and purposes. Yeah, that's hilarious Wild for people did I love Texas every time I come to Texas. I'm like this place is great It's always fun everybody's so nice to do exactly that's the best part is like nobody scowls at you You're getting the elevator in there. Hey, how's your day going? You're like very friendly. I'll tell you how it's going very A lot of people especially coastal elites No, it's like to say like people coastal snobs. They have this idea of it being like filled with rednecks and ignorant people and foolish people Yeah, not that way at all Especially Austin Austin is like one of the most like liberal Easygoing progressive cities. Yeah, but like even the progressives here. They're like more reasonable It's like down to earth. Yeah, it's not like extremism, right? Well, they they're definitely more crazy than they were 20 years ago When I first started coming here, okay, but wait less crazy than like liberals in LA. Yeah, or liberals in Cal or liberals in New York I just played there where it's just extreme right like a protest and all these yeah, well It's like this there's a saying about Austin keep Austin weird and surrounded and surrounded. Yeah What is the answer around it surrounded by red people? Like it's all red states around you and this is pocket of blue that's in the center of this red state I think that's good for everybody. Yeah, I think that's good It's a balance and the like the the liberals that want to turn Texas blue like don't You're gonna ruin it. You're gonna ruin it for you, too You don't get it like balance is important It's like you can't kill all the predators Right then the deer will get overrun and you're hitting them with cars. Yep And you can't kill all the deer because then there's no food And I mean that's what they did when they are market hunting. Yep balance. Yep And you need balance with humans, too 100% and the Austin balance is a great balance. Yeah, it's a liberal city surrounded by like hardcore Republicans with guns and tigers and it works And it all works it works it makes for nice people. Yeah, it's like it's a good mix. Yeah, and a misunderstood mix and it's interesting people on the outside they have a very Distorted perception of what Texas is especially Austin. Yeah. Well, how do you feel? It's a California tribe I mean you bounced around but as a California transplant did you bring your Si balls and your you know You're like I need all that California stuff here. What stuff? I don't know. I mean, I don't know that that's like That's the thing though, right? It's like all the Californians coming here and messing it up kind of thing. I was never one of those Yeah, so my what I got out of California was the comedy store and work. Yeah, and then jujitsu So like you get all that here the Austin is arguably the jujitsu capital the world right now really oh yeah Oh, that's interesting. There's this where the new league is based out of No, that's you mean the the UFC league. Yeah. No, that's in Vegas It is that in Vegas Because that's where the UFC's headquarters are but Austin has Kings world which is Gordon Ryan's place is got beat team is out here Seanjibra Heybarrows out here Okay, there's a bunch of Gracie Baja schools out here. There's multiple 10th planet schools out here It's like there's an incredible amount of jujitsu out here. So what I'm hearing is this is where to bring Ronation Bring it to office Don't never win They're the only people that are gonna win are those wild New Zealand dudes in those Australian guys those guys will win every time They're built for that shit though, but it's uh, it's just a great city period Arctistically it's always been like a great music city now. It's arguably the comedy capital the country Yeah, I mean there's so many comedians here now, right? It's because they got here and they went oh this is way better There's no traffic. Yeah, one's nice. Yeah, and then you can do whatever you want and also There's a lot of places to do comedy and yeah, just on my street where my club is yeah This five or six other clubs that have been up since we opened up. Oh wow So it's incredible so if you're a young comic and you yeah or an established comic that just wants to work out material You could go go to my club you hopped on a street to the sunset room Which is my friend Brian's club right down the street and you can go down the street to the creek in the cave an amazing club this just Two seconds away. Oh cool. It's like one block over. Let's get everything's close to Vulcan. It's just right there Everything's right there. Huh. It's incredible. It's incredible. It's incredible. It's great. I'm glad you're so stoked here I remember when the first maybe the second time we hung out down at your show and not Westlake Where was it woodland hills right? Yeah, and you were like dude I got to get out of here Yeah, I wanted to get out a long time ago. Yeah, and fun fact We started the podcast because I was depressed because I had to move back from Colorado Oh really? So I lived in Colorado for a little bit, but my wife got pregnant and when she was pregnant It was like if you are an altitude we were at 85 hundred feet. Yeah It's rough. Yeah, and we went back to LA for a short period of time and she was fine Yeah, and then we went back to Colorado and she was sick again Okay, and then we were reading about low birth weight Pre-mature birth is a lot of like really bad things that happen to people especially if you're not acclimated So you move to these high altitude areas. Oh, by the way Working out there when I worked out there I was I thought I was gonna die and then I Went to Philadelphia and I had to do some gigs in Philadelphia and I worked out and I felt like I could run through well You've said so much. I don't see it much. I was like this is incredible because the only time of my life I've ever been altitude adjusted. Yeah, where my body had adapted. Yeah, and I was like there's a mat This is a massive advantage. No wonder why fighters do it and you don't acclimate being up at that height over months or anything I did I certainly did like I could work out there and I used to I did you jitsu in Boulder So Boulder was I was in a place called Gold Hill which is 85 hundred feet above sea level and Boulder's like 55. Okay, so I was doing shout out to a mall easton my friend I'm all he has a jiu-jitsu gym in Boulder great place. Okay, and then when I was training there It was fine. I mean you train, but you definitely could feel it. Yeah, and I have trained there once before When I had come from LA and I was like whoo this altitude is rough like it's like working out in Denver You're like whoo yeah, yeah, but not like you feel it at 85 hundred feet. 85 hundred feet was I'd do this These kettlebell workouts and I was doing it and I'm I'm used to what it does I'm used to beat and I was like this is crazy. This feels like I'm drunk. Yeah Really felt like I drank a bottle of whiskey and tried to work out so tired I went to the Himalayas like maybe four or five years ago to look for red pandas up in the trees You know this cute little guys and Day one I literally maybe made it 400 feet and then had to sit down and I was like all right We're trekking for pandas we're heading up into the mountains. We'll find these pandas and I just I don't remember what the elevation was But I'd come from Santa Barbara where I live which is sea level to this high Himalayas and I I just sit down like every 15 minutes I saw a couple days the most Horrifying video the other day of this guy who was on one of those Summit hikes and slipped Now his friends watched him slide like all the way down to just sliding Down ice and snow and couldn't stop and couldn't and they just had to stand there and watch this guy slide away What can you do nothing? That's so great. No, was he climbing? Yeah, okay He was trying to he's making it to the summit and slipped yeah, it's And slipped off the you know just a very clear path and slipped off of it and just starts sliding and you realize oh He's gone. That's it. He's gonna go off forever. That's crazy Oh, it's horrible. I always want to like take my kids to do these things with me You know and I'm like I want to take them to track and see the mountains and catch crocodiles and do all these various things that I like to do and you realize it's like my six-year-old can barely walk in a straight line without falling down You know what I mean like imagine taking him on a mountain track. Oh, that's so scary But on the other side the other hand like you don't want to protect them too much You want to expose them to a certain amount of danger because I think it's good for them It's good for them to see it. Yeah. Yeah. It's good for them to experience It's also good for them to have like a broader Understanding of what the world is right like the world's a bunch of different things. That's right. It's not just Santa Monica That's right. Yeah. Oh, there's Costa Rica. Yeah, oh, this is great. Look at these bugs You're not like birds like there's it's nice. It's important. It's it. Yeah, because otherwise we live in a bubble like America is great I say this to my wife all the time. I'm so patriotic. I love this country It's great, but it's a bubble. Yeah, everything's easy It's safe. You can order shit on your phone. It shows up at your house You know, there's a million restaurants to pick from obviously depends where you live, but you get my point. Yes And then you get out of here and it's like Okay, everything closes at 4 p.m. Like go figure out your food You know what I mean and then you're like, okay Well now I now I have two kids who are hungry and we're in the jungle or it's you know in a town that everything shuts down on Sundays or whatever It's like figure it out Those are important lessons for little kids to be dynamic and figure out like how the rest of the world works and that they have to Figure out how to get things when it's not all just at the touch of your you know phone Also to recognize that there's gonna be times where you don't have food. Yeah Like yeah people are just so accustomed to having food anytime of their hungry and in fact sometimes they're not even hungry They just bored so they start stuffing their face from their board. What never existed in all of human history. No No, dude, I just read you might be well read on this But I just read something interesting the eight hour night of sleep. Yes invented by a mattress company You know about this. I didn't know was invented by a mattress company, but I do know that Traditionally in the past people would do two sleeps. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah This was yeah, so you know about what I'm talking about I just read this literally yesterday and one of my doom scrolling things But it's interesting because I did that a lot when I was young where I would wake up in the middle of the night And I just decided to watch TV and do something for now for a few hours and then I go back to sleep Mm-hmm, but it was just for me It was just like being indulgent because I was single and free and you know 25 years old I had my own apartment. I'm like I do whatever the fuck I want Yeah, get up at three o'clock in the morning watch TV for a couple hours and go to sleep till noon Why not sit around in your box or eat cereal? Yeah, just part is a myth. Oh, it is Everything I keep bringing up the myth. Yeah, no whale dick no man Is the killer of dream My stuff and the same instagram video you guys saw and I thought it was interesting too. Yeah That is the myth. I think that might be a myth Yeah, I think the two I think the two sleep thing It was a way that people would get up in the middle of the night But you also have to think I think a lot of people went to bed way earlier because it got dark We didn't have electricity and there's a normal circadian rhythm. Yeah people get it gets dark out You eat maybe hang out in front of a campfire for a little while and then you go to bed right if you've ever gone camping That's what most people do most people don't stay up till four in the morning We can't think not without booze My Town stories and laughing if anybody breaks out of guitar you're fucked You're up all night and I mentioned pain is I was gonna ask about it Me and my I didn't even go in around the same places that pandas are fake Did you see that do in China a lot of people talk about that? Did you see the zoo in China to paint it to I did I didn't see that But the thing is about pandas is that I went down a rabbit hole this the other night There were no Depictions of pandas in like ancient Chinese history. No, yeah, it is true Yeah, they didn't show up until like god. I want to say it was like the 16th century or 17th century That's bizarre. I wonder why that is because you know they were explorers going through the area and all of that Well the idea was that maybe they were engineered to eat bamboo Because bamboo if you think about it is like a very prolific print Absolutely like I have bamboo on my property. That shit just grows like it's crazy. How well it grows grows so quickly And there's almost no nutritional value in it either right. Yeah So here's the Panda. Okay interesting the claim is largely true With nuance so was that what did you search into perplexity our AI sponsor is it true that pandas aren't in Chinese ancient history? The claim is largely true though with nuance Okay giant panda strikingly absent from China's classical cultural record unlike the dragon To which is weird tiger cray by the way our conversation about it made it to the view Do you know what I think you know you change your status to dragon believer So funny Do I pay us a key belief to dragon? Oh my god. This is wonderful. Oh, it's so good. Oh, okay So when did it happen? Unlike the dragon tiger crane or tortoise doesn't appear on ancient bronzes or pottery in tank poetry song paintings Juan you want a while you a in how do you say that? Beats me one drama Ming novels or Q in G. Can Queen Before the late 20th century it had essentially no symbolic role in Chinese civilization It's status as a national treasure is a post 1949 invention That's bizarre after panda's became famous famous globally in the 20th century Chinese scholars went back and Comed old text looking for them a few candidate references exist The Xi Jinping book of Odes and Shang-Joo mentioned a creature called pie or mo Which some modern scholars retroactively identified as the panda, but the identification is contested and those same words were also used for leopards Taper tape here mm-hmm or mythical beasts Emperor Wen of Han seven second century BCE reportedly had a mo Buried in his mother's tomb sometimes claimed as a panda, but that's it's weird That is very bizarre fragmentary ambiguous and rare nothing like the deep iconographic tradition around dragons Phoenix's or tigers Why the abrogan style claim Never even said it before How dare you perplexity That is so funny. It's a Rogan style claim. I think is a Ex As you have previously stated no way I was trying to find out like how many views something had gotten yeah, and you like as you have previously Told you You're using me as data this is why ai so fucked up. Yeah, like you trust me. I'm trusting you. Don't trust me at all. I get all my information from you Did it so weird I cuz you was weird cuz it's not like you know Okay, there's no mention of ducks I get it cuz there's ducks everywhere who cares right like so why do we write about them? But it's not something like that Like that is we're never so abundant that it was not worth talking about yeah See if where this theore who invented this theory that they were engineered to eat bamboo So who who did this engineering in this theory? That's a question like who did dogs right? Why do we have dogs right? Which is really weird? You know why why why I have a dog he's a king Charles cavalier. Mm-hmm. You know those I do adorable He's so cute. I love him the death, but he he's made a appearance on the podcast Oh nice. Um, he's the furthest thing from a wolf like as far as we've taken a wolf Yeah to make it so fucking adorable and cute But that is what it is that was at one point in time a wolf right somehow or another We engineered it down to a dog that's adorable and just wants to cuddle with you and sit in your lap and play and weighs 25 pounds So what happened and how did we do that and could you do that with a bear and could you get a bear Then take take that bear and make it something I think it's the only bear that's a true herbivore as well Yeah, I think that's correct. Yeah, which is also Yeah weird. So what have we done their digestive tract? Yeah, yeah, and they're required like it's like koalas I think they only eat ee-gleptus. That's right. Yep. Fuckin weird bizarre We also has no nutritional value and you probably know this makes them like high basically Looking up who who did it and started going on the thing that it's not no one is known for the theory It's because they're actually carnivores. Oh, they're at tax on oh say so that means wallas I think are the ones that are pure herbivores that they definitely are but they're not bears at all They're in marsupial. They just call them koalas bears Okay, so they say they are taxonomic carnivores that means taxonomically They're in the order carnivora if that makes sense So but it says with a short digestive tract and gut microbiomes of a meat eater. Yeah Yeah, yeah, it's interesting. So the ovegans, but you could selectively breed for anything to some degree if you had enough time But look but that's the other thing like why they so cute? I think of that because there's so much cuter than any other bear before like that face even with a teeth out Horrible buddy. They also have the best PR campaign in history Like there's they're the dumbest animals in the world. You know this right really? Oh my god I don't know if that's the right terminology, but like you can hand a panda an apple and it will hand you its baby I'm not joking dude. You could find videos of this. Well, it's now more evidence that it's raised that it's been engineered because it doesn't have the instincts That a wild animal would have dude their parental instincts are bonkers Like they will drop their baby and go for an apple. That's how zookeepers take their babies away Dude it's like these guys are trying to go extinct. I swear to god It's insane. So where did the theory come from? See if you can find out where the theory came from that they were engineered to eat bamboo That's why I asked that exact question. It says just what just starts showing up on my Instagram about three months ago Huh Did Instagram you never know what you're gonna get of course, but that's what's fun. Yeah As long as you don't buy into it Dude the problem is even like me and what I do as a biologist I can I mean I'd say 90% I can tell but there's a 10% where I can't tell if it's AI or real or and I'm looking at it going Well that behavior is wrong so it has to be AI, but it's crazy What's going on in like the animal space with the AI? Yeah, I watched one today where it was a will to be sort of leopard had jumped on its back And the will to be jumped into the water and the crocodiles killed the leopard on its back and the will to be Got away totally fake it has to be sounds fake I mean it sounds insane will the beast is smart all of a sudden So smart that if they get off all I have to do is get to those crocs and the props Also like you're gonna run. I don't like you're gonna give yourself more problems right back you listen to the water Yeah, by the way multiple crocodiles so why wouldn't they just eat you too? They what they just kill everything kill everybody If they wouldn't the both of you are compromised. It's not gonna just grab the leopard on the back It's gonna grab you too because you can't get away anything they can get yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No. It's great It's crazy, but it was also fun. Yeah exactly A different video but yeah, here it is here. Yeah, I know so this is a That's a longer cut of the video, but you can see by like the saturation of the leopard It's a little fake and like the way the claws are kind of like there's no claws It's almost like soft-balling it, you know what I mean right right? I look how he's hanging on Yeah, video of a real wheel to be a bit neat by a crock and they just added the leopard to the back that very well pretty It's pretty amazing. Look no, that's a perfect. Yeah. No, bro. That's real guys stop This is different this one's different because this one the will also By the way the world of beasts is doing way too well in that struggle. Yes Because when crocodiles do get will to be they get them quick leopard god on this one Someone put some time into this Yeah, when the crocs get a hold of something is really to wrap dude I just said I'm probably not supposed to talk about this yet But I just did this show for discovery that I've been working on for a couple years where Basically I put myself in the perspective of prey So I would have been in the perspective of that will to be through engineering and doing all these like builds and stuff like that And I lowered myself into a pond of crocodiles It was insane. I had a cage around me so a very small cage was basically a coffin Made out of what though. What's a cage? Me now whatever the guys in the workshop could find I think steel do we try it out first? No I mean we tested it with Pretty small cage was basically a coffin. Made out of what though? What's a cage man? Whatever the guys in the workshop could find. I think steel. Do we try it out first? No. I mean, we tested it with nothing in it and we're like, okay, this is working. I get sent it to Jamie. I have it on my phone, but it was that. It's a jing game. Dude, it was crazy. It was not. What did you do that? I don't know, man. Well, it's like those shark cages, man. Those things don't hold up. You've seen that before, right? Oh, yeah. Where they go straight through the shark cage. Yeah. Yeah. It's craziness. It's absolutely craziness. I'll find. Here we go. Dude, we did this. I don't know why I did. Oh, you know what, Jamie? Go on the, if you don't mind, go on the discovery Instagram. I think it's there. Good, good luck finding it. I can send you something in the meantime. But I think they posted like a short teaser of it. It was nuts though. So I'm in this little cage. We rigged up these cables. Just you wear a scuba ear or what? So I had a scuba tank with me in case the thing broke and I ended up on the bottom. Sounds dumb or out. And then you have so much oxygen before they can get you out. 30 minutes, 30 minutes before. Oh, God, dude. And I was talking to our guy. So, you know, it's a TV production. So there's like stunt coordinators and all the stuff. And I was like, so, okay, cable snaps. I go down. I grabbed the regulator. I've got 30 minutes to 40 minutes in my tank. Then what? He's like, oh, I have this grappling hook. We'll throw it. Hook it with the grappling hook and pull it out. I'm like, bro, what if you had a log? He's like, hmm. I hadn't thought about that. Oh, how you getting me out of here? No, no, no, that's that. I'm not easily going to take more than 30 minutes. Of course, we're at the day, we're at 30 minutes. So you might have to get out and swim. Oh, I could, can you get out? I couldn't. I locked myself into the cage. There was no getting out. You did this? Yeah, it was pretty dumb. It was, it was cool though, because it was such a unique perspective. But I told my wife when I got home from now and I was like, yeah, I think it's my last year doing this shit. Oh, I got it. It's getting too, too much now. That's the thing about those kind of shows. It's like it's not enough to just see the animals. You have to do something that makes it spectacular enough to get people to tune in. Like that polar bear one where the guy got in that big plexiglass box. That literally inspired the whole series. I swear to God. I hate that video. It's crazy. I mean, I watched it 100 times. I don't hate it, but I hate the idea of it because it just shows you how predatory polar bears are and how they don't give a fuck. It's just trying to get at that guy. Isn't it crazy? Yeah, it's not. I mean, it's actively hunting him. Yeah, it's so different than the other bears, which like if you get killed by a grizzly, generally it's like you fucked up. Yeah, like you stumbled upon one that's old. Startled it. Or yeah, or you startled it or you, you know, you zig when you should have zagged. Have you seen the city in Russia, the abandoned island city where the polar bears have taken over? No. Oh, you got to see this. It's incredible. I've seen videos of Russia of people like getting chased by polar bears in their town. Oh, yeah. Yeah, there's like the one where the guy jumps on the snow, would be a run's after him and says, barely gets away. There's a whole area in the bearing sea that was, uh, I want to say a former mining town or maybe fishing town and people moved out because it collapsed for whatever reason. This place, look at this. And the polar bears have just moved into town. Oh, they're living in the house. They're living in the house. Look at this. They're just like, they took it over as a den completely took it over. How cool is this? That's amazing. They're just fully moved in like living in the house. That's a drone shop. But this is not AI. This was legit. They're so cool looking. Oh, they're the coolest. They're so interesting. How amazing is that though? Imagine like, imagine you're out on a boat and you're like, oh, man, we've been sailing for three weeks. Oh, look, there's like a little village. Let's pop in there for a day. That should be a cool movie. Yeah. That would be a good movie. Yeah. A bunch of people like, oh, we found a village. Let's go there. You like head in and turn, you know, like set up and then all of a sudden you're surrounded. Yeah, it's all polar bear. You like, why is there so much shit in this house? Because they probably just shit right in the house. Oh, yeah. So they're pawn at the drones. Yeah. Wow. Look how cool they're hanging out the window. Like, hey, Tom. Yeah. I'm on over. Have a drink. You could put me in the glass box on this island. This looks so cool. It is so cool. They're an amazing animal. They really are. But they're so weird. They're so long too. I went and did a sort of a track with them. What, Jamie? Really getting food on that island. If there's only one there. Oh, well, they're the only ones there. But there's the skills. All kinds of other shit. They'll be hunting all the marine mammals in the area. Yeah, they're they're the clean up crew. And they swim huge distances. Oh, yeah. A couple of turned up in Iceland. Did you know that? What? Yeah. There's I think two or three cases of polar bears that have swum from Greenland to Iceland and made ours that I'm not sure. But it's not close. Obviously. It's crazy. The Vikings like a hundred years. Yeah. Yeah. So crazy. Yeah. And then you can swim that far. Two hundred miles. Two hundred miles. Wow. Are you hopefully this isn't a myth? Are you seeing when it says it was shot dead after it did it in 2008? Yeah. And it's swam across, right? Yeah. I mean, that. To get off. They don't see. Oh, I'm going to. Miles. How crazy is that? Just take a swim one day and end up colonizing an entirely new place. So it's like the David Goggins of polar bears. It says bro, I can make it feel no pain. Operation killed the animals captured on film. Let's fucking go. Video might not let's fucking go. Let's see that video. Got an error for it for. Yeah. But isn't that crazy? Two hundred miles swim as a bear. Oh, yeah. This isn't might have jumped off just a piece of ice somewhere. So it could have got a little float. Right. It could have hung out for a little bit. It's a bit of a short, but still even 50 miles. It's pretty far. Well, they can last so long with the fat that's on their body. And they like snooze float. Have you seen that? They'll like they won't just like actively swim. They'll like kind of like snooze float in between hunting. It's kind of amazing. In the winter, they have so much fat, you know, that or yeah, in the winter, stored up getting ready to chill because they don't eat as much during the summer. Am I getting this right? I think so. Right. That they they like, yeah, you seem like snooze floating in the ocean. Well, they eat a lot in the summer to get ready for the winter. Right. They're metallic. I know they eat a lot in mid summer. They don't eat a lot. It's too hot for them to actively hunt. Oh, I know that. How hot is it too hot for them to actively hunt? I went to Manitoba, Canada to go see them on foot. And it was like 75 degrees at the height of the day or maybe 70. And yeah, they wouldn't be hunting. Polar bears were frequently tamed during the middle ages. What? This is no bears been captured alive in Iceland. Oh, but since then, receding North Pole ice is diminishing their hunting and mating grounds and jeopardizing their survival. Hold us. Siding an ice on with eight, 90. Whoa, 16 years after that first people got there. But what's crazy if you think about that is all it would take if people weren't there is two polar bears over the course of polar bears lifetime to wash up on the island. And then you have a population of polar bears there. Right. Do you know what I mean? Right. The male swims there five years later, the female swims there. Boom. There's population of right. So there's plenty of food. You know, what an adventurous female would have to be. 1252 Henry III took delivery of a white bear sent him as a gift from King Hakan IV of Norway. He decided to keep it in the Tower of London. The bear was either too big or too exciting to be taken to Oxfordshire where there had been a Royal Menagerie at Woodstock since Harry, Henry I rain. What's more, it needed to fish. So the beast was sent to the tower and from what we could tell, it was well looked out for, although it had a muzzle and it chained to where while on land, the sheriffs of London were obliged to lay out more than a shilling a week for its upkeep, which added up over a year to roughly the expected income of a night. What a wild story. No guns to stop him. What the, how would you do it to him? Those in arrows, I guess in spears, the bear had a long swimming leash. The man wore waterproof clothes. What? The keeper, so it had a keeper. The bear came to the Nori Norwegian keeper and the keeper was allowed to lead fishing trips into Thames. How do you say that? Thames? The Thames, right? Thames. Which the tower sat, the men wore waterproof clothes. Again, build to the crown. The bear had a long swimming leash. There were salmon in the Thames in those days. So while being in London was probably not half so pleasing to the bear sitting on an ice flow and an Arctic circle, it sure be working. The way this guy wrote this is hilarious by the way. Yeah. They, do you want a sloth bear is? Yeah. Mean is any. There's, there's Japan, right? India, India and into Nepal in that area. Amazing. They're like a perfect example of not the size of the dog in the fight, but the fight in the dog because they're not a very big bear, but they will take on tigers and everything else. They, um, a certain group, I don't know the name of a tribe, I think, in India, used to capture sloth bears and they'd put a ring in its nose like, like a nose ring. And then this barbaric, it doesn't happen anymore, but then they would take the bear onto the street as a street performer. I just read about this and they would light a fire and put like a big sheet metal over it and then walk the sloth bear onto it so the bear would dance because its feet were burning. Yeah. Um, and, uh, yeah, they call it the dancing bears. I guess it was in Nepal. And, uh, yeah, it was a horrific thing that people used to. Imagine doing that though and being like, Oh, this will be, this will be worth a shilling or two. Like, well, bear baiting these to do that with dogs. They just have a chained up bear and they would allow dogs to fight the bear. Yeah, it's crazy. They do that with bulls. Yeah. You know, they have a chained up bull and have dogs attack the bull. Yeah. They used in South Africa in the early colonial days, they used to do it with baboons and let the dogs and the baboons fight and that money on it. Yeah. People are so gross. It's it, but you know, like, I always have this weird stance. Do I agree with any of it? Of course not. But we wouldn't be where we were and care about wildlife and conservation. If we hadn't made some of those mistakes, is that what that is a mistake? I mean, it's also if you hadn't seen half of your friends get cut in half by swords, you're probably the, the, you're understanding of the value of life is probably completely distorted. Completely. Yeah. You're living in a horrific time. Everyone's dying of the plague. Violence is entertainment. Right. Do you know what I mean? Like that is something to do. And life value is incredibly low. Like life comes and goes. The Coliseum was when when was that? I don't know. I should, but I don't. Yeah. I think it was 2000 plus years ago. So somewhere around there when they first started having these crazy games there. Do you know they used to flood the Coliseum and do ship battles and things? I went there a few years back and we went on a tour. Is it cool? That was amazing. Yeah. But it's also like you stand there and you like you try to take it in. Like when I go to these ancient places, I try to just like sit and just try to imagine. Like when you're actually, it's one thing to imagine when you're looking at a photograph or a video, but when you're actually in the spot, yeah, you know, like when you're in Athens and you're like, yeah, standing at the path and on. Okay. What the fuck was this like? Yeah. Yeah. What was this like? And that was like the center of everything. Everything. Yeah. Democracy. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. And also drugs, those guys were highest fuck. They were all doing drugs. It's true. Because we went to Ulysses. And that's the place where they had the Ilucynean mystery schools and people would go on this track where they wouldn't eat and they would walk from Athens and they would have these psychedelic rituals. Uh huh. And you know, you're in this place where they did it. You could like feel it. It's weird. Well, I mean, obviously not synthetic, but were they, was it just mushrooms? What were, what were these psychedelics? Totally no, but they have had residue from some of these clay pots that had ergot in it. What's ergot? So ergot is a fungus that has a very similar psychoactive effect as LSD. Oh, interesting. It's, uh, I think it has lysergic acid in it. Like what, let's find out what the what would actually also kills people. There's been cases of ergot poisoning through wheat. Oh, interesting. People have died. And they also think it's connected to the Salem witch trials. Oh, driving people crazy. Yeah. Oh, the Salem witch trials. I don't know if this has been proven if this is just a theory, but the idea is that if you haven't early frost and that some of the wheat survives, but the wheat can have this fungus on it that grows ergot. Okay. This, this ergot fungus. And so you're eating this wheat and making beer out of it and like, yeah, everybody's tripping balls. I think I was like, I'm watching. You're all like, I'm accidental acid. That's hilarious. Yeah. Probably like, man, this beer is really good. Right. Until there's a witch. And then you're like, man, this beer is bad. Well, there's also, I mean, imagine first of all, you've got a bunch of crazy superstitions and people are afraid of everything already, because you don't know anything about science. You don't understand a thing. Yeah. So there's a lot of fears. And then there's a lot of people that claim to be the wise people of the town. And they tell you crazy stories about witches. And you're like, oh, which is a real. Oh, for sure. So life, surgical acid, um, a meat, uh, um, ergo, metrine, all these share, uh, life, surgical acid, Ergoline core, which is why LSD semi synthesized from life, surgical acid is chemically related to ergo compounds. And all of this comes from that mold on the way. Yeah. Or the pump. I think they're a time where they did it to people on purpose in France. I feel like this might have been like a CIA thing. See if you can find that story. God or LSD. Ergo. I think they, they put, because I think they were experimenting on the effects of ergo and I think they like picked a town and said, let's see. Cause we know they've done that before. We definitely know they've just hit a whole place. Yeah. Yeah. Let's see. Yeah. Yeah. Why not? Like, like we think about like what we found out during MK Ultra that the CIA was running brothels and they would give the johns LSD really literally called Operation Midnight Climax. And so what they would do is they would have these two way mirrors set up. Uh huh. This is proven. This is a jolly West who was the head of MK Ultra. Okay. Who would they would say, let's find out what happens to give people acid. What's the best way? Well, you get a bunch of people and do it to them in a way that, you know, totally unathically, but this is the way they're not going to tell. Yeah. You did it to them because they went to a whore house. Yeah. No one's going to admit they went to a whore house. Right. So you get these guys, they go to the, get to the prostitute. The prostitute's like a drink. Like, oh, I love it. Of course. Yeah. Hard. Hard. Work here. I said, it's down. I'm going to fuck. This is going to be great. That's the fucking wall. The candles talking to them. Do you find anything about the French thing? Oh, here it is. I likely think of the infamous Saint S. Brie cursed bread incident of 1951. Long running allegation that wasn't ergot at all, but a secret CIA US Army LSD experiment. What happened in Palm Saint S. Brie, this small town in southern France, hundreds of residents, suddenly suffered violent hallucinations, convulsions in somena and psychotic episodes over several days. 250 people were affected, 50 were committed to asylum. Seven died, including some who leapt from windows convinced they could fly or being chased by snakes and tigers. The official French investigation blamed ergot contaminated rye flour from a local baker. Classic Ergotism, St. Anthony's Fire. That's another case of it. Some later scientists or maybe the same story. Some later scientists propose alternative culprits, mercury fungicide, nitrogen trichloride, bread bleaching agents, or mycotoxins from aspergillus fumigatus. I call bullshit on that. This seems like something where they test. Yeah. It seems like a CIA thing. For sure. 2009, American investigative journalist H.P. Al-Barrarley, Al-Barrarley, Jr. published a terrible mistake, arguing that Ponce Espri was actually a covert LSD field test run jointly by CIA's MKL programs and the U.S. Army Special Operations Division at Fort Detrick with Swiss drug company Sandos who first synthesized LSD allegedly supplying the compound. So his evidence included a declassified CIA document quoting a Sandos representative saying the Ponce, St. Espri's secret is being discussed alongside references to LSD. Oh, they definitely did it. Yeah, it sounds way more likely. A testimony he attributed former CIA, SOD scientist Frank Olson, who died in a 1953 fall from a New York City hotel room after being dosed with LSD by his colleagues. Put a bunch of assholes there. He's kind of just dosed at each other. He didn't admit an MKL incident. Interviews with former U.S. intelligence officials why most historians remain skeptical. A serious pushback came quickly. So symptoms don't match LSD. Victims had gangrene like vasoconstriction, weeks long psychosis, and physical necrosis consistent with ergot alkaloids. Not a single acute LSD dose. Interesting. LSD is water soluble and heat sensitive, so baking bread would degrade it. The Sandos cable, Al-Barrar, Al-Barrarley, cited is ambiguous and predates the incident in some readings. No corroborating documentation as surface despite extensive MK Ultra declassification since the 1970s church committee hearings. Yeah, but the problem with that is like one of the reasons why we know about MK Ultra was evidence that they found that had been in storage. So when you say like freedom of information act, they don't give you shit. It's bait you with a little bit here and there to go, oh, okay, we don't just tell you. We don't have any evidence. Go fuck yourself. I mean look how hard it is to get the Epstein files. This is a guy that was alive in 2019, right? Where there were plenty of records of everything happening. Exactly. And the internet. This reminds me, do you know about the Lyme disease? Oh yeah. You know about this? Oh yeah. The Plum Island thing. Yeah. Seems very seriously. I'm not a huge conspiracy theorist. This one to me is like a no brainer. Well, it's also people want to say that Lyme disease has existed forever. Absolutely. True. Not to the extent that it exists today. Also not as contaminant. Like not not as it is. Right. And not like crazy. Like crazy. Like crazy. Sweeping out West. Not only that Plum Island, they were absolutely doing gain of function research on ticks. And the idea was, yeah. The reason why they were doing it and this is this is all me what I've read. I don't have any directive from it. Yeah. But it's still fun. But what they said was what they were doing was engineering ticks with these diseases. So what they could do is they could spray them from planes and they would overwhelm the medical system of any. Like overwhelm a town. That's right. Overwhelm their armies. You couldn't keep up and they wouldn't be able to fight. That's right. And it could wipe out food sources. Right. It had like multiple implications. Exactly. Exactly. So now we have these fucking creeps from the world economic forum that are talking about the dangers of eating meat. Right. And about how people eating meat is what's wrong with them. That's why it's accelerating climate change. Oh, or shit. But they're saying it and they're saying that it is almost a moral obligation to create a tick or to create more ticks that would have this alpha gal in them. The one that makes you allergic to meat. Yeah. So they're saying that they want more of that. Yes. Bro. This guy was talking about not only that. I have a buddy who has it. My friend Evan from Black Rifle Coffee. Oh, yeah. I know. Evan. Yeah. One of my best friends. Love him to death. Evan has it bad. And if fox him up, it's not as simple as he's allergic to red meat. Like if fox up all of his blood work and his body's a mess. And he picked it up hiking and hunting. He got a tick and he didn't know and he got, he's got a bit. My friend, Burk Resher, his wife's family half of them have this fucking problem. No way. Yeah. Are they from the east coast? Yeah. It's the Texas Lone Star tick. It's a Lone Star tick. Yeah. It's not the Texas Lone Star. Yeah. But this one tick carries this thing and they think that that might perhaps be genetically engineered as well. It's crazy. Because there was no alpha gal problem. No. 30, 40 years ago. It just didn't exist. No. And then all of a sudden it's like ubiquitous. And it's everywhere. It's spreading too. Yeah. It's crazy. I never used to think twice about getting a tick. I get ticks all the time hiking around doing the stuff I do. I never used to think twice about now. I'm terrified of it now. I'm terrified of it now. It's not just red meat. The Lyme disease is fucking devastating. You don't catch it early. It can fuck with you the rest of your life. I know multiple people that have it, including Jim Miller, God fights in the UFC. Really bad. Jesus. And it fucked up his career for quite a while, but he got his diet under wraps. And he figured out like what to eat, what not to eat. And now he's fine. Do you know about some of those other animal warfare things they used to do? Like the spy tech they put in cat city cats? Do you know about those? No. Oh, dude. There's some amazing ones. Spy tech and cats? So during World War II, Jamie would have to confirm what city this was in. I believe it was the Russians used to put little hearing devices in street cats. Because because the Brits would go and meet in back alleys and have meetings, but they were feral cats everywhere. So they'd have all these cats running around with these wires in their brains and stuff. And these little, yeah, acoustic kiddies. That's it. The CIA. Dude, how crazy is this? acoustic kiddie was a central intelligence agency project launched by the directorate of science and technology in the late 1960s and the 1960s. So it tended to use cats to spy on the Kremlin and in Soviet embassies. In an hour long procedure of veterinary surgeon, he planted a microphone in the cat's ear canal and a small radio transmitter at the base of its skull and a thin wire into its fur. Oh my God. How crazy. Imagine that you're just like having a secret meeting in a back cove, you know, back alley. And there's a cat there just live streaming your conversation to the CIA. Go back up a little bit here. It says, do the cat sense of hunger had to be addressed in another operation. What? Interesting. First acoustic kiddie mission was you've dropped on two men in a park outside the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C. The cat was released nearby, but was hit and allegedly killed by a taxi almost immediately. That's probably the thing was all fucked up. Yeah. Probably couldn't get it. It's like, what is in my head? Yeah, they put a wire in my head. This gets a frantic cat. Uh, how were this disputed in 2013 by Robert Wallace, a former director of the office of technical service who said the project was abandoned due to the difficulty of training the cat to behave as required. Go fair. And that the equipment was taken out of the cat. The cat was re-sown for a second time and lived for a long and happy life afterwards lies. Yeah, come on. You fucking killed that cat. You got him by a taxi, but it was fine. Also, get out of its head. Oh, but I mean more than one cat, I'm sure. Yeah. But this idea, the equipment was taken out of the cat. The fuck you did that. You spent money taking the equipment out. Did you really? Yeah, I did. Did you just kill the cat? 100% can assholes. Dude, there's a few of these. And the bats that would light fires. You know about those ones. Hold up. The military did not give up on this use of animals as spies. As the 2006, the Pentagon requested a creation of a cyborg, cyborg insects for you. And espionage. The request was made by fucking DARPA, of course. Yep. Of the Pentagon, scientists had Cal Berkeley responded by creating a controllable cyborg beetle in October of 2009. What? There's a cockroach under your carpet here listening to us somewhere right now. They're not going to hear anything other than the stuff we already talked about. Yeah, that's true. That's true. The wonderful thing about having such a retarded show. I'm just saying a lot of it. Look at this. Look at this. Look at this. Look at this. This is a fucking battery in the beetle. Come on. That's bad. That's bad. Look at the microchip on its back. It's amazing that the beetle can live through all this. Yeah, it's pretty amazing. That's wild. Wow. And I guess as these things have gotten smaller and smaller as shorts, battery technologies and crease cores, think of your cell phone in 09 compared to now. Yeah. The fucking wild, man. Yeah, there were a few of these. They used to light bats on fire and then they'd send them to roost and then they'd burn down whole towns and things like that. That's going back. Dude, there's spy pigeons where they put cameras like there's a handful of these that the CIA tried. Well, how about what they do at dolphins? Oh, like the, well, you know the whole, the, um, not Beluga. What's, yeah, what's the Beluga? The Russian spy whale. I don't know that. I was talking about dolphins. They used to detonate things. Oh, tell me about it. You know, they used dolphins as like literal distributors of warheads. Oh, really? Get a dolphin to go somewhere and then they blow them up. No way. They get a kamikaze dolphin. I don't know the exact details of it because I got sad when I was reading about them. I was like, oh, it's a fork. I have a deep attachment to dolphins. I fucking love dolphins. I always say anybody who hates dolphins has to be a bad person. I've had some experiences with them. I had one where I was like really high on edibles and Hawaii. And the dolphins would jump out of the water near the boat and they look at you. Yeah. They look at you when they were jumping out of the water like, look, look at me. Yeah. Like, look, it's doing this thing. And they're literally just playing their plan. Yeah. 100% plan because they came to the boat and they were jumping in the wake of the boat. And the more you would cheer and yeah, look at that. The more they were doing it. And they were having fun. And I was like, these are incredible creatures. Oh, they totally pick up on your energy. So the secret dolphin program began in 1959 to detect underwater minds and enemy divers. But I think they did stuff where they even. You mean whether this is correct or they just like, the one that's the history says that they didn't do anything to harm humans or engage in combat. They like, told their handlers to do it. The one that I've heard about is that they like put them out ahead. They were just signifying in dark water because they could see stuff better than our current technology back then. So they would echo locate and say, yo, we got something over here. Come check it out. What this is. Well, how's the dolphin communicate that back to the people and how's it know what the person is intended? That's no. That's pretty good. I think there was some speculation that they actually used them as weapons though. Well, have you seen vauds not to transition off dolphins but Valdameer? Valdameer? The Vladimir? I don't know. The Russian spy, Beluga? No. Okay, that's a real thing. Like, like, 100% this one's real. So there was this Beluga whale named Valdameer of Latameer or something like that. And he turned up in Norway and he was escaped from a Russian spy program and he had a harness with spy gear on him. This is him right here. Look, see the spy gear on him? It's like a whole thing. And so the Russians had been training this whale as a spy and had harnesses and spy equipment on him and then he just pieced out and turned up in, I want to say Norway. And then they followed him for a while and then he mysteriously got shot. Yeah, mysteriously. Yep, just things with the dolphin. Like with the dolphin story, I don't know if this is accurate but I did read this one time that we would like with if we knew Russia was doing this, we would put some paperwork out that said, well, we've got dolphins that are blowing up mines. Right. So you guys know it. Now we got to figure that out. Yeah. And we got to figure that out. That's a good point. That's a good point. It's like you never really know what's real. Right. How cool the Beluga whales look though. Look at that thing. That looks like an alien. Super, super, super cool. I mean, look at that. That looks like we have come to your planet. They're all discussed your use of nuclear power. And you would talk in that very calm tone. That looks like something that would be very calm. No, that was it. Yeah, this was a crazy story. But you know that John Lilly research with dolphins. Do you know about that? I'm not sure. John Lilly is the guy who invented the sensory deprivation tank. Oh, yeah. He's the one of those. Yeah, we have one over here. John Lilly was the man who was the inspiration for the movie, Altered States. Okay. So John Lilly, who was this really interesting guy and was famously like out there with psychedelics. Like he would he would take intramascular doses of ketamine and jump in the sensory deprivation tank. Oh, damn. Trying to unlock brain things. My friend Todd actually did it with him. Oh, wow. So John Lilly, who was also a pioneer in interspecies communication. So they were trying to figure out how to communicate with dolphins. So they set up a house and this lady lived with the dolphins in the house to get the dolphin and trying to coach the dolphin. And then like literally she lived in water. So the water was like, you know, four feet deep. Uh huh. And she lived with his dolphin. The problem was the dolphin was super horny. Oh, no. Only way that she could get this dolphin to cooperate was she had a jerk him off. Yep. So she was jerking off the dolphin and somehow or another they found out and they cut the funding for research. But she had to do it. That's what I Wap rate was she had a jerk him off. Yeah, so she was jerking off the dolphin and Somehow or another they found out and they cut the funding for research, but she had to do it. That's what I said You got to do it. That's the joke. She's like she liked it though. Look at her. She's not gonna. She's like yeah I mean after a while she probably did enjoy a little bit. I mean what else are you gonna do? You're stuck in a tank with a dolphin the girl who talked to dolphins. So is there a documentary on this? Ooh, let's uh, is there a clip? Is it like blurry? We see her hand moving? A water turn and white so I guess but if she jerked the dolphin off then the dolphin would try to talk to her But the thing was you can't really get them to they can't make the noises that we want them to make they don't have the ability Like it's a high It but it can't like the vocal cords right right right right right that's one of the things where AI May actually start to make a huge difference right yeah, right because they are able to decipher a lot of like Sitation like dolphin and whale language now and with enough of a database they'll start to be able to say like this This means this this means this how they actually Deciphered it so it's coming up to a so based you know AI works you have to train it on something Is this the lady? She looks like they're trying to lady it would do that Gonna real dolphin jerk look to her Crazy story to this listen to these orca whales imitate human speech. No, it's responding. I mean yeah Oh, there's your guy. Yeah, it's getting there. It's trying. Yeah Amazing Whoa, I bet what it wants to say is let me go Fucking asshole Put me back in the ocean you praise a bitch I Quit jerking me off Maybe if they jerked off the killer where they went to kill them. Yeah It's like just like seawirl alone. It's just it's so awful and it wasn't until those that documentary It wasn't called black fish black fish. Yeah, that was like the first one where people when like hey It was really eye opening. Yeah, we shouldn't support this at all I mean I can't believe people still even go to fucking sea world. It's pretty crazy You know, basically prison you know about those two in France that are trapped there No, oh, this is interesting. So there is basically a sea world equivalent in France and the government shut it down I forget the I'm sure we can figure it out But it was shut down But then the dolphins and the two orca's were not released and the guys like these are mine I'm not releasing them and I kind of forward to release them remove them So they've just been sitting in these abandoned tanks for I want to say a year now Maybe maybe more. Yeah, this is it here. They're raised to save these two Jamie, I don't know if you can see if there's an aerial shot of it, but yeah, so they're just sitting in this thing But but it's closed the guy kind of forward to feed them because nobody's visiting And then I believe the government just doesn't want to do anything about it because they're like we just wanted to shut you down We don't want to actually like do anything about it So there's just these two orca's sitting in these tanks. How do they get food? I mean, he's feeding them, but he's like doing it out of his pocket and it's like few and far between oh Man, so yeah, it's it's a crazy. They're there. Yeah, the abandoned whales and they're just sitting in these tanks We've had a do you know filled dimers? He's a guy who uh, he helped shut down marine land in Canada. Okay. Yeah awful awful place There's so many of these fucking places like that. We see what they're doing and just like oh Man if we could understand them. Yeah, and we could I think someday in the future We're gonna look back at that the way people today look back at slavery. Oh totally We're gonna say these are intelligent creatures. They just they just don't have the ability to manipulate their environment like yeah We do yeah, but like just dolphins. There's cerebral cortex is 40% larger than a human beings so Something's going on in there and you think it's okay to put them in a swimming pool. That's crazy Dude, it's the same thing like what I was talking about elephants there. They're EQ They're emotional intelligence. We can't even comprehend it The way those animals feel like the highs that an elephant experiences and the lows that experience are way bigger than the highs Are lows that most humans? I think any human can experience like their EQ is way bigger than ours The trauma that they feel from losing a loved one or from being abused or whatever it happens to be is like 10x What humans can even emotionally comprehend? How do we know that based on their their brain scan And whatnot? I don't know the specifics of it, but because that part of their brain is so much larger than ours Oh, and so you have these they might not have the same like Computative skills as we do mentally, but they have this emotional Intelligence that's like so much deeper and broader than ours at least that's my belief It is a weird thing with us where we only characterize intelligence as the ability to manipulate your environment Yeah, like we we want you to write a book right? I don't I don't trust you you're real you're really smart Make your house How come you don't have a rocket ship right? Yeah, you're so smart. Where's your phone? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's weird. Yeah, right? We're a weird way to look at things. Yeah, it's like I think there's a part of people that recognize that this Direction that people like this Classification of intelligence in that way is wrong, but I don't I don't think we can really quantify it yet and if AI really can decipher A dolphin language or a language whale language if they really can and we realize that they're actually communicating God I would hope that would change our approach to how we deal with those things. I think it would because there's I think they are Sea people Really do they yeah, they're just they don't need to manipulate their environment first of all They can travel 3d. Yeah, they go up. They go down. They go across. They can hold the breath for an hour They don't need to make a house. No their food is everywhere Also, they're at the top of the fucking food chains right their orcas and they're no they're nomadic They don't we are not nomadic by trade So we have to manipulate our environment to make it more comfortable Why were because they're not low? Yeah, we didn't move so fast they can make a sunfish explode We're so slow like the fastest people like we just run into each other and knock each other unconscious. That's that's what we could do on the watch though Dude, but I want to go back to what you said about I agree by the way about orcas and captivity and whales and things like that There's this huge anti-zoom movement that I just don't agree with though like I Believe I agree with you that in the future will go why did we keep animals the way we did and when you look at old zoos and concrete boxes and stuff But there's so much good that animals and captivity have done saving species keeping things alive connecting kids to nature There's a lot of gray area there's this thing and there's fucking San Diego Zoo You know what I mean there's a lot of nuance to it. San Diego zoos an excellent example of a really great zoo It's unbelievable. It's incredible. I've been to that place before. Yeah But I also went to that wolf place with you. Yeah, and that made me sad. I know yeah I know went there. I was bummed out man, but at least they're rescuing them, you know like I know what they also cut their balls off Yeah, that bummed me out hardcore otherwise they all fight. I mean, but that's the gray area that you had like What's the alternative you know They dice let them lose but they're not but only a few of them were pure wolves You can't just let you know Of the true to you know because then you're muddying jeans. It's such a complicated thing Well, isn't that the whole reason why black wolves exist in the first place? I think black wolves exist because it's a trait that they got from domesticated dogs I read that and then I read it was false and then I read it again I don't know what the truth behind that is put into perplexity. We should the process a Rogan S claim As stated on today's podcast, you know word that's like you can't get a good That's interesting. How do you word that? Would you say is it true that black wolves? inherited that trait from domesticated dogs because that is one thing that absolutely has happened is it has been Interbreeding betrayed. Oh, yeah, and not just on purpose. No. No. Yeah, it happened. Yeah, I mean you get Just like a little while and yeah, it does right right. Yeah. Yeah. Is the genetic mutation of a black fur color brought about by domestication. Yes Sorry Is it is the black The trait of black wolves Did they inherit that from domesticated dogs? Added my thing Uh From domesticated dogs. I would yeah, yeah, see see what it says Let's say Pointed enough. It'll start guessing. I love watching it work where it's like spinning. Yes This is well supported by genetic research Black coat color in North American wolves comes from mutation in the K locus especially um specifically Excuse me a three base pair deletion in the CBD 103 I don't know what that little thing is. Yeah, I don't know defense in gene Which fence? Is that what it is? I think produces a dominantly inherited Melonistic phenotype the mutation originated in dogs and moved into wolves through hybridization Not the other way around in 2009 study by Anderson at all First identified the KB black a whale in wolves is derived from dog wolf Interbreeding follow our work analyzing 331 wolves and 20 dogs found that North American wolf Uh How do you say that word? haplotype. Oh haplotype. Yeah. Are mono Philetic Meaning a sink. I feel like you're my teacher single Good job introgression event from dogs most likely seated The a lao through the continent probably in the Yukon or North Northwest territories um, you know, I um Went to where Colossal I know made the dire wolf texted me when you guys went That was an interesting experience. Was that cool to see? Yes. I haven't even seen him I know it's a whole hot shot I brought my youngest daughter and she was cuddling with the four month old wolf Well, there you go. You can cuddle with them when they're four months old. Yeah, until certain point But it was like a puppy and it was still huge right? It was no no no no no. No. It was pretty small. Yeah. It's like 40 pounds. Okay, okay, but there's not a whole fucking cute man. She was so sweet. She's so sweet. She would cuddle with you And you you petter and she'd kiss you. That's cool. It was like a fucking dog. That is a Wrongulus there you go. That is oh my gosh. She's so sweet, but the males they had two males that had Police that's right. Yeah, that's right. Col They were like that when we went there like that size picture that size that's already Yes, I don't know if I let my kids in with a wolf that size well they kept away from you. Yeah, and we were in a large contained area But we got to go out with them. Yeah, and they just kind of hang out and look at you They keep away from me for the most part, but she didn't she just went up But she can't be with them yet with the males. Yeah, she was too little interesting to like you know They didn't want her to get killed and just just too sketchy. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, and she was you know She was still a baby still, but they were older. I think they were a year or close to a year But they could hang out with them for the first like five or six months. I think no after while they just got Different there's also some stuff about them that they didn't even know dire wolves had like the main Which is they're getting interesting they can aren't they have a main? Oh wow Almost like a lion's oh wow Which they didn't know and they didn't know they were gonna be white either Now is that a variant from their genetic mutation work or is that something that's just expressing itself? Very good question that you'd have to talk to a geneticist about because like there's a lot of people that don't even agree They're actually dire wolves a lot. Yeah a lot Yeah, they're essentially saying the way you've done is you've taken the traits of dire wolves and you've made them Be expressed in a gray wolf this is a gray wolf, but that's what Beth says they've done I mean like she's she's not they're not hiding that they're right. We're trying to fill in each we're trying to make something Yes, yeah, but she's also said that I think I know on a miscarriage But I essentially what they're saying was but that's what a dire wolf was right like that They are a wolf that has all these traits right like the size is the same The look is the same you can get technical and say no You've taken a gray wolf and made it except but yes But they got those genes specifically from dead dire wolves right right So it's like well what it is it our own classification of these things that we're disputing right because we can't just decide Like that this I call this a dire wolf and that's what it is like The genes don't give a fuck what labels you put on not at all You know and if you make a dinosaur like that's not a real T-Rex it ate everyone in the city right It's a real T-Rex. It just took over a fucking city. It just ate everyone in a VW bus It's a 30 foot tall lizard. It's a dinosaur like it doesn't matter how you shape it Yeah, oh the woolly mouse is really cool too. Yeah, they really need Ben Ben Been told me one day. I could have a woolly mouse so I'm holding him to that. Yeah It's it's really interesting seeing the dire wolf though and just imagining What was it like when those things are just roaming the earth? I know because it's like a 300 pound wolf It's all white with like thick fur and a mane like a lion dude Speaking of roaming the earth. Have you heard the theory about how a sloth bear stopped sorry not sloth bears? Okay, what were the big cave bears in the short face? Short face bears stopped human immigration. Yeah, have you read about that? Yeah, that's really cool totally makes sense it totally does They just stood there waiting for people like salmon to cross the bearing land bridge And they're like well it's that time of year again Also like who would do that knowing that those things are out there that thing was so big. Yeah, it's like double the size of a polar bear It's crazy. Yeah, it's crazy twice large polar bear that it's can run 50 miles. Look at that thing I don't care how smart we are that is not something you want to face right even if you have a gun like good luck Like if you have a nine millimeter handgun and you run across a grizzly bear, you're dead. Yeah, it's not gonna be an upfire power No, so what are you gonna? What are you gonna hit that thing with? Well, they have rocks so you know that's good rocks and spears Yeah, rocks I mean when they first started coming across did they even have fucking bows and arrows that yeah, I I don't know Yeah, but they I mean spears for sure but like that But then there's that there's the real question is that the only way people got here? Right When you see the white sands footprints that are 22,000 years old and you start going well this predates the ice age Now before any humans were known anywhere in the new world. Yeah, so it's like well What's going on there right? This is actual human footprints right that have been dated to 22,000 years ago Yeah, and that's just all we found yeah, that's just because they left footprints. Yeah, like that doesn't mean there wasn't something there 50,000 years before a hundred thousand exactly exactly and then there's in Mexico this evidence that looks like predation on mammoth bones by humans. Oh really? Spearheads and things carvings into the mammoth bones. It looks like they're broken open to get marrow Oh very disputed right because there's also Some people to think it could have been like some rocks falling on the bones sure sure sure how this is happening But it does think they oh Let me write this up for Joe So what it we're gonna forget a separate computer that we only use for perplexity what is the question? Oh, sorry Well, how would humans have contested short face bears on the bearing straight? Let me write this up for Joe fuck off baby Did he actually have all of monster bears kept humans out of North America doesn't hold up any longer apparently Yeah, when I was talking people say it was a myth that someone a scientist caught us for a commented on a paper that doesn't necessarily He could have thought that but Didn't they didn't really have evidence for it. Well, here's the thing like the idea of a bear line No, because the problem is bears they would have to eat so much to sustain that kind of mass Yeah, if there couldn't really have been a lot of them no But it sure makes sense that they were predating upon people when they came across. Oh hold up hold up Go back back up here. This guy's saying something kooky He's saying that a hyper carnivore built for pacing long distance He argued that it was primarily a scavenger using a size sense of smell and long-legged gate to Clepto paratocite paratocite parat Parasitize you got it there it is kills from lions dire wolves and cimitar cats rather than the rundown prey itself That doesn't even make sense long-legged gate would make it faster I heard about this. So yeah, the theory is that Sure face bear would come in and rob a kill like basically what a hyena does to lions or what wolves do to mountain lions Yes, but I think it to me it doesn't add up well Well, you know grizzly bears chase down moose and kill them. Yes plenty of video I watched a video yesterday of it They've also shown now that hyenas are incredibly efficient predators and until like 10 years ago We thought hyenas were only scavengers or 50. I mean it's longer than that But you know what I mean right now they show they have like a 30% success rate, which is very high Yeah, there's no reason why they wouldn't be if they're carnivore So like why would they be completely relying on other animals to do the work for them when they have that kind of biting power? They they're just opportunistic like old carnivores and they move his packs. Yeah, they work as pack animals So they kind of move like dogs if if you're gonna get food get food You know what I mean if you can kill it kill it if you can fight something off for it fight something off for it like it doesn't really matter That's how carnivores are what is this? What you saying says this is how they 100 brown bears that probably would have done it the same way Oh get him in the dens and then get burn it burn the entrance with fire probably kill the babies Right, but that's if you had access to fire I had an adult adult and a spear at best and maybe some fire that they could maybe move, you know You know you know close you have to be to hit something within the adult adult. Yeah, okay There's there's some videos that are really interesting where they're showing people Realistic scenarios where bears charging you and they pull the machine. Yeah showing bears prey and guns like showing them like a mat Like imagine you have a 10 millimeter semi automatic pistol and you have to rack it so you have to rack a slide Yeah, so the gun the bears coming you have to draw the gun Rack it take the safety on then point it towards the animal and squeeze it through your dead. You're done. You're already dead It's like that it has to be like a hundred yards away from you as it starts running for you to get a shot off I think the like idea is the bear gives you some sign. Look at that bullshit ass thing I've tried one it is impossible to throw accurately. Well, that's true, but you're not practiced in it. No, of course Like yeah, I mean I've seen people that are super accurate with spears Is anybody Adam Greentree doesn't he do the atlato? My Just like oh I think I've seen him. He probably knows how to do it. Yeah, but I mean pretty well. It's not a good weapon No, I mean it's definitely better than no weapon Over throwing a spear it just goes further met mechanical leverage. Yeah, so it's I have a thing like that for my dog Yeah, it's like a Thing the ball that is a ball and move it and you get it's so easy to not blow your shoulder out You throw it pretty fucking far right and that night whenever ever time I do it I was like wow of course This is way better Yes Extra leverage with this thing and then also you can kind of whip it with your wrist and you get all this action With the ball you would do the same thing with a spear with a lotta make sense Yeah, it seems hard to be accurate though super hard. Well, it's hard to be accurate with a traditional bow right You know, it's so hard. Yeah, you know, I shoot a compound bow. Mm-hmm and a compound bow is There's so much technology involved. Oh, yeah first of all I have a laser range finder and I arranged something It says 52 yards then I go to my site tape That's on my my site on my bow and I dial it to 52 yards Because I use archery software that measures the weight of my arrow So I have this 500 grain arrow and then it has the speed per so it's 390 feet per second Yeah 500 grain arrow. Yeah, and then it I put it into this computer and it spits out a site tape So that I can move my pins specifically so I could put it in a quarter 52 yards if I was accurate enough. I'm not. Yeah, no one really is sure except like really excellent world-class archers Sure with a traditional bow you're just guessing yeah Yeah, so you just guessing the arc of the arrow and then you have to think okay, I'm buying arrows Right they're made by a guy who's measuring them right they're all down to like they're within two grains of each other And they have like inserts my front of center is very high perfect aerodynamics and they made it a carbon fiber These fucking arrows they're making them by hand and then they're making the arrow heads by hand Yeah, so they could be off Yep, each one of them like so you're just guessing where that fucking arrow is gonna go and you have to shoot every day to get a real sense Oh, yeah, like what the drop is at a certain distance and then you have to kind of judge how far is he? Is he 20 yards? 30 yards? 50 yards So even with modern traditional bows, that's like it sounds like a yeah I know what you mean yeah recurves and long bows, right? I mean it that sounds like an oxymoron, but they are still Traditional in the sense of you're not using cams. Yeah, right? You know I have like a cam that rolls over and there's some mechanical advantage Fiberglass limbs and all this chest you're using like wood still, right? Even with those things you're still buying arrows and the arrows weigh the same amount. Yeah, they're perfect So if you did that over and over again in your yard You did it every day for three hours a day you would get a sense of how far and then If you did it a bunch you'd get an idea of judging distances There's like little tricks. There's certain archery tournaments where you're not allowed to use a rangefinder. Oh really? Yeah, and so the idea is you have to develop a skill of being it And I think these tournaments probably started back when rangefinders didn't exist. Yeah, and then when rangefinders did exist They're like nah, that's cheating that out right? And then the targets are at various Yes, yeah, and so guys develop a very good Way of measuring distance sure and what essentially they do is they they can pretty accurately judge five yards And then they double that and then they triple that and then they try to figure it and they get within like 10 or 15 yards Sure, but you know that's a lot even with a compound bow, you know that drop of 10 or 15 yards It's pretty significant even something that's going 300 feet a second But when you're doing with a fucking wooden arrow that you made yourself with a stone tip like like one of these bad boys I have one here somewhere Somewhere on this desk. Yeah So like that's something you made that so if you make that one and then somebody else makes one right next to it It might be 15 grains different. It might be 50 grains different and the air dynamics are different Yeah, the flint nothing is completely different. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's things not very That's not good I think playing like a motherfucker. Yeah shot it out of a really good bow and not to mention the stress of if I don't kill this thing I'm either gonna die or I'm not gonna eat or you know all the other things and You have a 15 foot bear right Probably bigger like was the height of a short face bear or the length Like what is the what is a big short face bear? You've seen those caves They have in like Missouri where they still claw marks from short face bears and things really oh Yeah, you can go visit like middens of them in Missouri where they call it out of cave like a den Yeah, where they lived in dens and you could see their claw marks in the mud and everything else amazing 11 to 11 a 12 feet I think they probably have to be bigger than that because Kodiak bears get that big Kodiak bears can get 12 feet do they get that big? Yeah, Kodiak? Yeah, I Mean maybe they're measuring them squarely because you know like a lot of times they measure stuff to try to make it seem bigger So what is the largest Kodiak bear ever killed? Let's look it's looked that up largest Kodiak bear largest Kodiak bear ever killed Ever recorded there you go recorded the same thing Okay, they have it by weight It's 1,656 pounds, which is by the way Whole at sea Shit and saying yeah nearly a one-ton bear. Yeah, that's so crazy The hind foot measured 18 inches. Oh god. How tall was it? How long was it earth 500 pounds more than that? Oh, yeah, but over a ton in a zoo. Yeah. Oh my god, but he might have been fat. He was fat. It might be a short fat. So What is the so what is the longest the largest length? Pretty sure he's sitting I think I've seen this bear and he's sitting in the anchorage airport when you land there Oh, there's a big was that that bear? I think that's the largest bear ever killed that. Yeah, I've seen that in anchorage That's that thing's nuts at the airport there. Yeah. Yeah. It's in luggage last case Yeah, I'm pretty sure that's the biggest bear ever ever shot Look at that one ever recorded 2,130 pounds. No, no length measurement That is so big. That's so crazy bear the short face bear there. They don't even really know how much it weighed They're just basing it on the bones. Yeah, right. They don't have a dead one now So that right that photo up there. That's a Fred bear with his 1962 world record Alaskan bear go back to that photo that you just were At before Yeah, look at that. That's his stuff bear. Jesus. He shot that with a old bullshit bow. Yeah. Look at his bow the reaker of bow That bull's that both sucks would narrow That's so crazy. He was the the first like modern bow hunter. Oh really? Yeah, I mean, he's a guy who popularized bow hunting Fred bears a legend. Oh, in the bow hunting world and I mean you got to think How much how good does life have to be? Where you go? Let's try to do something that people you should do before guns. Yeah, just just because yeah It wasn't really a thing that people practiced right like Food had to be so readily available. Yeah, we had to say let's make it harder. Yeah, go backwards Yeah, let's have so much food. Yeah, let's make it more difficult. Yeah And then there's guys today that they don't like compound bows because they're too hot to too easy. Yeah, there's an recur of Oh, yeah, it's crazy. Yeah, my friend Aaron Snyder who's a like a world famous bow hunter went back to using a recur of bow Realize it was killing too many things with a compound bow fella goes too easy But that's what happens right as these guys master their their craft and when they spend all that time on it and then they're like How do I make the challenge harder on my cell? So they're competing with other world-class bow hunters like they're all like who's the man? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, even you go stroke. Yeah There's a little bit of that, but it's also like that's how they get good in the first place like this a weird thing about people in Competition you can say competition is bad like okay He's saying that on your phone because how do you think you got a phone? Yeah, you got a phone because somebody's competing for other people who developed a phone make it's just a different kind of competition I think competition is essential to human culture. It's certainly essential to progress. Yeah And this is why socialism is never gonna work. Yeah, you got to reward people Yeah, if they're not rewarded they're not gonna work hard enough to do anything really spectacular Why bother so you're never gonna get all laptop? Yeah, would have never happened. Yeah, you've never had a high speed internet. Yeah, somebody has to profit wildly Yes, for them to be enthusiastic about spending 17 hours a day making something like that But that's the joy of competition paying off. Yeah, right? It's like I know not so much Bohoning but if you're competitive as a person to the point that you succeed the most at developing a phone or a cup or whatever It happens to be you win and you get paid the most We just have to have regulations to make sure that those people don't run a muck and then take over entire countries and become a monopoly Yeah, yeah, yeah, what was going on with Microsoft in the 1990s remember all those remember that no what was how were they taking over Bill Gates was maniac like But before people think of Bill Gates now well now I think COVID kind of ruined his People's oppression so him can now they think of him as a vaccine pusher But and also as a philanthropist or doing philanthropy that makes millions and millions of dollars for him Didn't he also put out that anti protein film? Wasn't that him? Do you know what I'm talking about? I think Bill Gates why I have to pay that makes millions and millions of dollars for them. Didn't he also put out that anti protein film? Wasn't that him? Do you know what I'm talking about? I think Bill Gates, why Bill Gates correct me for him, but Bill Gates, wife is vegan, I believe. And he funded like some Netflix documentary all on how like bodybuilders get huge. Are you thinking about James Cameron? Am I thinking about James Cameron? I know James Cameron's wife is vegan. I might be mixing them up. You're talking about game changers that the vegan document Yes, yeah, but the huge Jack guy being like I never touch protein. Yeah, that it turns out that the problem, I think if you're looking at that from an ethical perspective and you're saying factory farming is bad, I'm on your page. Totally. I'm with you. But that had a agenda. But yeah, it's a clear agenda. Also just not accurate. Anyway, I pirated your thing on Bill Gates though. Sorry. So the point was during the 1990s, he was, there was all these trials. Where they had these monopolistic practices. Okay. And they were buying up competition or destroying competition. These are just anybody that developed any computer. Yeah, anybody developed browsers that competed with, you know, Microsoft stuff. Yeah, here is landmark 1990s trials referred to United States versus Microsoft Corporation, massive antitrust lawsuit filed by US Department of Justice in 20 states. Key elements included browser war integration, the antitrust ruling and the appellate settlement. And so everybody in the 90s thought of him as this guy who is this like ruthless capitalist, it was trying to destroy all the competition. Okay. So he kind of reinvented himself. Gotcha. And what the way he reinvented themselves, the first of all, he donated an enormous amount of money to the media. So to NBC, CBS, CNN, always different kind. They gave him hundreds of millions of dollars just to fluff. Just to kind of say, guys, I'm your friend. I'm your buddy over here. And then he developed the bill and the Linda Gates Foundation. And they were really concerned with global health. Oh my God. It's dude. Do you know what they did fucking in the Corvassa Delta with their mosquito nets? Why would you? But do you know what I'm talking about at all? Oh, what they do. Dude, I'm going to go on a fucking tirade. Please do. Okay. So the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation decided that there was too much malaria in Africa, right? Which you and I could probably agree with. Malaria is bad. So what did they do? They gave all of these people living in tribal villages. I'm totally pirated your thing. I'm sorry, but I'm going to go on a fucking rant here. They gave all these people living in the Corvassa Delta, which is the bread basket of the Zambese Valley, meaning like where more fish are born. It's a it's a nursery for fish, right? Not just there, but this is a good micro example. They gave millions of mosquito nets out to all these people to avoid malaria. Guess what the people who are starving to death did with their mosquito nets? The fish, they fished with them. Mosquito net has a hole that is so small that a mosquito can't get through. So guess what? These mosquito nets now indiscriminately catch tiny baby fish in areas like Corvassa where the fish go to breed and reproduce and populate. So now all of a sudden you have thousands and thousands of people that have been handed nets that have been living one way for hundreds of thousands of years. Don't give a shit about malaria. They have their own way of dealing with malaria. They sit in smoky huts at night. They sleep with a campfire. Everything else. Yes, they still get malaria, some of them, but they deal with it. Their own way. Bill Millenigates Foundation come in, hand out millions of mosquito nets. Absolutely collapse the entire population of fish that feed millions of people. Because these people just take the nets and fish all the baby fish out so those fish don't grow up to make substantial protein sources. So now these wonderful philanthropists that have given out millions of nets have destroyed an ecosystem, crashed a fish population and created widespread hunger for people that otherwise had plenty of resources. All because they were trying to help with their mosquito nets. Oh, God. It's just like it's a fucking disaster, dude. They've taken such a rich and important part of Africa. One of the most abundant freshwater fisheries in the world and destroyed it because they're helping by handing out mosquito nets. Good. Yeah, I don't know. Sorry, I told you I'd gone to rent, but it's like it's so bad what's happened over there. And they're still giving out mosquito nets, by the way. And you literally watch these guys line up, take a mosquito net and it never goes in their house. It goes straight to catching fish that are this big for them to eat. Oh, God. Sorry. I remember it was crazy. It's so bad for them. It feels like can you just double up the net thing and just get them other nets too? Like I say, hey, guys. That's what happens. 2018. They got the new nets. Oh, you know what it says? That's what I am not. I'm looking at the thing. Yeah. But it's good. It's good. Other information. It just totally might have ruined it. And crashed the ecosystem. It completely crashed. And it created widespread hunger in a place that had no hunger. So now you have people with malaria and hunger. And it's like done from a place of good intent, or maybe it isn't. And I think that's where you were going. But I don't think it is. Yeah. I think it's a it's a ruse. And I think what a lot of it is is this thing, like we are doing philanthropy. Yeah. But then you go, but you're profiting. You're making hundreds of millions of dollars from this philanthropy, right? Yeah. You're buying goodwill. And you're also on television promoting vaccines. It's like, why are you your guy who didn't even graduate college? Yeah. Like, I mean, I mean, I mean, if you made it out of high school, like he's a weird guy. Like, it's obviously very smart. Yeah, of course. But why you're not a health expert. Why and you look like shit? Like, why are you promoting health? Yeah. Like, this is great. Global health. Yeah. Like, just a fucking weird guy, man. Yeah. The weirdest thing, if you ever seen that, you know, he was obviously, um, friends with Jeffrey Epstein or communicated with him and had some sort of release. Yes. Yes. Oh, I didn't know that. Oh, yeah. It's popular. Gotcha. Well known. But because everyone is connected to Epstein now, like I've lost a lot of people. Yeah. But the craziest conversation was there was a woman who was asking him. Did he regret his relationship with Jeffrey Epstein? And he's just trying to say that the only reason why he talked to Jeffrey Epstein, because Jeffrey Epstein was going to, he was going to donate money to his philanthropy and all the different things that he's involved in. But it didn't work out. I do regret it. And, and she said, did you, I forget what her question was, he, but Gates says, well, he's dead now. So there's that. Geez. There's something about it. Is he got to be careful? Like he's, it's like a weird, like veiled threat. It's very odd the way he answers the question. Yeah. Essentially saying that I'm reading it like, like you got whacked. Yeah. Like that's what I'm reading. Interesting. Weird. Fine. That that I was, well, you find that I was talking to some buddies about this, you know, just like standard bro chat. If, if Epstein happened today, right? And you had no knowledge of the weird stuff going on in the island. Like you would be invited. You know what I mean? They'd be like, hey, Joe, do they? They did invite me. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. 2017. I'm like, not to specifically, yeah. But to meet Epstein. But that's what I'm saying. And I was like, what if that happened today? So I came to meet. Oh, sorry. Oh, let's put it. Yeah. Let's do it. Ported at that time that you had a number of meetings with Jeffrey Epstein, who when you met him 10 years ago, he was convicted of soliciting prostitution from minors. What did you know about him when you were meeting with him? As you've said yourself, in the hopes of raising money? Uh, you know, I had dinners with him. I regret doing that. He had relationships with people he said, you know, would give to global health, which is a interest I have, you know, not nearly enough philanthropy goes in that direction. You know, those meetings were mistake. They didn't result in what he purported. And I cut them off. You know, that goes back a long time ago now. There's, you know, so there's nothing new on that. It was reported that you continue to meet with him over several years. And that, in other words, a number of meetings. What did you do when you found out about his background? Well, you know, I've said I regretted having those dinners. And there's nothing, absolutely nothing new on that. Is there a lesson for you for anyone else looking looking at this? Well, he's dead. So, you know, in general, you always have to be careful. And, you know, the, you know, I'm, I'm very proud of what we've done in philanthropy. Very proud of the work of the foundation. First of all, the record scratch. You have billions of dollars. Right. And this guy didn't give you money for years. Right. And you still get money for years. You kept meeting. Yeah. What about your money? Like, what is it? What is it going to give you? How much does he get it? How much does he have? Especially compared to Bill Gates. But he also probably doesn't have a fraction of what you have. Right. So, like, if like Elon started hitting me up to donate money to something, I'd be like, hey, Bitch, why don't you, you got to do it. Do you have much money? You have so much money. Why would you, why are you asking? I'm the wrong guy. If he kept meeting with me for years. Yeah. For years. It's a question. Try to get me to donate. Like, it's kind of similar. Yeah. Right. This is what we're talking about. He's a billionaire. Right. Like hundreds of billions of dollars. So, yeah. None of it makes any sense. No. I was providing a party for rich people. That's what he was doing. He was providing a way where these rich people can fucking let their hair down and have a good old time and do Coke or whatever. That's all it was. Really. Right. But the party had no rules. And that's what makes it. I'm just guessing. I'm just guessing. But I had a guy who tried to get me to meet him in 2017 in LA or where? Well, I was in LA when he reached out to me. Epstein appeared to have drafted himself claiming Gates had, oh, yeah. Yeah. He wrote it to himself. Right. This is an email that Epstein appears to have drafted to himself claiming that Gates had contracted an STI from encounters with Russian girls and hid antibiotics from Melinda. Gates said the emails were never sent and are false. His spokesman called them absolutely absurd. So absurd that someone could get an STD from a Russian girl. Gates has separately admitted to affairs with two Russian women. Oh, with a Microsoft employee. But it says none of them were connected to Epstein or his victims. Some people say those emails were like a journal he was keeping. Why would you keep being? The email himself. He wrote on an iPad all the time apparently. That's why the typos were so bad. And he just liked email. You know, it's, you know, I mean, imagine that's your journal. But why would you do that? Why would you make up a story about a guy having STDs? I think more likely because there was a rumor and this is an unsubstantiated rumor on the re-recler that Epstein was trying to blackmail Gates with some story about a bridge player that he was having an affair with. Oh, interesting. It's not Russian bridge player. I also think they've intentionally flooded the internet with so much misinformation. Perhaps. But my point was if he could have drafted that email, which was never sent, and then sent the draft to Bill Gates or showed it to him. Yeah. And say, what do you think about this? Right. I could just if you don't. Yeah. How about you shut the fuck off? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, because there was a bunch of, well, there was a bunch of people that gave him a lot of money. The gay man's seeing a lot of money? Oh, yeah. Yeah. In fact, the guy, the Victoria Secret's guy gave him a house. He gave him a small amount. A small amount. A hundred percent of his finances. So it wasn't just he gave it to him. Oh, hundred percent. Because I've taken it or, you know, and he goes like, I didn't know what he was doing. So did Epstein's fund that house, right? Did he fund the Victoria Secret guy to start Victoria Secret? No. No, no, no, no, no. He got involved after that guy's, let's go through real deep. So Columbus has got, he's going to go to talk to the IRS about specifically what I don't know in 1984, but he was like the tax guy for that company. He was murdered in a mob hit style. Dude, this is what I like this podcast. I'm just like an animal nerd. I like talking about snakes and I'm like, find out about Victoria Secret. Epstein and shit is well. Well, it's with the human animal does. Yeah. Animal when it's in these very controlled spaces where just, so let's look at it this way. So imagine you're a guy who's especially if you're a nerd and, you know, you were never really good with women when you're in high school college. So college. And then all of a sudden you have literally a hundred billion dollars. And you could just get prostitutes anytime you want. And I guess if you get the really high end ones, they know how to shut the fuck up. Sure. Friend of yours, you was in the Mossad and that guy can get the best hookers. It's got a fucking island. You go to the island. It's the best. We fly. We talk about philanthropy. We fuck. Yeah. It makes sense. I mean, that's what I'm saying for. It's like, it's just a party for a bunch of dorks who can come here with a lot of money. But there's also some weird science connection with him. And that's what the work it's really odd is that there's, he got that ranch in New Mexico. So he could be close to the guys that were working at Los Alamos who were famously not making much money. So he's around these guys and he's talking about going into business with them and giving them this chance to make an insane amount of money. And this is what he did with Eric Weinstein. With Eric Weinstein, he contacted him and they had a meeting and he was trying to get Eric Weinstein to do something with him. And if Eric did it, he had the potential to make an enormous amount of money. And Eric is very wise. And he just didn't buy him from the starters. Like, it's guys are construct. Yeah. He's like, he doesn't know anything about finance. Like, he was talking to him. He's like, this guy's a construct. He's not a real finance guy. Yeah. He's like, there's something going on. The wheeler and dealer. So wait, what was the science they were working on? A bunch of different physicists were connected to him. Einstein, Epstein reportedly hoped to develop super race. If he wins with his deal. Wow. Wow. What is that from? That's the deal. I got a different one of the article. Oh my God. There's a lot of news in New York Times. It was crazy. But he had a bunch of relationships with some very impressive scientists and physicists. And also oddly connected to the whole UAP world, the whole Los Alamos things weird because the thing is that he, by buying that ranch in New Mexico, put him close to Los Alamos, which was in New Mexico. And then he had access to all these scientists that were famously underpaid. Right. So these guys were not making much money. And he was this incredibly wealthy guy through no way than anybody could ever rationally explain. Yeah. It was all weird. And who knows what he was trying to get them to do? He was probably just one of those guys. I mean, you never ended up meeting him. But he was probably just incredibly likable as a con man. Do you know what I mean? You probably sat in a room with him and you're like, wow, this guy's really great. Like maybe I should give him some money. Yeah, I should like what a cool guy. And he's just a dirt bag under the, you know, under the veil. We're just speculating, but maybe, maybe also if you have a bunch of really hot Russian chicks that are hanging out with you, that'll do it. You don't need to be that charming. That's so true. So true. You're a billionaire with a bunch of hot Russian chicks. Yeah. And then there's a bunch of people that are willing to hang out with billionaires just because I've seen it where people just get enamored by the fact that someone's insanely wealthy and they want to go to the party at their house. Like whoa. People do work like crazy. Do I mean they're not fun? I mean, I just don't know them anymore. He was. That's true. That guy's party hard. Good point. Yeah, to be a billionaire to, I mean, in most cases, what you have to do is be insanely driven. Yeah. You have to be that guy that works 18, 20 hours a day. Right. And give up all the other things. Yeah. You have to give up all your time. That becomes your whole life. Yeah. And I, but I think that's also why they wanted a guy like that that could provide them. This is why Eric Weinstein described it. He said he provided them with experiences, I believe. Yeah. And I think he's right. I think that makes sense. So I mean, my one and only billionaire friend is that a not a body that Indian guy I was mentioning. I think it's so cool. He's built this gigantic wildlife rescue. That is pretty dope. Because he's a great thing to do with money. He's just like, he's a nerd like me. And if he hurts, it's going to be like, thanks a lot. But like he's just an animal nerd. Do you know what I mean? He's going to be like, he just like, he just loves animals in conservation. He's like, I have generational wealth that might, you know, it came from his family's family's like fifth or sixth generation of having huge industry. And he's like, okay, so with my excess money, I'm going to rescue animals instead of do other, you know, it's very cool. It's very cool. I mean, for me, it's amazing. Yeah. I mean, there's nothing wrong with space race stuff too. It's all fascinating. No, but it's just, it's, and I get it from a perspective of people who think there's not enough money in the world. And then why do these people have so much money and they should give all their money away and like, oh, okay, but you could do that all the way down to like $100,000 a year if you really wanted to do it, especially when you compare yourself to everyone else in the world. That's right. That's right. We're in the, just living in this country alone, we're in the 1% most people. I think 1% of the world we will look this up. It's like $50,000. If you make more than that, you're the 1% of earth. Right. And that's the majority of people in the United States. Yeah. Yeah, you're barely getting by in America and you're in the 1% of the world. Exactly. Yeah. Which is wild. It's wild. It really is. Yeah. Yeah. We're, we're the weirdest animal. You just study us. I should. Well, I learned a lot today. I'll tell you what. Yeah, but we're not fun. Like you, you study us and you go, oh, God, what are they fucking doing? Where's these study animals? You're like, oh, fucking cool. They're way cooler. They're way more interesting. More teeth, more claws, more slithering. It's also just the fact that there's so much variety and that they are real, that they are, then some of them are so strange. How about that new monkey that they just found in the Congo with the lipstick? Crazy, the look is orange, orange mouth. Yeah. It looks like you just seen it. Like one of them freeze pops. Yeah, exactly. Like your kid after, yeah, 100 years so cool. And new primates species coming out still like, I love that. I think it's so great. Do you believe in the Bondo ape? Do you think that thing is? Yes and no. There's probably likely a group of chimpanzees. Do you know what I mean? Then that just are more aggressive, that are a social construct. And are larger. And are larger. But it doesn't mean that it's like this, you know, because I have the whole thing about them being lion killing apes and all this other stuff. There's probably a family troop, a group. And you know, they're in war now. Have you read about this? Yeah. So I think that's the Bondo ape is real in the sense of there is probably an isolated larger group of chimps that just act like chimps that have gotten this. The thing about this, they said that their skulls are different. Yeah, the cranial ridge. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Makes sense. Things with stronger jaw muscles have a cranial ridge. You see it in hyenas. You see it in things like that. The real is. Yeah, it's just more surface air for the muscle to attach to basically. It's just like that would be so fascinating to find those things. And that's what, you know, that Carl R. Mongeye spent his whole life hunting, reading rumors. But at least he got some photos unlike that poor fucker that was looking for the sloth. Yeah, still still trying. Yeah, you got some camera trap photos of them. Yeah. No, and they were bipedal in the photos, right? Yeah, so a lot of them, which chimps are, you know, they'll walk on hind legs and stuff. Yeah, it's pretty cool. It is pretty cool. And then there's a photo of the one that they killed that was at the airport. Do you know, you see that one? No, I think so. Oh, it's crazy. At the airport. Yeah, there's a small airport and they killed this one enormous chimpanzee. So there's just two guys that are standing with it. It's hard to tell how big the guys are, but it'll be normal size human beings. That's the biggest fucking chimpanzee I've ever seen in my life. Yeah, it's huge. Look at that thing. They're amazing. Look at that. I mean, the guy is, you could tell by perspective that the guy's, he's got his hand on it. So he's right behind it. Yeah. Yeah, it's not enforced perspective. His arm is not extended. No. So it's not fake. Yeah. And that chimpanzee looks way bigger than him. Way bigger. Yeah, it's amazing. So they think that is one of them. Yeah. Like I said, I think it's real in the sense, oh, yeah, this famous photo. See, but that one just to me looks like a chimpanzee. That just looks like a big chimp. Yeah. Where the one that's sitting down, that looks way bigger than those guys. Yeah. It's the size of its head is fucking enormous. Do you know that there's one river where, I'm trying to remember exactly how this works, but basically there's one area where the rivers collide, where the chimps and the gorillas go into conflict with each other over this one river spot. Do you know what I'm talking about? Have you ever heard about this? Yeah, it's really interesting. So somewhere in the Congo, there's this particular river. And I think it's called the cross river. I can't remember now. And it's an area that the chimps will come on one side and the gorillas will come down on the other and they will have the like throw stuff at each other across the river. And like it's like a whole thing that it's been documented. And these guys will, they're sort of these like two clans of great apes that come and communicate across the river and throw rocks and like show off to each other and then they kind of go back into the jungle. But it's been seen in this one particular river several times. Wow. Yeah. Like the real planet of the age. What is it, shrimp wars? What are they fighting over food territory? Unless I'm mistaken, it's relatively unknown, but it's sort of a social construct. So if you think of humans, for example, once our population gets too large and we have too many men and not enough women, we fight. Right. Throughout history, Roman times, Mongolian times, you name it. So there was one troop of chimps that all live together in relative harmony and then two leaders basically sprung up and there was a lack of enough females. And so all of a sudden this clan divided into two clans and now they're at constant war with each other. Like they live in the same relative territory, but they'll come in with, come into contact with each other and go to war over who's going to be the leader of the alpha troop, the megatroup. Wow. And it's been going for maybe a year or two years now. Fuck. Yeah. But how human is that? So human. Like to be like, okay, we're all part of this group, like you and I don't like each other now. Like this is my side, that's your side, we're going to fuck each other up. Study highlights friends with benefits relationship between gorillas and chimps. What the fuck in each other? No, it's a lot younger ones hanging out. It says, it's I've probably in the same area they're meeting pictures of them, like in the same tree. Yeah, I think this is that river. I think it can for fake that want figs out of these trees. Yeah. If it's generally benefits or yeah, I was looking for wording that got to what you're getting at. But you know, we're saying that with like, why do you why do you go to dinner with Bob? Well, we're friends with Ben. Oh, you're fucking Bob? Yeah. When you start fucking Bob, man. No, no, we just like figs both of us. Yeah. The chimp in Z's though, they caught them beating their chest, which is only something grille is a bit. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, they're they're imitating mimicking each other. Yeah. I'm sure you've seen that one documentary. I think it's called relentless enemies, where there's a particular pride of lions that grew enormous because they're only eating water bubbles. Those they got trapped on an island because the river changed paths. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I remember what you're talking about. I don't know the documentary, but yeah, they're eating cape buffalo. Yeah. It's exclusively. Yeah. And the lions are just getting bigger and beefier and they're all fat and like, yeah, it's pretty cool. Well, they have to get bigger. Females are doing all the killing. So they're as big as male lions in other places. Yeah. And they're chacked. And they don't have a choice. Yeah. Because otherwise they're going to die. Exactly. While trying to hunt the cape buffalo. Right. But it's so we're watching natural selection in real time because they're just getting bigger and stronger. Yeah. And, you know, they're like these fucking buffalo are enormous, man. They're jumping on these things and hanging on them and trying to drag them down the ground. The black death. Yeah. That's what they call the cape buffalo. Yeah. Those motherfuckers are so scary. Yeah. And they'll charge so unprovoked. Like they'll just turn and come anytime. But it's crazy how you have that basically insular dwarfism and insular gigantism throughout animals, no matter like animals stuck on an island. They're either going to get bigger. They're going to get small. Well, lizards usually get big on an island, right? We're tortoises, right? Like the Galapagos or the Seychelles. Yeah. Why? Why do they get bigger? No predators. Unlimited resources. Yeah. But you know, you're a little tortoise that's this big and every time you get to this big something spots you from the air and eats you or whatever it happens to be. But now you're stuck on an island with all the grass and fruit you could ever eat and nobody wants to eat you. So you just get bigger and bigger to out completely. Look at each other. Look at that face. Whoa. Yeah, look at those guys. I mean, it's an imagined. That's the only thing you can eat is something three times bigger than you. They can fucking kill you. That kills a lot of lions, by the way. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, he kick in the face. Take him out and then that's it. Your jaws broken and you never eat again. Yeah. And you starve to death slowly. I love the little cub there covered in blood. Look at that. It's a really cool documentary. Yeah. It seems so weird when you're looking at the size of the females. They just look exaggerated to the point where they look fake. They look like Hulk lines. It's awesome. It's very cool. Very, very cool. Nature is such a wild thing, man. I mean, such an amazing, fascinating, endless resource of just cool shit to see. And our understanding of it changes all the time. Every animal theory we've ever had evolves and changes as we learn more, which is what makes it so fun because it's so dynamic. It's not a static thing. What's just crazy that we keep finding new things, like the new primate? Well, is he find that little new monkey that they found with the orange lips? He's really cool. He's in the Congo. Well, the Congo's another place. Yeah. I've seen that BBC documentary on the Congo from, I was like, the early 2000s. But look at him. Well, we're looking at him. So cool. So strange. There's a few lost primates out there too. Like species that we've seen once or twice that have never been seen since that. Like what? Miss Waldron's red colobus is one that comes to mind. It's called Miss Waldron's red colobus. I think it's called Miss Waldron's red colobus. It's a call of this monkey that there's like three or four museum specimens and no live specimens. Yeah. Really? There's a few of those. Oh, Miss Waldrons. Yeah, red colobus. Why is it called Miss Waldron? I don't know. Who's that lady? Good question. What do you have to do with this monkey lady? New York West Africa. Previously described as subspecies. It's not been cited since. Oh, I saw it for a second. And what's crazy is a lot of these animals, especially things like primates. And essentially anything that lives in the Congo is a place that's so scary and so dangerous to visit. Yeah. There's not a lot of research being done. Well, that's always what I tell people when they're like, oh, well, you know, find these animals, find that animals. Nobody's looking. It's too hard. The local people know they're there. Like these lost species are species that the people that hunt and eat them know they're there, but they have no communication to the outside or the scientific world. You know, for you or I to go into that part of the Congo is probably a death sentence. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. But there's a lot of cool stuff out there. Are there any other animals that might be real that people think they've seen as far as like cryptids? Yeah. It could still be real. Weird ones. Like the giant sloth or something like that. I mean, there's that hole like the dinosaur in the Congo thing that people always talk about. It's silly. It's not real. I kind of think of any. I think, you know, David Show went looking for that one. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Actually, that's one of your pods that I watched the whole thing. He was talking about that. David's crazy. Yeah. I kind of think of any, but you know, it's, it's those rumors like there's a sloth. We've seen it. There's a Asian unicorn. We've seen it that if people don't follow, you never know. It's like you can, you can absolutely be the 10 foil hack guy like I can be with the thylosene. But if you give up and don't look, you know, we never really know. And if it's going to be it'll probably be in a place like the Amazon or like the Congo somewhere enormous play like the con, isn't the Congo as wide as the contiguous North America? The country or the river? I think the country of the Congo, the Congo, the jungle, the Congo, I think is almost as big as America. And not knows that large Africa is fogging huge. It's huge. If you see, because United States imposed on Africa, you're like, oh my God, that's what Africa is enormous. Well, that's what's squirrely about maps, right? Especially like when you get the globe, like everything's so distorted. Yeah. Which I don't understand why they do that. No. I've never had that explained to me in a way that like, oh, I get it. Or timelines. Have you ever looked at how like time lines are drawn on the globe? Like, you know, like the time zone. Right. Right. Right. So weird. Like jigsaw puzzle. Yeah. And you're like, why is that island in this time zone that's three slots over? Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But like, see if you can find the size of the Congo. Like if you see the size of the Congo versus I think it's almost as big as the United States. In terms of the real size that. Yeah. Yeah. There are these. There's so many of these incredible remotes. I think it's thousands of miles wide. It gets the United States. And crazy. I didn't realize that. Yeah. Yeah. There are these, there's so many of these incredible remotes. I think it's thousands of miles wide. Okay. So if you took that and you shoved it, why doesn't, why doesn't it put it over? Right. The bottom one there is a better one. Bottom one. That one's better. So not quite. Yeah. But it's still enormous. Yeah. It's like 35%. Yeah. And there's more political unrest there now, which means stuff shuts down. I mean, that's crazy. That's an enormous piece of it. Look how big that is. Yeah. You get all of India, all of Eastern Europe, the United States, China, fucking crazy, France, Spain. Look at that. It's a big place. And the cradle of civilization. Yep. The cradle of humanity. And then also Egypt. That's also part of Africa. You know about the eclipse coming up there? What? Biggest one in history. 2027. Yeah. So in 2027, I want to say April, there'll be a six minute total blackout in Egypt. It'll be the longest one in 100 and something or maybe 80 something years over the Red Sea in Egypt. Oh, that's when you want to go see the pyramids. Can you imagine the aliens are going to return? That's what I'm saying, dude. Can you imagine being at the pyramids and seeing a six minute long, six minute 22 second? That's what it's going to look like. And it's in a place that never has fucking clouds. So you're going to see it. I mean, they do. But not that time of year. So yeah, total solar eclipse for six and a half minutes. So we had one here. Um, yeah. Yeah. Two years ago, Jay. Yeah. It was really cool. How long did that last year? I wasn't not that long. But yeah, a couple of minutes. But was really cool about it though was that all the animals got oddly silent before it happened. Yeah. It was really weird. Like they know something. Yeah. So we were outside waiting for it. And as the, you know, as the eclipse starts taking place, everything might go out. Yeah. It was really wild. So crazy. And then while it's happening, like whoa, and you imagine like imagine living thousands of years ago before anybody understood what the fuck was going on. And thinking like some wild magical moment had happened. And we entered into a new timeline or something. You know, all crazy theories. I'd like grab somebody. We got to sacrifice them right away. Something's going on in the area. Get them to the pier. Yeah. Cut their heart out. Yeah. Straight away. It's also, it's like so weird that the sun and the moon are the exact right distance. And when they cross the moon just completely outlines where the, I mean, just fills in everything. Yeah. But, but the light around the outside of the edges. It's like how is it perfectly sized like that? Have you seen, oh, sorry, go ahead. No, it's just, it's an incredible coincidence that it's the right distance and the right size. Because obviously the moon is so much smaller than the sun. Yeah. But perfectly distance the scale so that when the sun and the moon is there, it's like boom. It's like the right size, not like half of it. Yeah. You know, it's perfect. Yeah, perfect. It just sits right in there. Yeah. It's like an Oreo in the cream. It's amazing. The really screwball theories are that the moon is fake. I've never heard that way. The Panda, the Panda fake is nothing on the moon being fake. The moon is fake. Yeah. They think that the moon is artificial and then it was like put here by aliens and it's hollow. You're kidding. Oh, no, no, no. Put here in order to sustain life on earth to give us a stable orbit. I mean, it does do that. It does do that. Yeah. Yeah. Imagine like how fragile life is. Like we're really concerned about climate change. Like, oh my God. It was just the climate change. Well, guess what? If the fucking moon wasn't there, you'd be doomed. Oh, there's nothing. There's no way. Yeah. You need a big moon too. Controls all of our oceans and the quarter of the size of the earth. Yeah. It's a weird moon. I don't think there's another moon on in our entire solar system that's comparable in terms of the size and the relationship to the other planet. To the planet itself. It's way bigger than every other moon. Let's find that out. Is that what formulates the conspiracy theory that was brought in? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Interesting. There's also we did something, some sort of experiment, we shot something at the moon and it rang like a bell for a long time, which is really weird. That's why. It echoed way longer than we thought. Of course, could just be. They didn't know what it would do. Yeah. Because they've never done it before. They don't know like fifth largest moon in the solar system with a diameter of the width of the Kitevish United States, while it's dwarfed by Jupiter and Saturn's largest moons. It's uniquely massive compared to its parent planet. Yeah, that's what it is. Making the earth moon system more like a double planet. Yeah. So in relationship to the planet, it's so Jupiter and Saturn have huge moons, but Jupiter obviously is massive. It's a massive way bigger than us. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, can we look at the size of Jupiter in comparison to the size of Earth? Yeah. So it's the scale of the moon to this two year. Yeah. Interesting. That is a wild conspiracy theory. Imagine just being the guy is like, you know what, why don't we shoot at the moon? Let's give that a whirl, see what happens. Yeah, they did something. I think I don't know what they shot it with. I think they sent a rocket to the moon and just to measure the sound, see what would happen. And it was odd. It was odd the way it rang. It rang like a bell. But you know, they've never done that before. And also, who knows what the fucking center of the moon's made out of. Yeah, who knows where you hit it. Yeah, totally. Maybe it's weird. You've got some caves in there. It's hollow. A hollow experiment in the ringing effect. The phrase moon rang like a bell comes from Apollo 12 in 1969, November NASA deliberately crashed the lunar modules, a sent stage onto the moon, size, size, mommeters recorded a long lasting vibrations for nearly an hour. This description is a metaphor for how dry, cold lunar rock reverberates without water to dampen the shower. Interesting. Yeah. But retards and dorks. So it's hollow, which made by aliens. And there's also people that think that, you know, there's stuff there. Like there's a monolith. So the city's on the moon and all that. Yeah, yeah. The other side that we can't see. Yeah. Yeah. Bases. Reddit's a wild place. Huh? This is not even Reddit. This is like, you got to go to like weird message boards. Uh-huh. Crazy people go deep crazy. Yeah. Yeah. It's a little bit of, it's a hollow moon. There you go. The hollow moon, closely related to spaceship moon. Ah, that's the one. Our pseudo scientific hypothesis that propose the earth's moon is either a holy hollow or otherwise contains a substantial interior space. No scientific evidence exists to support the idea. Let's go to go to spaceship moon. Because that seems even more interesting. Mmm. A spaceship moon. Come on, baby. You leave all these pseudo scientific. The moon spaceship includes historical. Oh, no, no, no, no. Yes, but that means. Spaceship moon theory. Try that. It's theory. Do-do-do. A pseudo scientific hypothesis proposing that earth's moon is an artificial hollowed out satellite constructed by an alien civilization. Oh boy. Like the Death Star. There you go, bro. Well, you need to get into like space is fake. That's even better. Space is fake. It's popular, popularized in 1970 by two Soviet scientists. Michael Vasin and Alexander. How about that word? Yep. Sure, sure, come back. Sure, curb or cove. So suggested the moon was reinforced by an armored titanium hull to survive impacts. Oh, man. People need more to do. No, you don't. You like that. I love the cookier, the better. Yeah. Like hashtag spaces fake is one of my favorite things to look up. Because there's a whole community of people out there that thinks spaces fake. But I also think that a lot of these people, what you're getting is there's been some, people who develop fake theories in order to see if people bite. And then they put them out there like on Reddit or somewhere on on for chance. Yeah. A great place of stuff like that. Because you got a lot of schizophrenia to look to visit those places. And then they'll put it out there and see if people run with it. And then they'll do it to see if just for fun. And you give to your community. Right. It's like, oh, yeah, I have this group of flat earth earth earth earth that I hang out with on Saturdays. And we talk about how they're not around. You know what I mean? Right. I made my own lunatic community. Bigfoot hunters. Yeah. There you go. Unfucking fuck. Unfucking white guys. Looking for cryptids. Something to do. Are there any other cryptids that are even remotely interesting? To me not really. I mean, I always enjoy the fun of it like when we chat about it. But as far as like the reality of it, I don't think so. You know, I know it's a boring answer. But I think that. Well, you would know. I mean, that's why I'm asking you. I mean, your guy actually goes these places. I mean, it goes looking for stuff. I love when you hear about something like a borrowing snake. And everybody's like, that's not real. It doesn't exist. And then turns out somebody finds this weird snake. And it's not really a cryptid, but it's something that nobody's been looking for. Because why would you? Right. No, he's digging in the earth in the center of the Congo to find a mud snake, you know, or whatever it happens to be. And I think those are the things that they end up being cryptids in small communities. You know, like you hear from the village about the snake. I'm making the snake up. But about the snake that lives under the mud and only bites when people dig their crops or whatever it happens to be. And it creates this generational legend that becomes a cryptid. But the truth is there is a snake that lives under the crops in the mud. It's just nobody ever goes looking for it. Because why would you? Well, there is a weird arrogance that we have in 2026 because we have uncovered so much in comparison to people that live two or 300 years ago. Oh, for sure. Because maybe arrogant assumption that we have an accurate audit of all the animals on the planet. And it's such a human thing to do is to be like, we've quantified at all. We have the answers. You know, it's like we put a finite on something. And then you have all these guys, like especially in the scientific community, which is that's a whole story for itself. But they're now like, okay, I need funding. So I'm going to speciate a bunch of stuff. So I'm going to go look at four things that are exactly the same except one lives on one side of the creek and one lives on the other. And now I'm going to make it its own species because that'll fund more work for me. So now you have the speciation race. Yeah. There's no gatekeeping on that or someone goes, hey, I mean, there are certain criteria that you have to meet, but they're pretty easy to meet. Do you know what I mean? You have to say it looks different. It has some kind of genetic anomaly. It has some kind of physical anomaly. There's a population of it. Okay, now now I've named my own species. And that makes noise and I can publish a paper and now my research is funded. And it's just like, it's not, you know, is it a species? Do we need this one frog to be split into four different groups because they live on, you know, four different patches of the mountain? Not really. You know, and it's sort of lessons, the conservation for that frog in general because now all of a sudden it's like, well, there's four different kinds of them. So who cares if one of them gets extinct? You know what I mean? So it's sort of like, it's a weird thing that's going on in the sciences where there's this race to do speciation and pull apart everything into more and more and more. And then it's sort of lessons, the value of them in my opinion. That's interesting. So there's this reward thing that happens that encourages people to do these things. Dude, I'm writing a whole book on this right now. It's coming out next year because it's just the scientific system in wildlife and conservation is so broken because it's very, first of all, the first of all, if you're an animal guy, you're probably not a great people person to begin with, right? Myself included. You're not a bad people person. Thanks. But for the most part, the people that get into the sciences probably are don't have the best, yeah, they're awkward. They don't have the best human social skills, right? So then those people become professors and heads of parties and academics and all these things. And again, I'm generalizing. They're great people that I work with too, but just as a picture of the system. So now you have all these socially awkward, somewhat introverted people studying animals. Now there's this tiny little resource pool of money and everybody that's socially awkward that's already somewhat arrogant because they've made it to the top of their field or close to the top of their field is competing for this tiny little pool of money. So now they're putting out anything that's headline worthy and a headline worthy could be as simple as speciating a frog on a mountain or it could be discovering something. But basically you have to just publish something to show that you are accomplishing something to then pull from that tiny little pool of money. So now a system like say, you mean Jamie here should all be working towards saving this guy right here, this metal, metal chimpanzee. Well, we're not. We're all fighting because there's this tiny little pool of money that we all want. And we're all saying that each other are wrong because we need to prove that we're right so that we're funded because you two, because all three of us can't be funded to save that species. Does that make sense? So now we're all fighting each other to save the thing that we all care about because the resource pool is so small. What's the solution to that? Well, it needs to become more mainstream. And I think there's a lot of bullshit science, you know, to be honest with you. Like there's a lot of this speciation and publishing and all this stuff that's just sort of making noise that isn't really helping. And I think the solution is well, one once it becomes more mainstream. Here's the short answer. Conservation is incredibly easy to measure. We try and make it very difficult and complicated. Are there animals now? After your work, are there more? Have you fixed the problem? What's all conservation is? Are there more or less than when you started? If when you started there are less and now there are more and this is very black and white and in every system is different. But if you had a thousand frogs and then you worked on the project and now you have two thousand frogs, you're doing conservation right as long as the ecosystem supports as long as the prey is there, blah, blah, blah, blah. That's all conservation is we try and make it so complicated and so in depth and require all these papers and this publishing and this information that is sort of an information overload that the common person doesn't care about it. I mean, when's the last time you read a paper on frogs? Probably never, right? Me neither because they're boring because I don't want care about it. But I would care if you just came out and said, look, these frogs need a home. We're going to fight kitrid fungus, which is this big widespread fungus that's killing all amphibians by building frog hotels. And if we build, which are these little brick hotel things that frogs go into incubate to kill fungus. And if we build enough frog hotels, then there's going to be more frogs. That's good conservation. So instead of fighting over that, make that popular and mainstream. Don't make it so complicated so that nobody understands it. I'm not saying don't publish papers and things. Those still very much so have their place and they're important. But focus on the messaging to the common person so that the common person now cares, then there becomes more funding and resources. Then we don't all have to fight over this tiny little pool of resources to publish things that aren't actually accomplishing things. Well, this is actually the value of getting into a crocodile cage. That's right. Because you get people actually interested in animals. And that's why I do YouTube. That's why I do all these things is that I hope that it helps people care. I don't need to get funded by it. It's great when my YouTube does well and I make money. But I just want people to care about these things. Because if you care about them, then that resource pool widens. Yeah. Well, it's you got to make things interesting to people. And this is where like David Attenborough was so amazing. Absolutely. Because he developed these documentaries. And the voice that he had explaining these things. Like he was the first guy to document chimpanzee's eating monkeys. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I remember that. Incredible. Incredible. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I remember that. Incredible. Yeah. The goat literally. But you kind of, that's another thing about being a wildlife biologist. Broken is a lot of these world leading experts have never touched, seen anything with a living one of these animals. I worked with a person and I don't want to say her name because she's a lovely person who's a world leading expert on a certain type of shark. And we're like, great. You're the world's leading authority. You're perfect to come with us on this trip to study these sharks. We fly to the opposite side of the planet. And I want to give too many details. It's not fair to her. She's a very nice person. We fly to the opposite side of the planet. She's published 50 papers on this species of shark. We get there. And I'm like, all right, day one, let's gear up. Let's hop in the water and look for the same. She's like, I don't know how to swim. Like, what do you mean? She's like, I've never been in the ocean before. Like, you're the world's leading authority on this type of shark. And she's like, yeah, I don't, I don't dive. I don't snorkel. I don't know how to swim. I'm like, well, how are you the world's leading authority on the shark? She's like, well, I've never seen one alive. I've dissected him. I've published all these papers. I can tell you about the tooth count, but I've actually never seen one alive. Like, you're the world's leading authority and you've never seen one of these animals alive to study it. The guy who fishes and eats it in the village next door is a more authority than this person. Do you know what I mean? But that's the scientific process, the world's leading authority because they publish the most papers on something that sits in a pickle jar. Do you think that that is an absolute requirement though? Like, do you have to have some sort of physical contact with the world that they live in? I think you have to have observational knowledge. You don't have to have physical contact. You shouldn't have physical contact with wild chimpanzees. They'll rip your arms. Right. But I mean, the world they live in. Yes, I do. I think it should be a requirement. I think if you're going to be considered an authority on that thing, you have to have observational data as well as scientific data. You can't just live in a world where you're like, I've studied them in pickled jars and I can tell you everything about them. Well, to me, that was like one of the most fascinating aspects of chimp nation. You know, that these scientists had been embedded with these particular chimpanzees for more than 20 years. That science. Yeah. That is science. Yeah. That means you're sitting there and that's why the best scientists are the guys that hunt in fish and spend their lives surrounded by these animals that will never once be credited as a scientist because all they do is study the behavior of the animal. And I'm with you. Like that is that's the real deal. 20 years watching a troop of chimps, learning their behavior, understanding their social dynamic. I'm not saying you shouldn't also cut one open and measure its canines. You should when you get a dead one, but that doesn't make you an authority on it. Right. In my opinion. Well, that was the thing about that particular documentary in those particular scientists was it was so unusual that they had this long history where these chimpanzees had lived and died and raised new chimps around these people. And as long as they followed this protocol, stay within 20 yards, at least 20 yards away from them. Never have food around them. Don't look them in the eyes. You're good. Yep. And you got insane footage because of that. Yeah, because there's a mutual respect. Like they've learned to appreciate each other and you can't do that with every animal. Like it doesn't matter how many years you spend sitting watching a crocodile. It'll still eat you at the first chance. Right. But you've earned a mutual respect with a highly intelligent creature. That to me as a field biologist is science. Well, if not a respect at the very least, you've become a part of their world. They don't think of you as being an anomaly. That's right. So they act normal. Yep. They're not, they're not weirded at like if you just show up out of nowhere and you weren't a spacesuit, yeah, the monkeys are going to go, hey, exactly. Exactly. Exactly. But if there's always people with spacesuits around, they never bother them. They go, oh, it's just the spacesuit guy. Normal. It's going to go eat my bananas like normal. It's the same as seeing, you know, an impollan of wildebees hang out together at a watering hole. They're used to each other. Threats to each other. But you or I walk up in both of their ears perk up and they sprint in different directions. Yeah, you can have that time put in to make things calm. It's amazing. But I mean, has there ever been anything other than chimp nation where they did that effectively? I mean, grizzly man sure tried. Did work out some well. Didn't end well. Or did it? Yeah, it probably ended the way he wanted it to. Honestly, there's no way he could have wanted to go out any other way. I think I think that was suicide by bear. Yeah, you think I also think it was Warner, her Zog's attempt at comedy. You think? Yeah, there's something about the way he edited it where I'm like, this guy's fucking with us. Because there's one time where he talking about the sheriff and the sheriff like, what he thought of him. And the sheriff goes, well, I thought he was retarded. And then they smash cut to something else. I'm like, you're trying to make me laugh, weren't it? It's pretty funny. I've wanted to try to get him on the podcast. Yeah. And he probably never answered honestly because it would probably be disrespectful to Timothy Treadwell and just, you got it. No, I would love to get him on just because he's amazing. Yeah. And also his documentary, Happy People, Life in the Tiger is one of my favorite documentaries of all time. Oh, really? I don't know. It's good. It's all about these people that live in Siberia. They have no mental illness. And all they do is they live a subsistence lifestyle. They're just hunting and fishing and trapping and they ride around on snowmobiles and and they make these huts and they live up there with their dogs. And they have this extended periods of time where they're alone. And all they're doing is they're taking their snowmobiles to different traps and gathering wood for fire and fish to eat. And they're all happy. And they're drinking and laughing and they're like, it's weird because he documents it. It's called Happy People. That's what the documentary is called. And it's like with his like the way he describes these people living in Siberia. And that's what I'd be very fucking amazing. Oh, that's cool. It's really amazing. It's amazing documentary. I think he's credible. I have said forever, you don't all look mental illness, a real thing. I'm not going to pretend it's not. But if you spend a lot of time outside and in nature and especially by yourself, it noise goes away. I don't care who you are. I don't care what your history is, drug history, anything. When you're much more present, when you're alone in nature and mental illness, I have no experience in this. This is just opinion, but mental illness comes from when you're wrapped up in your own being. Right. When you're thinking about all the problems and this, that and the other thing. But when you're alone in nature, you have to think about your surroundings and what you're doing. And you don't have time to sit and manifest on these things that create depression and anxiety and all of those types of things. There's also no comparison. You're not comparing yourself to anyone else because you're living in a community that are a consistent lifestyle. Right. All these people are doing the same thing you're doing. What are you going to do? You're going to have the biggest fish? Nobody cares. It's all hunting, fishing, living off the land. They all do it. And they're all like sharing and drinking together and having fun. It's really wild when you watch it. You go, well, I boiled down to like the most simplistic community driven ways that people exist like this. It seems to be the best way for people to live. But like you said earlier, you have to have both sides, right? Of the coin. It's like the red and blue in Texas because you have to have innovators and over thinkers and workers or he wouldn't be a society. Or by the way, they wouldn't exist because they use snowmobiles and not one of those mother fuckers is going to invent a snowmobiles. Exactly. So you got to have the red and the blue. You got to have both sides. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. That's awesome. Well, hey, brother, it's always good to talk to you. It's really fun. Really fun. Oh my God, dude. You didn't tell me they put meat all around the outside of it. I told you as an idiot. Look at this. We made that cage by the way and I am no engineer. Oh my God. Look at these. These look so flimsy. So that thing looks so flimsy and you're just hanging by a thread. Literally like this cable that we sourced from a village and hoped it would hold up. I mean, we tested it as far as put some rocks in it and tested it and empty cage. But it's a terrible idea. It was dumb. It was dumb. Look at these things doing death roles. But people are going to watch this, Joe. And they're going to learn about crocodiles. Great thing you filmed it. Right? God, man. That's insane. That was fun. That cage looks way too flimsy. Don't do that again. I'm not doing it again, I promise. Yeah. Tell people how they can see that. Where they can find all your stuff. Dude, it's shark week. We got an awesome show coming out this week. Alien sharks untamed America looking at some incredible sharks, celebrating America's birthday are craziest, weirdest sharks. The one is shark week has been going on since the 80s. 39 years old, same age as me. Yeah. It's been around my whole life. That is so crazy. Yeah. It's an institution. Plus, we got the YouTube channel. That's where I'm doing most of my stuff now. I hope people check that. I know you watched some videos. Yes. I've heard you comment. I appreciate that. Well, I appreciate you doing that stuff. Thanks for having me, dude. I'm glad you're always great to see you again. Bye, everybody. See ya. Bye. Bye.