Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast my night. All day. Hello, David. Don't worry. Let's have a good seat. Good to see you. How you been? Good to see you're still alive. You're not full of visible holes that come forward. What are you up to, man? Spending a lot of time with my daughter. Number one, and then number two, the working on this series for National Geographic. So I've been traveling around the world, searching for these people that do incredible feats that they've passed down through generations. And I'm trying to learn, but it's a fast learning curve. So it is the most dangerous thing that I've ever done in my life, but I have the best of the best helping. So that says a lot. Because you've done it. By far, the most. Yes. Whoa. Well, you showed me some things off-camera that we can't talk about. But well, you can talk about it. I just can't show it. OK. Well, so the scary thing was like three days ago. The Cobra? A King Cobra. Yeah. In the wild. Yeah. What is, is there a trick to that? Is there a movement thing? Do you move slowly? So you don't. I studied for weeks and just tried to understand their behavior and worked with different cobras. And I had a team around me that taught me how to move quickly and get out of the way. What happens if you get bit? Well, they've enough venom to kill full grown elephant in 30 minutes. So we had anti venom. We had that there, but still. In my case, I won't trust that. And even if you get anti venom, it's still a rough ride. You can live. Right? Yeah. But it was amazing. It was incredible. Is this similar to rattlesnake venom? Because rattlesnake venom essentially is a narrow, yeah. I mean, it digests your body. Well, this one shuts everything down. So your heart, your lungs, everything just starts. So were they like ready on standby with a needle? Well, they don't, they put it in a serum. You have to go to a hospital. Oh, we had it in a hospital. Yeah. So you have to travel. But we hadn't ambulance right there. And how far is the hospital? It was 20 minutes away. Oh, God. So 20 times in. Oh, God. 20 minutes of King Cobra venom. It was the scariest and most intense thing I've ever done. How many of these guys died doing this? Well, the snake, the two snakes we had, one of them killed its previous owner. Oh, boy. Yeah. And then it'll kill her. I think after it kills the previous owner. Oh, no. This guy died. So it's exactly. Right. That's right. Oh, boy. Yeah, it's, but it is kind of incredible. Because there's another guy named Chris Sweet, who, well, that's his Instagram name. But he lives in Thailand with 90 venomous snakes. And he just lets them move through his legs through it. He's, well, he was bitten twice on my birthday and his heart stopped two times. But he lets him just while you were there. No. Oh, no, no, no. I'm April 4th. I mean, oh, OK. Yeah. But he, but he's so calm with them. And he studies their behavior and he watches how they move. And then he gently takes a now. And there was one, we were outside. And the scariest thing wasn't trying to kiss it. Oh, my God. And I think that's a snake called a spire. Yeah. So that's one that was slithering through my legs. And you have to keep your heart rate down. Because if they sense, they have pheromones. They detect if you're nervous or uncomfortable. So anytime I would get like super tense, I would have to walk away carefully. Oh, boy. Yeah, that's him. And that's, yep, that's a snake called a spire. It has your soul good at finding everything. Wow. Oh, my God. It's trying to bite you through the glass. Why is it trying to bite you through the glass, but won't try to bite you when you're right there? Well, there it's feeding. Oh, when it smells snake or food, it becomes aggressive. So you have to make sure you don't smell like any other snakes or anything or food. We'll catch food. They eat snakes, the kinkobras. They eat other snakes. Yeah. Not kinkobras, but other snakes. Other snakes. Yeah. Dude. Dude. Do you have a second guess when you're about to do something? That one I second guessed. I left and then came back a few months later and did it again. I wouldn't go to a frayed to go near it. What made you go back? I went to Cleveland and I trained with my friend Mike and my other friend, Chris Gillette, who's Gatorboy Chris, who's amazing. And we slowly started to understand just a little bit of the behavior of kinkobras. And then I went back to Indonesian train with Fitz, who's unbelievable with how he handles the cobras. And slowly I felt OK. But there was days I wouldn't even do anything. So luckily I had a week. Which is still a really fast learning curve. Yeah. Normally I would train for something for a year. But with this show, I get like a few days. And then I have to try to do it. Oh boy. So what strategies are you using to keep your heart rate low? Like, if you feel yourself freaking out, how do you calm yourself down? I get out. You just get out. Yeah. Yeah. Just get out and regroup. Yeah. Yeah. Take it. But that's the last dangerous thing I'm going to do like that. That's it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I'm glad you're alive. And I feel like in my show of Vegas, I was jumping from the height of a nine story building, landing in boxes. And I dislocated my shoulder. It came down to my arm pit. But in retrospect, I think I was lucky. Because I could have been really bad. It could have been the neck. It could have been something else. Oh yeah. So did you get surgery? No, I think it's a surgery. Well, they did. There was an orthopedic surgeons convention in Vegas at that time. So I had five orthopedic surgeons in the audience. And one was a shoulder specialist. And they all came on stage. And he popped it right back in. So then I walked out to do the show. Joe. But my arm was all numb. It stayed numb for like two months. But I was going like this to get like to see if I could get feeling back. And it fell back out. So I think I'm back on stage. They popped it back in. And then I did the whole show with one arm. Yeah, that's it. Yeah, that's a bad one. I think that's all I got injured. Yeah. And my friend Doug, who's with the hat right there, when I jumped, he knew that something was going to go wrong. He bent over and took a heavy breath because he knew that was the one. There's a gentleman named Yuri Projoska. He was the UFC Light Heavyweight Champion. And his shoulder dislocated during training. And his trainers tried to pop it back into place. And they were yanking on it. And they just destroyed his shoulder. They tore everything apart, just kind of pulling on it. And it ripped apart. The UFC doctor says the worst shoulder injury he'd ever seen. That's crazy. And he's fighting again next weekend. Got it repaired. He got surgery. Yep, got surgery. vacated his title. And now he's back fighting for the title next weekend. And mine is still messed up. Really? Yeah. Like him away. Well, I can't really work out or do anything to say. How long ago? Maybe March. Did you get an MRI? Oh, many MRIs. What's the damage? No, it was really bad. It was in the ligand man. So it was bad. It came down to here. Right. Why didn't they do surgery? I'm like afraid of surgery, I have to say. Like horrified of it. Why didn't you afraid of surgery? I don't know. It's just afraid of keeping progress with you. Yeah, it's crazy. But I'm horrified of surgery. Why? I don't know. Yeah, you probably get surgery. What specifically, which ligaments I have a lot of experience with the stuff? I have all the scans and the whole right up of it. Mm-hmm. I can show it to you. And so it's just very weak and it's not stable. Can you just hurt? No, I can go over it. So I'm good like that. It's just hard to push things. No, I can still do it, but not like I used to. Have you ever gotten stem cells? No. You should get stem cell therapy on it. That could help a lot. I avoided surgery completely with stem cells. Really? Yeah, I had a full length rotator cuff tear in my right shoulder went away. The doctor said it was extraordinary. He went to look at it six months later. And the tear was completely gone. He said, this isn't sane. And this is just, yeah, they can do wide stuff. How did you rip your rotator cuff? Training, just jujitsu. Like too hard. I don't know. But it was a slow or it was a one time you were. Oh, you know, jujitsu. It's very addictive. And a lot of times you get injured. And you're like, I'm still going to roll. I'm going to go back in. And you go back in with like fucked up discs and the tweak knee and the fucked up shoulder. And I know a lot of guys that have some pretty significant injuries and they just can't stop training. They just enjoy it so much. Right. Right. Stem cells could help you a lot. Specifically, if you go out of the country, because they can do some wild shit, they can't do an America because the FDA have some good friends that run a clinic in Tijuana. It's called a CPI. And a bunch of my friends have gone down there, a bunch of UFC fighters. It helped you a lot. I'd be so afraid though. Why? I don't know. Why are you talking about being afraid about that? Maybe because when I was young and my mother was sick and that whole thing. Well, this is what they can do with modern stem cells is pretty extraordinary. But unfortunately, the United States is very limited in what you can get away with here. Right. Yeah. They're constantly putting restrictions on it, unfortunately. For no reason. It doesn't make any sense. There's no downsides. I feel like also just when I eat right and do everything perfectly, the inflammation all goes away for sure. And then the pain goes away and it's much better. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. That's definitely a factor. Inflammation is huge. And a lot of it does come from bad food. A lot of it comes from too much sugar, too much bread, pasta, the com shit, ice cream, hella shit. All the stuff that's good. But yeah, afterwards I'll connect you with those people. OK. Yeah, I bet it can help you a lot. And it doesn't hurt. No, really? Yeah. It's not a downside. No, it's not going to hurt you. No. No, you'll go there. They'll do what they'll do is they'll do IV stem cells. They'll do local stem cells into whatever the area that's injured. And then they'll use hyperbaric chambers, which also accelerates the healing. They'll have you down there for a few days. And I guarantee a few months later, you'll feel significantly better. Wow. Yeah. That is all dependent upon what structural issues you have. Now, if you have something that's completely torn off the bone and it's not connected anymore, they can't help with that. I don't think it's that bad because I can already do this. Sometimes you can do that even though it's torn because there are other ligaments that compensate. Another muscles that compensate. And I still have a little bit of numbness down here. But it's really crazy because I was numb all the way to here for like months. Yeah, that's generally it's nerve damage. It takes a long time for that stuff to get a nerve damage is rough. But I feel like I got off easy. Oh, yeah, could have been a neck. Yeah, sure. Right. So I feel like that was a good lesson. You don't do that. Well, not every night. Don't do it, period. Don't do it again. The craziest thing was we only had insurance for the first 10 shows. And the injury was on the 10th show. Oh boy. So Monday morning, the insurance company called, they said, do you want to discuss this new condition? Yeah. So that was the end of that. Yeah. Which is a good thing. Yeah, don't do that. You've done some extraordinary things with yourself. I mean, you really have some crazy things. Yeah, some crazy things. But all for entertainment and not, I mean, it's interesting because it is entertainment, but it's also entertainment and sort of educating people, the boundaries of what the mind can force the body to do. You know, like the one we did with your frozen ice. Yeah. Like that's basically just you standing, standing and using breathing techniques and your mind to deal with that situation. How long was that for? I think 63 hours. Yeah. That's a long time. I brain tweaked at 55 hours. Yeah. Yeah. Will you probably weren't sleeping, right? No, you can't. Right. So there's probably a lot of the brain tweaking is just from that. Yeah. Wouldn't you imagine? I think that plus the extreme conditions. Extreme cold and lack of sleep and your standing. I'm standing and I had a demon. My ankles blowing. Oh, I could imagine. Yeah. How long did you recover from that? A while. Yeah. I couldn't even walk for a while. Oh, David. Oh, David. And I was lucky because it was a 68 degree in November. So the air pumping through was 68 degrees. So created that drip that was awful from the ice, but that that helps significantly. Well, even just standing still for. Yeah, see how happy I am. Yeah, you look super happy. You're probably hallucinating. That does look like the big, that's hallucination right there. That's where I'm hallucinating. What'd you see? Everything. Like, one. My mother was in the ice talking to me. Wow. And my girlfriend was in the ice talking to me. And time moved completely different. It was crazy. Whoa. But kind of amazing at the same time. Wow. Yeah, but kind of horrific. I can imagine. The way I explained it was like having nightmares with my eyes open. Wow. I think your brain is doing anything that can trick you to try to quit so you can go to sleep. Considering all the things you've done, you're in remarkably good condition. Time will tell. When you're walking around, you're talking. Everything's fine. I mean, hopefully you're right. Yeah. But I'm always pushing it. No, no, I'm always concerned about the effects. Yeah, I would imagine. Something to be concerned about. Yeah, because I want now that I have a daughter, I want to live long. Sure. Well, I live in 100. Right. That's possible if you don't get bit by cobra. So the buck then, now this is probably the best time ever to have that go over. Well, they mean to have the goal of living to 100 with modern science and medicine. Yeah, I believe it's possible. It's for people who live to 100. But I think diet is everything. It's a lot of it. Are you pretty diligent with your diet? Well, since the injury kind of gave me an excuse to not be, but I need to get seriously. The injury gave you an excuse to not be? Yeah. How come? I don't know. It's like, fuck this. You know? Yeah. That's funny. Yeah. No, if you, I mean, it seems simple, but it is true that your body is essentially made out of what you consume. Yeah. It's the only thing that it has to regenerate. And it doesn't, people don't think of it that way. You think of your body as your body, but your body is constantly reproducing itself. Yeah. So those are constantly regenerating it. And if you don't give your body good nutrients and real food, you suffer. You suffer. And that is the majority of Americans, unfortunately. Even my friend is running a marathon in a few days. And I said for the next couple of days, reduce any food that will give you inflammation and do extreme hydration because the impact of that distance will pay its toll on the long run. Most certainly, especially if you're not conditioned for it. And I think really good endurance athletes like Kobe Bryant, Michael Jordan, LeBron James, Tom Brady, they all are very concerned with inflammation. Oh, yeah. So they don't have anything that will give them inflammation. And I think that allows you to continue much longer. Most certainly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Inflammation is one of the biggest problems that people have, particularly in this country, because the way we eat. I'm sure you've seen those photographs of people on the beach in like the 1960s versus people on the beach in 2023. No. I can imagine. Yeah, this is the balloon. And it's because of the American diet. It's sugar. It's sugar. And the process, the bad sugar. Yeah. And even just the way they genetically modified fruit, like if you look at watermelon from the Renaissance days, like a Renaissance painting of a whole watermelon, as opposed to a watermelon now, it doesn't even look like the same thing. It yields such a high dose of sugar that become addictive. Yeah. And berries, everything. So that term genetically modified gets thrown around a lot. A lot of it is just selective breeding. You know, like they just figure out a way to breeding something like word either. It's like they select for very specific traits. I mean, that's why they've made a tomato that can sit on a truck and drive across the country and not rot. You know? But then you get it in its flavorless and pale. Yeah. But it's durable. Wait, can you put up a Renaissance painting of a watermelon? I just want you to see it. Yeah. And I'm going to have a very side by side. Renaissance painting of a watermelon. Yeah. How they were originally. Well, I'm sure you've seen like heirloom tomatoes. Have you seen heirloom tomatoes? Yeah. They look so perfect. Wow. And wait, the middle left one should know. Yeah, that one shows the, the difference. Wow. Yeah, they've done that with everything. That's wild. Yeah. It's all, I mean, it's the reason I think even fruit, you would think fruit is so healthy. But then you get these berries when you go to Whole Foods and they're like this big and they're so juicing. Eat the whole thing. But if you're in the wild getting blackberries, they're small, they're bitter. Mm-hmm. Yeah. That's extraordinary. So I think even the fruit and the things we think are healthy, we have to be careful. Yeah. It's definitely very different. But I don't necessarily think, I think, I wonder what is the difference in terms of the nutrient content, whether or not it's bad for you to eat modern watermelon. I would doubt it is. No, I think it's fine, but I'm just seeing it yields such a high dose of sugar. Right. Yeah. Most sugar creates inflammation. Yeah, it certainly does. And cancer thrives on, yeah. Yeah. Well, I've noticed a giant difference, cutting sugar out of my life, like when I cut it out and just live very cleanly, eat very cleanly. It's just massive difference in how your body feels, how your back feels, joints feel. That's everything. Especially things like the back, where you have pain, that stuff goes away. Yeah. Yeah. And even how your brain functions. Everything. Yeah. Right now my brain is on a lag because I've been not eating properly with you. I would think of anybody who would be taking care of themselves at someone like you that brutalizes yourself. But sometimes I go so extreme that I need like a break and I go the other way. I know what you mean. Yeah, you get tired of it. That happens a lot of fighters that get done fighting and they just get fat because they're just like, I don't want to train you. Why don't do anything? Yeah, because there's so extreme and so focused and all the sudden it's a... Yeah. I think little vacations from discipline are fine. But when I take a little vacation from discipline, I feel like shit. And then I'm like, what are you doing? And then I'm upset with myself. And then I go back the way. I used to eat and I'm fine. And then you feel great. Yeah. But that's, you know. What humans are supposed to eat, we're supposed to eat real food and a giant percentage of our diet is process bullshit. And that stuff is just, it tastes good and it tricks your body because there's all sorts of salt and sugar in it. And, you know, those high calorie, high carbohydrate foods are so easy to over consume. Yeah. You know, we had Elon. I had pizza the other night and I just couldn't stop eating that Jamie had to take it away from me. If you didn't take it away from me, I would eat that in a little box. Yeah, once you start, you can't stop. I'm a glutton. And then the funny thing is then you're still hungry an hour later. Yeah. Whereas when you eat foods with high nutrition like broccoli or isn't your full? Well, especially protein, if you eat foods, protein has a very high satiety rate. So like if you eat steak, you can only eat so much steak. Or you could keep going if you wanted to if you're in a contest or some shit. Like you ever see those places like restaurants where they'll like give you a free meal if you get you to 72 ounce steak. And so people try to eat them. He if they eat it like within 30 minutes or something crazy like that. But when you eat steak, like at a certain level, you'll you're done. Your body's like, that's enough. But if they're steak and then bread, the bread's right there with butter and it smells good and it's fresh. Oh, give me some more of that bread. Or there's a bowl of pasta, like whoa. And then there's some ice cream. Whoa, they'll keep going. And that's that's where modern foods have kind of hijacked the human brain. Check your reward system. It makes you crave these things that are ultimately detrimental to your health. But when you're eating really healthy, what should I eat? Mostly meat. I eat mostly meat and eggs. Do you eat raw eggs? No, not cook them. I eat. I eat so good when I have raw eggs. They're good, but you do have to be concerned with salmonella. You particularly have I think it's one in the 35,000. And it's on the shell. I think it's a low risk. It's a low risk. Yeah. But it does happen. I manage people every year, certain number of people have you ever get salmonella from eggs. But the eggs in Paris, by the way, they taste so good. It's kind of amazing. Well, they're probably free-range chickens in their life. They're like orange. Yeah. Well, that's a free-range chicken. That's chicken and eating bugs and worms and small rodents, and things like that, which is what they're, I mean, they're fucking dinosaurs. I have chickens. And the chickens that you have, if you have, like chickens in your yard. And if you have a good amount of place for them to roam and free-range, you get a dark orange, yolk, and it's delicious. Yeah. Amazing. And it's also a few people. It's also a few people who's very concerned about factory farming and ethics that are involved in that kind of stuff. And you don't want to eat eggs because the chickens are mistreated. Chickens that you have yourself are basically pets that give you free, calmer-free food. Because they're not even scared of you. They wander around you and peck at the ground, right in your feet. And they eat ticks. And they will produce food for you. Because they're not going to make chickens unless there's a rooster. Their eggs are never going to fertilize. So you're getting these beautiful healthy eggs. Yeah. That's amazing. No one loses. No. Yeah. It's a perfect cycle. And there's so good for you. And there's so many things you can get from eggs that you're just not going to get from a plant-based diet unless you're supplementing. You're just not going to get them. Do you take vitamins? Yeah. I take those liposol, the liquid ones, because you absorb the amount. Lots of sommel. Yeah. Those ones. But I'm just going to bring them and share them with you. But I forget. Yeah. I take those. I also think, you know, what, uh, AG1 is athletic greens. No. It's great. It's just very simple. You take a scoop of it, put it into water, stir it up. And it's probiotics. It's like 75 different vitamins and nutrients. Very good. It tastes good. Easy. So simple. Just stir it up. It's called AG1. Very easy because it's like, it's a no brainer. He's, he's, he's, he's sell the little travel packs. Open up a bottle of water, pour it in the bottle of water, shake it up, drink it. And it's all natural. All natural. Yeah. It's all plant-based. Yeah. That all looking too. It's great. And then, you know, you really should supplement with vitamin D, um, you know, vitamin D and K2, they work well together. But all that stuff is one of the things that people are very deficient in. Yeah. Divide them in D in particular. That's a big one. It's really cold climates or people don't go outside very much. You know, get exposure to sun. The best way to give vitamin D is from the sun. Yeah. Yeah. That's the best way. But most people do not get enough. Yeah. It makes sense. Yeah. We're in the world. Yeah. But when you think about like, what did human beings eat to thrive? Well, the, the, their most treasured in the, their prized food was meat. If they could kill a deer, if they could kill, you know, something that was nutrient dense that had fat on it, a pig, like that's what they, they che, treasure the most, because that's what they would give them the most nutrients. You would also assume they would have like coconuts, banana, fruits, fruits, goods. That were easy. Especially, I mean, again, fruits that weren't fucked with. But that's one of the things that we've done with wheat. You know, if you get wheat, everybody talks about this. If you get wheat in Europe, you're getting this heirloom wheat. You're getting wheat that is really what it was originally when they took wheat and changed it in America, what they've done is to hide those. Exactly. To destroy that much more complex glutens. And it just gives you more inflammation. And you've ordered digest and you don't came weight from those. I know. I'm modified seeds of 500 years ago. I know. You go to Europe and you eat their food. You look at them. They're not fat. No. It's crazy. Look at France. The people eating bread and France. In America, we're all balloons. Yeah. It's just making things better to sell because the higher yield and you can make more profit, you would poison ourselves. Yeah. Essentially. You know? Yeah. It's fucked. But at least we know it. So if you do seek out the information, there's plenty of doctors that could explain these things to you and just seek out organic foods and just eat real foods. Eat real foods. And you'll be far better off. You're even sleep better. I don't snore. I don't need as much sleep. It's so crazy. But a difference it makes. It does. It makes a giant difference. And it's so hard to get people to deviate. Because once you get accustomed to eating certain kinds of food and you start craving those kinds of food, it just triggers your... Do you have a girl to get off that path? Yeah. So will we show the shorted out? I'd like to see what your MRI said though too. Yeah. And I'm sure they'll do the one doctors want to see that too. I have all the MRI. So I was doing MRIs before every jump and after every jump just to make sure the blood vessels around the heart, you know, things weren't shifting because if we noticed something small, then we would stop because that way the blood... something connected to the heart wouldn't become problematic. So yeah. I feel like I got lucky on that. You probably definitely did because if it hit your neck and had the same sort of impact, what did you shoulder? Imagine something that can blow out your shoulder like that. What it could do to your spinal cord. Yep. Yeah. Very dangerous. Yeah. Do you ever think you're going to stop doing this kind of crazy shit? I think so. Really? I think I'll eventually just move towards magic. Oh, you're really good at magic too. That's a good, busy debate. Your card tricks are fucking bizarre. Like, when you, you did a bunch of card tricks for us off air. You did them for my kids. You did them for the security guys at the old studio in LA. And I mean, Jamie is like really good at watching that kind of stuff. I'm just watching him just us younger. Rapid Jamie was watching this shit. Jamie was fucking staring at you like a heart. I don't want to figure it out. I mean, I know it's magic, but like there's also. I was strict. He knows how to do it. Yeah, but after it was done, Jamie was like, fuck, I have no fucking idea. I tried. I thought I knew it was going to happen. And I didn't. Or you're, you're, you're honestly that good thing. He couldn't wait though. He's like, I'm going to watch every, I'm going to watch. I'm going to watch. I'm going to figure out. I'm going to figure out Jack shit. It's, um, yeah, that alone. But I mean, you're kind of the only magician who also does things that aren't necessarily magic, but they are extraordinary feats of control of your body and just dangerous stunts. I think part of the excitement for me is just learning something that's unique, that's not really done in the magic world, but then just the actual training and learning a new skill. So it's like a continual search to try to figure out new things. And that's kind of what keeps me excited in a lot of ways. And I think it's like something different because I think most people that are magicians, they, you know, a card trick everybody can learn. But when you, when you go and try to figure out one of those things that are insane to learn or you're inspired by something else and it leads to the trick itself that, that's exciting for me. So when I went to Africa to learn how to swallow a gallon of water and then spout it out. I know it would lead to being able to hold frogs and my stomach then produce them at any time, but it ended up leading to that. So it became a magic trick, but it started as like some insane skill that I saw somebody doing I was obsessed with. When you swallow a gallon of water, are you stretching your stomach out? Is that what's happening? It's awful. But is it like, do you gain greater capacity because of that? No. No. Every night in my show, I have to put a gallon of water inside and it's horrible. What does it feel like? Awful. Like pregnancy maybe? I don't know. I can't answer that. Maybe. But for something, so you feel your organ stretching, do you feel like everything getting pushed aside to make room for the water? I mean, gallon of water is a lot. It's a lot. Was it way? I think like 8.43 pounds or something like that. So just imagine eight pounds. It might be 8.34 or four. Just eight pounds of food in your body is insane. Yeah. No, it's a lot. And it's all solid. Yeah. It's water. So it's just like a big sop. Just a mass in there. And then I have to go do the show. Oh, God. So you have in your body, what you're doing is so you have to ignore this awful feeling while you're doing your show. And act normal. Well, and then spit it all out. How do you make sure you're not peeing it all out? Like how do you? I know the time on that. So practice the window of time. What's the window of time? But you're just swallowing it. It obviously starts to move in like 15 minutes. But I'm able to kind of control it for the length of the show. Pretty much. Are you contracting your body? Are you doing something physically? Well, then I spouted out to put out the fire. So it's a break. And then I reload it so secretly. So when you spout it out to put out the fire, people are like, what the fuck? Like where do you get all this water? Well, they seem to be drinking it also. Right. But still. It's pretty insane. It's insane. It's a show that my shows this show that you can only do like once or twice a month. You can't do it. If I did a card trick show, I could do it every night. Right? It would be like very good for business. But I like this show because it's an impossible show. It's like what did I have to like get into the mindset and be like, oh fuck. Because it's a mother bite. So when you put together a show like this, like when you're sitting down the planning stages and you're like, OK, got a big show coming up in Vegas. What am I going to do? How much time is involved in the creation of something like those years? Years. Yeah. Wow. Years and years. Wow. I mean, it took me 20 years to even do my show. 20 years. Almost. That's insane. Yeah. I wanted something that was different and something that I felt like would represent what I love and what interests me. So I worked on all these crazy things and it took so long to figure them out and then had to apply magic to them. They had to make the trick part. And then the trick part always makes the other things seem like that's a trick. So when I'm holding my breath, everybody thinks like I have tubes or something. Right. Right. What did you do when you held your breath? How long did you hold it for? It was something insane. Like, do you want to say like my actual 13 minutes or something like that? I did 17 oh four on over. But my actual record with doctors and pulmonary experts on it was 20 minutes and two seconds, breathing puro too. And my heart rate dropped to eight beats per minute. So they pulled me up because they thought I was going to go into cardiac arrest. And I actually that one felt pretty good. But now I think the record is like 24 oh three. Oh, yeah. Breathing pure oxygen before you do it. Yeah, without the pure to I was up to like seven 47. Which is still insane. I know free diaries can do stuff like that. Yeah. Yeah. But they're also the ones that are really good are really thin. Really tall. They have a total lung capacity. It's much greater than mine. Mine is less than average. So your lung capacity is less than average. Yeah. 80% of the average person might heighten size. Why is that? I don't know. That doesn't even make sense. If you can hold your red, that's what you'll see is 80% of the. Hmm. That's crazy. But I think that's where a lot of it has to do with accepting the pain, like mind over matter. So generally like taller, longer people. And like longer lungs. And longer lungs. Bigger chest cavity. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There was a dude who's an MMA fighter named Egan Inouye. And I know he did something insane. He was a free diver. He lived in Hawaii. And I think he was up to like seven plus minutes. And that's also physical, right? Because you're holding your breath. And then you're diving into the water and moving your body. So that makes it much harder oxygen. It's not just sitting there. Yeah. When I was doing it, it was just an even your brain functioning. You want to shut everything down. Because your brain uses a lot of oxygen as well. Hmm. So the more that you can just shut everything down, the more efficient you are. When you're doing that, how are you getting your heart rate to eight beats a minute? I didn't intentionally do that. It just happened. I think the body does whatever it needs to do to make sure you survive. Right. So your body is recognizing like this motherfucker isn't breathing. Yeah. Let's just slow it down. Yeah. It's kind of like creeping towards the gas station when you're on E. Yeah. You know, like five miles an hour because you're not going to make it otherwise. Wow. What do you think is the most difficult of all these things you've ever done? Maybe the ice. Hmm. Just on the mind. Yeah. That one was the worst one. I would never do that again. How long did it take your brain to recover from that? The brain recovers pretty fast. I think after one night sleep, I was OK. Really? The brain. Yeah. So no more hallucinations. Yeah. I was, yeah, it was bad. I would worry about some point that I would open up a door that I could never close. Yeah. That would be really, you know, in a horror movie that would happen. That's why I don't mess with sleep deprivation. I tried to mess with that in the world. I tried to mess with that in the world. Yeah. I think it's a very effective form of torture. I think in North Korea they did that to the Americans, extreme sleep deprivation. I think that tweaked them the worst. Oh, I'm sure we do it too. Guantanamo Bay. I mean, the provisions horrific. Yeah. Isn't that crazy? It's horrible. Because that's when you wouldn't even think of his torture. When we think of people think of his torture, the think of pain, you know, they don't think of just like making someone stay awake. But that's, isn't that Chinese water torture? I just drip water in your face. I don't think that one's so bad. Really? I don't think so. I heard it's pretty bad. I don't think there's something about it that just keeps you awake. It's just nuts because you're just the drip and like it being irregular intervals. It's so good. It's so good. It's so good. It's so good. I don't know. I don't think so. Maybe just try that one. Do you want to see this trick? I would love to see this trick. What do you got? Well, it's a simple one, but it's a simple one. Okay. So I just used some thread, but I might need your help. Okay. Do you want to come closer? Okay. I'll come over there. Yeah. I'll just move over or you can come here. I'll go there. Should I slide to the left or something? So first I'll show you the trick version. Okay. Wait. Can I take this off? Yeah. So first I'll show you the trick version of it. Okay. Which is just like this. For the people just listening at home, he folded over a little loop in a piece of thread. And he's putting it in his mouth and swallowing it. He's chewing on the thread. Now he's drinking water. Yeah. I think it's here. So this is the trick version. You see, you get, see, you can pull. You can pull. You want to just pull it? Pull the thread. You have a thread that you start pulling it. See. So that's the trick version. That's the thread that he just had embedded in his skin. But hold on, here's a different version. Actually, I'm stood. Instead, I'll do it this way. See, you can see what's happening. What's happening? Yeah, we grab here. The one on your chin. Okay, so now he's got a thread coming out from under his chin. Pulled up a little. Okay. Pull it down. It's through his mouth and through the bottom of his mouth and out his chin. And pull. Want to pull it out? Yeah. Okay. So that's something that I learned in India. So you just essentially use a needle and shove it through the bottom of your jaw. And people think it's coming out of your mouth. Yeah. It's pretty good though. It is pretty good. I'm going to put the other side. I'm going to put the other side. Right. So there's a book called Swami Mantra. How are you getting it into your chest? Well, there's a first I'll tell you. There's a book called Swami Mantra, which is a collection of pamphlets of secrets of what the ficures are doing in India. So there was a trick that I saw a magician do when I was a kid. And he ate a thread and he pulled it out of a stomach. And I was with a bunch of amazing magicians and we were all blown away in and shocked. But I cornered the guy and convinced him to teach me the secret. So then I started playing with it. And then just now when I was in India meeting street magicians and finding all these performers, I went to a festival and they do all these extreme things I have never seen before. Like they pushed the ice pick skewer type thing through their neck through their neck. And so I suddenly had an idea and I was like, wait, maybe there's a way. And then it becomes a magic trick. But you're seeing the early phase of it. Okay. Yeah. Sometimes I get nervous that like, you know, obviously anything could go wrong. Yeah. So it's quite in blood. Like it happened last time. Yeah. Well last time I see there was going to be no blood. Thank you. Yeah. When last time we poked the ice pick through your arm, we had a nerve, right? We had a back it out. Oh, yeah. And it was not good. And it was probably good. Yeah. It bubbled up. Yeah. And that's not what I wanted to happen. Yeah. I was traumatized afterwards. I was like, oh, fuck. I just picked it. So is that just a luck thing? Like you miss or you just don't know exactly where to push it through? No. What happened was normally I think I go in from this side and out. Uh-huh. But because you were sitting here and I wanted to push it, I think we went in the opposite direction. Oh, and I think it. That's what went wrong. Oh, so you know where to do it dorm. No, there's a lot of space to do it. So there's like, you know, but from the other side, I don't really know. And I, oh, for some reason I thought it would be okay. But, geez. Well, how long did that one take to heal up from? I mean, that was fine because it was just the arm. It wasn't like it wasn't nerve-wrining. It seemed like you were hitting nerve, though. Well, we stopped. We started it again. Did we start and start? Yeah, we stopped. And we found a new hole. And he tried again. Yeah, but it was bleeding internally. The loaning up and we had to stop the show and get lucky we had an EMT here. Yeah, but he said it was fine. Yeah. And that was. But he was a little bit like, what the fuck? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. After it's like, my career is over. I just did the most disgusting things, nothing worked. It was horrible. Yeah. Exactly. You're going to be so bad. That's right. That's what we're wrong. Yeah. And I always go in the other direction. What is the difference, though, if it's the same spot? I don't know. Maybe. Obviously. Yeah. But I think, isn't it's probably you know how to do it yourself. No, but I let the audience do it when they come on stage. Oh, really? I mean, I make sure it's above the break. You know, it makes sure it's not in a dangerous place. But yeah. Yeah. How many times do you just stuck a ice pick through your arm? Oh, my. So many. And I'm doing it way more. A thousand. A thousand? Yes. And through both hands, I had to stop with my hand because I was getting the scar tissue. And it was becoming really hard to push the ice. But I did. I did CT scans. I looked at the hand. I studied where all the blood vessels are. So I thought about it for a long time before I started doing it. And then I did it with like acupuncture needle. But this is something nobody should do. No magician, nobody because it's just real. There's, it's just not good when things go wrong. Yeah. I would imagine. Yeah. I would imagine it's real problem. How do you like decide like what you're going to do with these kind of things? Like what makes you come to like I think it was like an ice pick through my hand? I think that started early on. There was a magician named Harry Anderson that used to do needle through arm. And it was like a fake arm thing like a stuck it together. And it looks like it's going through. And I was like that. And I think I was like that could probably really be done. So I think it began with that. And then I heard about a kid that can take a bicycle spoke and put it through. And then I started thinking, well, if you could do that as a trick but have no blood, then it's kind of amazing. And what I didn't realize was basically your blood equ highlights when you, so based on time. So if you pushed this through, again, I don't want to give anybody lessons on how to do it all. But with time, I think when you pull it out, you just don't bleed. Unless you go through the wrong side and hit something. Yeah. But I like those things that just seem impossible. But there's an actual science to it. Who is the guy who would take thin swords and shove them through his lungs? Yeah, mere endial. I have not done that. I'm never going to do that one. He died doing that, didn't he? No. So what happened? Well, normally he would have a rapier pushed through by a doctor. And he would jog with these rapiers that was body through his lungs right through the middle. And I think what happens is he became very overconfident. He could do anything. And he swallowed a needle, like an ice-pig-sized needle. He swallowed it and thought he was going to push it through. And he went to sleep. It was still inside of him. And it ruptured his heart. And then he bled out. Oh, God. Yeah. Yeah. I think he started to get so cocky with what his body could do yet. So this is the guy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's how it does one do that. I mean, if he's got a... They send in to Birky-lose this. And so the way his body recovered it, it doesn't... Nobody really knows. But I know scientists and doctors, they all thought it wasn't real. They thought it was a trick. It's a trick forever for them to even think it was real. Oh, those sideways. Oh, that's right. I forgot this one. So he's going through his fucking intestines. Yeah. He was the human... The human pin cushion. And that's a doctor or that doctor. What about do no harm, fellow? That is so insane. So he's got... I mean, it's insane that he could control... So it's just... ...to his arms as well as at why his bandages... ...and what about? But it's insane that he could control it. Because, you know, obviously when people get stabbed, you know, he's going to do an x-ray. Is that what he's doing? And look at the holes and the holes. Oh, God, dude. That guy's got so many holes. Yeah, it's crazy. The doctors have to examine. That's a really sore... Dick rape your by the way. Yeah, and then they eat... ...like the water comes out. Oh. Yeah, don't do that one. Mm-hmm. Never. Yeah, there's... I mean, there's real danger in a lot of the shit you do. Well, but I don't just go randomly do things. I start carefully, methodically slow. I have not magicians around them. I have doctors and I have, you know, people that are the best in the world that do these things. And there's a slow learning curve. You just never see it. Mm-hmm. So... But that one to me, I was like, no, it's not worth the reason. Has anybody else done that other than that guy? I don't think so. Not intentionally. So I can take the cards, bro. Yeah. The cards are amazing. Why fuck around with the cards are amazing. They're amazing. They are amazing. They are amazing. Yeah. Slide of hand. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. What's the dexterity of the fine mobile skills, motor skills of your fingers? It's so impressive. But it makes sense. Like, my left hand is so dumb in comparison to my right hand. Like, if I try to write things with my right hand or try to type my shoes left hand and I actually try to use both fingers. But doing things is... One hand is better, yeah. And doing things is difficult. Like, with your left hand, it just... Your brain, somehow or another, doesn't have a really good relationship with your left hand. Yeah, but as a magician, you change that, because you have to work with your hands equally. So you definitely rewire the way your fingers move and the way your pinky moves. And you learn to do moves instead of not natural. Well, I learned that from boxing, because when I first started boxing, I'm right handed and my right hand was so much better than my left hand. But then after boxing for a few years, my left hand was much better because you use the jab much more than you use the right hand. And my left bicep became larger than my right bicep, like, pretty significantly. Wow. Yeah. And Roy Jones Jr. is the best example that. Roy Jones Jr. when he flexes, like he was in the studio and he flexed, his left biceps like twice the size of his right bicep. Because they used to call him Captain Hook, because he was so fast and so extraordinarily talented that he would throw a left hook the way most people throw a jab. Just like leap in with this insane fast left hook and his left bicep was enormous. Look at the size difference. Wow. Isn't that crazy? Yeah, that's a huge difference. Huge difference. And that left hand was a lethal weapon. Amazing. But when you do box and you throw jabs and left hooks with your left hand, and then you switch and try to do with your right hand, your right hand seems uncoordinated. And it's really just your brain has this relationship with those particular movements. Look at his bicep. Wow. That's unbelievable. Yeah. I mean, in his prime, he was just a freak. It's funny because nobody would think of the jab as being, you know, as you do, you would build your jab much more than a. Yeah, because you use it much more. When you're boxing, you're constantly throwing jabs and then you occasionally throw right hands. It's probably like a four to one ratio at least. Yeah. And then left hooks. Yeah. I used to always print t-shirts when I was a kid of Mike Tyson, where the everybody. Oh, yeah. Yeah. He's he looks like to me the scariest guy to ever get up against. He's so scary that when he was in my studio, we had a desk. So Mike Tyson, the first time he came to the studio, Mike was not fighting. He was completely retired. He said he wouldn't train because he didn't want to reignite his ego. And then the second time he's in the studio, he had decided to take a fight with Roy Jones Jr. And so he was in his 50s and started training again and got in fucking insanely dedicated. And the way he I think the way he described, he said the gods of war reignited his ego and brought him back to do combat again. And he was so terrifying that when he was sitting across from me, he was so different between the first podcast and the second podcast. I decided to make the table wider. I was going to make a more narrow table. So I was closer to the people, but I was like his energy. What I was this close to him was so it was so like confusing. Man, he is unbelievable. Yeah, that's number two. That's when he was back. He's my favorite that ever lived. Oh my God. In his prime, oh, 80s. He was a fucking forced one. He's like the black shorts. He has no way to look. Oh man. The way he went through people. Yeah. He's a scariest heavyweight of all time. He was a big, like, yeah. Did you see the Francis and Gano Tyson Fury fight? Francis and Gano, who is the UFC heavyweight champion, he vacated the throne and had a boxing match with Tyson Fury. Who is the lineal heavyweight champion? Dropped him in the third round and won on one judges' scorecard and lost on the other two. So he lost a majority decision in his first ever boxing match against arguably the best heavyweight boxer. Wow. Absolutely alive, but maybe of all time. Wow. It was pretty, pretty, and I thought he won the decision. A lot of people thought he won the decision. It's very close fight. I mean, you can maybe say that Tyson Fury, I mean, you can kind of see an argument that he maybe could have won. I don't think so though. When it comes to damage, I looked at it. I've watched it three times. And in my mind, he won the fight. And I think that's one of the most extraordinary accomplishments in combat sports history. A guy who's had zero boxing matches, who is an MMA champion, goes and fights a guy who is one of the greatest boxers that's ever lived. I mean, Tyson Fury is phenomenal. Now, whether Tyson Fury took him seriously, whether he was overconfident, who knows. I mean, he literally said to him, time to go to school. I'm taking you to school at the beginning of the fight. And then when Tyson Fury said that. Yeah, and then when Francis dropped him in the third round after the fight, Francis like you are a shitty professor. And Francis is a real freak. And Francis is six foot five, a natural 272 pounds and built like a Greek god. Can I see that? Yeah. James. See if you get the photo of Francis standing over Tyson Fury after he dropped him. Because I mean, he really rocked him. And by the way, they gave him. I'll send you this, Jamie. They checked the amount of time that it took for him to get up 23 seconds. So that's after he dropped him. Look how big Francis is. I mean, he's just an extraordinary specimen. And you know, didn't even start combat sports. He was 25 years old. Where is he from? Camaroon. I mean, I had on the podcast. His story is so insane. It is like something from a movie. He was working in the sand mines when he was 10 years old and developed this incredible strength. Fucking digging sand. Wow. And when he was a man decided that he had to leave his village and he wanted to be a professional boxer and wanted to go to Europe. So he walked and made his way to Morocco, like hitched rides and all these different things. Made his way to Morocco. And then seven times traveled on rafts to Europe and got arrested and sent back. And when they would send it back, they would drop him off in the Sahara desert. That's how they would do to people who are trying to make their way to Europe. And seven times he made his way from the Sahara desert back to Morocco back to the raft. And one day finally made his way all the way across was arrested, was in jail in Spain for I think three or four months. And then was homeless in France for a year, founded Jim, started training. And they told him to train in MMA. And so he starts training because he wanted to be a boxer. But they were like, you really should be an MMA champion. And I'm amazed more popular sport now. So he starts training in MMA. Four years later, he's the UFC heavyweight champion. I mean, it's insane. And the guy he knocks out. But it's obviously it's not just his natural strength. It's also his willpower. And it's everything. It's intelligence. So there's where he drops him. So now he drops him. So look at the count. One, two, three, four, five. He's up six, seven, eight. So he made it up to the count of ten. And he's obviously clearly rocked. Takes a big deep breath. But look, it's 12 seconds, 13, 14. The guy's still counting. Seven, eight. This is a bullshit count when the referee's still giving him an eight count. And it's 22 seconds before they reengage. And the way he hits him is just this clubbing left hook. It's not even like full power from Francis. I mean, he didn't really totally turn like Francis's dancing with my love. It comes out of nowhere though. Yeah. And then battered him again in the eighth round. And somehow, in other words, they gave him, they gave Tyson Fury the eighth round on at least one judge of scorecard. This is fucking insane. I might have been two judges. But, boxing is a dirty business. It's a dirty sport. There's always one judges in the bag. It seems. At the very least, if they're not absolutely paid off at the very least, they're deeply indebted to the promoters. And there is some sort of an agenda to have this person who's either the most marketable or the one that he's writing on. I mean, I don't think he's going to have a rematch. I didn't talk about a rematch, didn't say wanted a rematch. And Francis wants a rematch for sure. Francis thinks he won the fight. I mean, it's interesting after the fight when people, immediately afterwards, most people were saying that Francis won. After watching it carefully, some people have said that they could be an argument that Tyson Fury may have out pointed him. In my mind, Francis landed by far the harder shots, by far did more damage. And even though there's this thing that happens when you see an underdog outperform the expectations, which certainly happened, I think he was a 14-to-1 underdog. By the end of the fight, the online betting odds had Francis favored to win, which is crazy. And then many people, including myself, felt like he did enough to win the decision. I felt he won by at least one round. And who's that promoter? Oh, God, it's the one guy who promotes Anthony Joshua. Eddie Hearn. He gave Francis two rounds. He said Francis beat him by two rounds. It's just an extraordinary accomplishment, even losing a majority decision to Tyson Fury's insane. Because the only time this has ever happened before, where an M&M champion fought, a boxer, was when a con-mugrager fought Floyd Mayweather. But con-mugrager fought Floyd Mayweather when Floyd Mayweather was at the tail end of his career. It was the last bout that Floyd had. And Floyd just kind of like warm out, outboxed him and stopped him in the fight. Whereas Francis fucking dropped him in the third round and battered him in the eighth round. And it was just an insane performance. I mean, literally like a legendary combat sports performance. People go down in history when they talk about boxing and things that people have accomplished. It's one of the greatest accomplishments ever. Pretty amazing. You trained both boxing and... You've done everything. Yeah. But what's through prefer? M&M&M for sure. Yeah. There's more options. It's more complicated. I mean, I think the boxing is an amazing skill. It's an amazing thing to learn. It's very helpful in terms of self-defense. It's an excellent... It's a must know. It's a thing that you must know. If you want to compete in combat sports, you must know how to box. But a really comprehensive skill set that a true MMA champion will have is far better. And if a boxer, like an elite boxer, fought in MMA fighter, they would have almost no chance. Like if Tyson Fury fought Francis and Gano in an MMA fight and beat Francis in an MMA fight, that would be more extraordinary than Francis beating rather than Tyson Fury, if Tyson Fury beat Francis in an MMA fight, it would be more extraordinary than Francis beating Tyson Fury in a boxing match. Because at least a big part of Francis' skill set is his punching power and his hands. Whereas Tyson Fury has almost no experience in grappling, kicking any of those skills. If he beat Francis in an MMA fight, that would be like the most incredible thing that I was ever done. Ever. But no boxer. Other than the only boxer that's ever even at an elite level, competed in MMA, was James Tony fought Randy Kottur. And he got...it was at the end of James Tony's career. He had already accomplished incredible feats as a pure boxer. And kind of just took it for a paycheck. And he got taken down and just strangled pretty quickly. Randy Kottur just ankle picked him. Promised the ground, down on top of him, had an arm choke. It was...it was a...once he got to the ground, it was like a foregone conclusion. Randy was going to destroy him. No boxer has ever said in the middle of their...like if it's if Manny Pacquiao in the middle of his prime said, I'm going to fight MMA. That would be insane. And he would probably get his face kicked off. I mean, he'd probably get strangled, probably get taken down, strangled. And he would be helpless. It's a different skill set. There's so much more to MMA. To me it's more exciting to watch. It's certainly more complicated. It requires more of you. You have to train in multiple disciplines. You're not just training in using your hands. You're training kicking elbows, punches, knees, take down submissions. Submission defense. The rounds are longer. They're five minute rounds. It's supposed to three minute rounds. It's like five minutes is a long time. It's a long time. It's a long time. And in the old days, in the pride day...well, in the old days the UFC there was no time limit. And then in the pride days, which was one of the glory years of MMA, in Japan, they would have a 10 minute first round. And that was very, very hard. That really, Dan Henderson, who was in here before was one of the all time greats, said that was what separated the men from the boys, that 10 minute round. Because, you know... A lot of minutes is straight fighting. It's crazy. Against a train killer. It's crazy. It's a whole world. And they would do this. By Thomas Super Arena, there was like 90,000 people, the Tokyo Dome. These enormous venues. It's just the endurance training that goes into that. It's like nothing else. Like nothing else. Not that boxing is not insanely difficult on your endurance as well, especially at a very elite level. I mean, next to wrestling, which is probably one of the most difficult things, it's about as hard a combat sport exists. But MMA is the top. That's the top. If the MMA champion is widely regarded by almost anyone who's an expert as being the baddest man on the planet. Whatever weight class it is, the MMA champion for the most part is going to dominate someone who is just a boxer. For the most part. But you know, you've got some guys like Mike Tyson, if someone taught Mike Tyson kicking defense and how to take people down, could fucking luck. That's fucking luck when that guy's coming at you through all punches. It's just a different thing. Yeah, he was the most exciting thing ever when we had a fight come up. He was so fast. He was so fast for a heavyweight. He was so even for then France. My friends hit so hard, but he's, it's different. Mike was so fast. The combinations just come like lightning and he would be shifting side to side to be standing in front of you through a hook and also he off to the right and he would have right hooked you to the body and hit you in an upper cut and they would shift to the left. Oh my God, he was a fucking, he was a fucking ghost. And every single guy's just go down. Oh man. Yeah. Yeah. I cried when the busted bug was like, no, I'm serious. I did. Yes. Of course. Who's the icon of our job? And he ignited people's interest in heavyweight boxing because at the time Larry Holmes had retired and there was no real compelling heavyweight on the scene. And then Tyson came along. But I remember busted Douglas' mom had just died and I hated him. And I also remember reading. He was out like eating burgers and things before. It's like, hmm. The Tyson was? Yeah. Like he would be out and like right before the fight. So I think all those things played in and just. Well, I'm sure. I mean, there's certainly overconfidence that comes with someone who just thinks they could destroy anyone that they front of them. Yeah. Well, he could. He had died. Yeah. He had died years earlier and it was just very different. You know, and I also think that there's a certain level of performance that a fighter can only maintain for a certain amount of time. Right. Because it's a lot of dedication and joy. It's so extraordinary. I'm present then. Yeah. You really can only do it for so many years. Yeah. And then eventually you fall off. Yeah. And I always say, when you talk about all time greats, you can talk about all time great careers and there's people like Bernard Hopkins who had insane careers that went into his 50s. But when you look at like the when they burned the hottest, who was the best during that time? There was no one like Tyson. There was no one like Roy Jones Jr. There was there's Mike Tyson was also a showman. Yeah. It was a show. It was an execution. You were essentially you were just even but you were just staring at a motorbike. He was right through. Oh, yeah. He was awesome. He was an awesome specimen. I mean, just a perfect example of an elite boxer who had a very unusual skill set. I mean, to be a short guy for the heavyweight division, but insanely fast and just on her built like a brick shit house. Just coming in, winging bombs. To me that the Tyson that is the scariest was the marvis Frazier fight. And he beat marvis Frazier was before he won the title and it was on ABC Y World of Sports. And I remember watch not going, oh my God, who can beat that guy? He was just it was just different. You know, there was every other heavyweight look like they were like they were stuck in mud. They look so slow in comparison to him. And the music when he would walk out was just like noise. It sounded like the clanging of steel. And it was like, it's definitely the documentary where he describes his mindset from the locker room up into the time he gets into the ring. No. It's amazing because he talks about being afraid like in the locker room. But the time he gets into the into the ring he's unstoppable. He says, oh my God. See if you can find that because it's so scary. It's so extraordinary because he would describe question walking into the ring. You ever get scared to death. Really? You never looks good. Well, that's the whole thing. Boxman's like acting. He always project what you don't feel on someone else. As I got old dad found them, Tim was scared to me than I am with him. 100% you know. So once I found that out, you know, I almost stopped training. No, that's not the one. It's it's a scene from his documentary where he talks about it and he just any said, you know, he just talks about like what was going through his mind in the locker room, all the fears and all the worries and all the different things. And the thing that I'm doing. Yes. As soon as I come into the ring, I'm gloved. No, stop. That's not true. While I'm in the dressing room, five minutes before I come out, my gloves are laced up. I'm breaking my gloves down. I'm pushing the lever in the back of my leg, breaking the middle of the glove for my nook. I'm prepared to do the leg. I feel my knuckle piercing against the tight leather gloves on the everlasting globs. I come out of the frame confident, but I'm scared to death. I'm totally afraid. I'm afraid of everything. I'm afraid of losing, afraid of being humiliated. But I'm totally confident. Close, I get to a ring. More confident if I get close, I'm more confident. I get the closer, more confident I get. All during my training, I've been afraid of this man. I thought this man may be capable of beating me. I've dreamed of them beating me. But that will, but I always stayed afraid of him. But it was close. I get to the ring. I'm more confident. Once I'm in the ring, I'm a God. No one could beat me. I walk around the ring. I never take my eyes off my opponent. I keep my eyes on them. Even if he's ready and pumping, he can't wait to get his hands on me as well. I keep my eyes on them. I keep my eyes on them. Then what? I see a chinking is all boom. It's one of his eyes may move. And then I know I have them. Then when he comes to the center of the ring, he still looks at me with his piercing look and that if he's not afraid, but he already made them a steak win. He looked down for that one tenth of a second. I know I had him. He had fight hard for the first two or three rounds. I know I really broke his spirit. During the fight, I'm extremely confident. I'm moving my head. He's throwing punches. I'm making them missing. I'm countering. I'm heading into the body. I'm punching a real heart. And I'm punching it when I'm punching it. And I know he's not able to take my punches. One, two, three punches. I'm throwing them up punches and bunches. He goes down. He's a speed. I'm victorious. And the power. He's fighting. He's fighting. The speed was just insane. The speed is coming. She's literally like a lightweight or a middleweight. But he was 225 pounds. A fury. I hate to break up this party, but I have to be so bad. So let's take a little break. We'll be right back. I have had legitimate psychedelic states from meditation and from yoga. And the big one for me is the sensory deprivation tank. I've had them. I've had like full blown experiences in the sensory deprivation tank while sober, where if I could give you a pill that would get you to that place, you'd be like, oh my god, I'm on my drug. And I've come out of that, those psychedelic states, which I call psychedelic, you know, I could tell someone I had a psychedelic experience. And I didn't take a drug. I had a psychedelic experience in the sensory deprivation tank, meditating and going through these deep breathing exercises. It's not a psychedelic experience like mushrooms or like dimethyl trip to mean or something that's more beautiful and spiritual and heightened sense of awareness. Very heightened sense of awareness, but also a completely altered state of consciousness that I don't think you would ever imagine is available to you just naturally. But what I've had in these psychedelic experiences naturally is nothing in compared to what these Kundalini masters have. Kundalini masters, and I have a friend who has done this who trained Kundalini Yoga for many, many years, and learned how to get to a full blown, like hallucinatory psychedelic experience where there's geometric patterns and you're connected to entities. And the way he described it, he's done psychedelics and he's done Kundalini. He said, it's much better. It's no, no, no, no. He said they're indissernible. They're the same experience, exact same experience. Like you can get there. You can get there naturally, which makes sense because the human mind, the brain, produces psychedelic chemicals. They're indigenously produced, particularly dimethyl trip to me. It is a naturally produced psychedelic substance that your brain and your whole body creates, your brain makes it. So whatever you're doing when you're getting hypnotized, there is something going on. And I mean, I think you could measure it in the brain as far as like FMRI or EEG or some sort of methodology where they would use equipment to measure your brain waves. They would find a difference in the frequency. But I think more importantly than that, I believe there's an endogenous release of certain chemicals, whether it's like here's another example. We just did, I've got a bunch of comics that are out of shape and one of the things that I told them I said, listen, come in with me. I'll take you to the gym. I'm not going to make you do anything that's going to brutalize you. I'm going to slowly get you guys in shape and we've been doing it for the fat past few weeks now. But one of the things we do afterwards is the cold plunge. And so it's the past. It's amazing. The cold plunge is amazing. So my friend Shane Gillis, who did it, we did it yesterday. Yes, it is. And I'm not of it. He's like, dude, I feel like I'm on Molly. I go right. But you know why? Because your brain ramps up dopamine outside. When you get out of the cold plunge, you do three minutes. Your dopamine gets increased by 200% and it lasts for hours. Hours and hours. So you feel like you are on a drug. And it is a drug that your body is producing. So you are in a psychedelic state after you get out of the cold plunge. And especially if you feel gratitude and you go into it with the right mindset and you leave it, you feel so beautiful. You feel so in tune with things. Yeah. Yeah. Do you do the sauna also? Yeah. Like sauna to cold plunge. Yeah, I do back and forth. That's my favorite. Yeah. I used to do that at Rick Rubin's house because his sauna would get really, really hot. Yeah, Rick Rubin. Now we talk about it all the time. Yeah. We both do the cold plunge and the sauna is amazing. Yeah, it's amazing. And it does give you a very bizarre altered state of consciousness that is the exact same thing as a psychedelic experience. You feel like it also makes you tougher to the environment. And I think it's like there's a lot of things that it does. Voluntary. It also sets your mindset. So like, once somebody is going to go into the ocean and like, oh, it's too cold, you know that you can just go in. Yes. I think I used to do that as a kid subconsciously. I would wear a t-shirt, all winter. And I would like, you know, when we moved to Jersey, we'd walk a mile and a half or whatever it was in the freezing cold winter night. And there was a kid, my friend Matt, that used to always wear a t-shirt in the winter. And I thought that was so cool. Everybody else didn't really pay attention. But I would just start wearing t-shirts all winter. And I think that's in a weird way. The beginning of like me understanding that you could fight the cold with your mind. Yeah. And then when you went into the movie theater, you were perfect. And you felt great. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. When you're no longer cold, you're by his life. And I would never get sick, by the way. I'd never get sick. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because it really enhanced. And every minute it was all bundled up all the time, they were always getting sick. Right. But I was, I don't understand that you're body strong. I think so. 100%. 100%. The cold plunge absolutely does that. But I also love extreme heat too. I do too. I love it. Well, there's a lot of extreme. I think there's a lot of extreme ways to have a cold, into a thought of that. Why don't you have that? I don't know. You need to get that. I have that. But here I have it at home. I live off that. I think it's extraordinary. And there's also a lot of real research that backs it up. There's a study out of Finland that was done that showed four times a week for 20 minutes. They studied these people over 20 years. And the people that did it four times per week had a 40% decrease in all cause mortality, heart attack, stroke, cancer, ever. Sure. Because of heat shock protein. Sure. So your body's developing these heat shock proteins from the sauna and it's reducing inflammation. And it also increases your cardiovascular output. And that's one of the things that wrestlers like Dan Gable, who is like one of the most extraordinary wrestlers of all time, he learned that from the Soviets. Because the Soviets in a lot of these Eastern block countries, they were using the sauna as a part of their training. So he started incorporating into his training and using it for his wrestlers. And then it also sweats out the toxins. It does all this amazing stuff to you as well. Yeah. More importantly, it's the heat shock proteins that all talks and talks like, oh, really gets a little heavy dip. Chris, did you know, you know, I went to the Arctic circle with my daughter on New Year's a few years ago. And we stayed in this ice hotel. Oh, I've heard of that. And it was freezing. And the only thing you have, obviously, is the only thing you have is a like a little sleeping bag to sleep. And so we're sleeping in the sleeping bags and the whole night I couldn't get a blink of sleep because I was I was thinking just get a freeze. So I kept touching her. Makes me sure that was our. But she loved it. And it was amazing. It was incredible. I think it'd be probably a fun thing to do for a night and then go to the state. Oh, that's a nice thing. These heat water. Yeah. Did you see the Northern lights when you're up there? The Aurora Boreas. Yeah, amazing. I want to do that. And mom, you've never seen that? No. No, never seen that. It's amazing. I heard it's insane. Amazing. It's so green, right? Oh, you'll cry. Yeah. It's fucking amazing. Yeah, we've talked about doing that for one of our family trips. Going to see in the Northern lights. You have to go do that. Yeah. I do. Yeah. There it is. Yeah. Wow. That's crazy. Is that the ice hotel? Well, no, that's all. That's all. But that one looks amazing. Wow. That's one of those down here with the sculptures. Yeah. Pretty dope. Yeah. There's something to extreme cold and extreme heat where your body understands that it's in danger. And then it becomes stronger resisting it. And the priest is cold shock proteins for the cold and heat shock proteins for the heat. I think it's extreme deprivation also. Yeah. It certainly makes you more resilient for other things too. If you can do, I start my day with that. The first thing I do before I do anything, I get in the cold plunge. I do it before workouts. So I get in the cold plunge with three minutes. Which takes out the inflammation as well, probably. It does, but it also jacks up your testosterone because for some reason when you go into extreme cold for three minutes and then you work out the effect is that your testosterone gets jacked up. That's a real, I never heard about that. Yeah. That's something that there was a study out of Japan and there's something that people are just starting to incorporate now that they're starting to realize the benefits of those. But just doing that. The bus overall health and wellness is just amazing. It's an amazing thing. And you know, I very, very, very rarely get sick. The last time I was really sick at all was COVID and I was only sick for a couple days. Before that, I hadn't been sick in 11 years. And I think a lot of that is training, vitamins, a lot of different things that I do. And when you start to feel sick right away, you go super clean. Yeah. Tease, ginger, lemon, a little honey, all those things. They definitely work. They definitely work. And it's also recognizing, understanding your body because you're used to exercise. You have a deeper relationship with your body. You know when your body feels weak. Like when I, when, when it times my whole family got COVID and I didn't. And I think one of the reasons why I didn't is not just that I'm really healthy and I work out a lot. But I started working out and I was like, boy, I feel unusually weak today. Like I, so what I'm going to do is I'm going to stick to a light kettle bell. I stuck to 35 pounds and I'm just going to do a very minimal routine of like 10 clean presses each side, 10 swings each side and just stop and relax. And that's what I did. And I did that for two days. And then the third day I started feeling really strong. And I said, well, let's just push it today. And I went back to a normal workout. So I think my body was resisting whatever was going on in my house and all around me. And then I got through it and I never got sick. Do do anaerobic training. I do it all kinds of training. I'm going to roll because my favorite, I think that helps with the breath hold. I think it helps with when you say anaerobic training. What do you do where you're depriving your muscles of O2. So let's say we were doing kettle bell swings, let's say with a 35 pound, you would do 50 of them or 54. What I do, I do, but anyway, so you could do whatever high number you want. Then you take a minute and then you do it again. Then you take a minute, do it again or with the battle rope, you do. Let's say 10 minutes straight and it builds up such a high tolerance. It's amazing. Even if you're just doing lunges, you can just do them slowly and really feel the burn. And then it burns for a long time after. Your body is like a race car that you could build the horsepower on the engine just through will, just through will. And an intelligent training and doing it properly. You can build your output. You change how the thing works. But when I'm holding my breath, those things that that training is exactly what plays a part because when I start to feel that pain and I want to quit, I know that I can keep going. So it's almost like I train in extreme conditions to be able to do the other stuff. Yeah, it makes sense. The boundaries of what is possible versus what you think is possible. The only way to explore those is by trying things like that. And by doing things like the cold and the heat and just realizing that your body can tolerate a lot more than you think you can. And then when you get out of the- You build a resistance quickly. Yes, you do. Well, that was the thing with Shane, the first time he got into the water, he couldn't even do a minute. He's like, fuck. And then yesterday he did three minutes. Yesterday and it's only been two weeks. So he climbed in there and he's like in there for three minutes. I'm not back here. And then he got out of his like dude, he goes, I feel like I'm on a molly. He goes, this is amazing. It's amazing, right? Well, now it's getting a song. You're going to feel so good. And you get in the sauna and you close your eyes and you feel like you're flying. And it's also a great mindset to just walk in. You know, you just you don't tip toe and you just walk, walk, walk. Walk in. And you go all the way under, right? Just go in and then come up. Yeah, just go in. Just go in and do it. Yeah. Yeah. And then go in and have a normal conversation with people. Yeah. Yeah. But the first time I did it, I could even do it in half. I think I did like a minute and 24 seconds. I was like, oh, just fuck fuck fuck. And then the second time I did it, I did it longer. And I think the third time I did four minutes and then the fourth time I did it, I did 20 minutes or 21 minutes or something like that. What's the temperature of like 33 degrees? 33. Yeah. That was rough. How do you get it to be 33? I have a what's called a morazco cold forge. And it's really cold. It's just above five. All right. So I have to come back at one point and I cracked the ice with a kettle bell to get into it sometimes. Or allow. There's a video of me pushing aside the ice where I climb into it on my Instagram. You can see what it looks like. It's just like giant floating chunks of ice in this fucker. And I just climb in there and just deal with it. And it's and I can talk like normal. I can get in there. My body's so accustomed to it. Yeah. I fucking hate it every time I'm about to do it. I don't want to do it every time I'm about to do it. I'm trying to figure out a way I can push it out. So there's two. I feel like my price. I'm approaching it's less much lesser extent. But there's two people in my brain. There's this little bitch. Here it is. Yeah. Give me some volume. See all the ice in it? Oh yeah. That's great. Yeah. That's great. First I do in the cold plunge. The it was difficult for me to get to just like a minute and a half. That's crazy. And I'm still just as cold. But now I understand I've been here before I've experienced it. Are you listening to music? No, I'm talking. So that's like the microphone. But I do listen to music. I generally listen to books in the sauna. That's one of them, but there's another one that was even more ice. This is the first one I popped up. Yeah. You find it. There's another one. Yeah. It's cold as fuck. Yeah. It looks amazing. Yeah. But again, part of me is like don't do it. I don't want to do it. Don't do it. Like that's the idea of it. I wrote it. That's your inner bitch. You got to conquer your inner bitch. And you got to tell your inner bitch shut the fuck up pussy. Like my friend John Joseph, he just, my friend John Joseph, he does a lot of triathlons and he used to be a drug addict. And now he's like super disciplined triathling. And he says it with his like heavy New York accent. He goes, your mind tells your body who's the fucking boss. Yeah. That's what it is. You tell it doesn't. Yeah. But there's there's a limit, but you have to figure out what that limit is and get to that limit. But I think that by the way, I think that's part of the thing that I love about learning those crazy things because even like to kiss the cobra. It is. No, no, no, but seriously, as you approach, it's like all of those thoughts. Go through your mind and then you get there suddenly everything shuts down. And it's just you and the cobra and your hyper alert to its movements, to its behavior. And you're in some sort of a zone that's that's crazy. And you have to stay very calm or the cobra. Exactly. And if you're not, you get the hell out. Yeah. But I mean, that's one of the things that people enjoy about watching your performances is that everyone knows physical limitations and everyone knows that every human being has this inherent desire to avoid discomfort. And the fact that you seek it and you don't just seek it, but you're doing it like in the cold for that frozen block of ice for 60 plus hours. It's fucking insane. And that's like, is he still doing it? Like people have tuned in the next day. How many days has he been in that fucking block of ice? What's the trick? There's no trick. The trick is the mind controlling the body. Well, you decide that you can even with this series that we're doing. You know, I have a team. I have imagined is helping me put the together. So I have a team for the first time. And they said, oh, we're going to find this. We're going to do that. We're going to skydive off of, you know, all these. I said, no, find me things that when I hear them, I'm going to be very uncomfortable hearing to even think about doing. Find me those things that when I hear them, I want to run away. That's what I want. So they said, we're going to cover you with a quarter million bees. Or you're going to do this. You're going to be put on fire. You're going to scorpions. A lot of things that you did, we did on fear factor. We covered people with bees on fear factor. We covered people with scorpions on fear factor. Right. Especially those big ass, dark black scorpions. Yeah. The kind of scorpions. Maybe it was like the elephant scorpions. I don't remember what they're called, but the really big scary looking black shiny ones. Yeah. And people got lit up by those things too. And they get stunning too. And it's like a bee sting. I think it's like 20 bee stings. Is it like 20? I think so. Whatever it is. I was stuck by the forest scorpions. Yeah, exactly. That's right. Yeah. Those are terrible. I was stung by the first scorpions. The first one. And you have to stay perfectly still and perfectly calm. And unlike a bee, they don't die. But with the bee sting. But with the bees, it really was incredible to be, you know, we put the queen and the lock around the neck. And then they all swam. Wow. And when they're all vibrating around your body, it is one of those feelings. It is pure magic unlike anything you've ever experienced. I don't recommend it, but it is incredible. It's just when they when I shook them off, that's when I think I started to get stung. When we did it on fear fact, this was very interesting. We did it at this ranch. And there was a local hive of bees. So we had all the bees that we brought in. And we covered people with bees. But then a local hive sent a bunch of bees to find out what the fuck was going on. And the beekeeper knew that these were different bees. And he said, hey, we have to stop production right now for a while. They have to sort this out because they have to communicate with each other. Right. So somehow or another of these local bees, we're talking these breed bees that we bring. these breed bees that we brought in. And they're like, hey, what the fuck are you guys doing here? Like, oh, we're doing a TV show. I don't mean whatever the fuck they said to each other. But there was some sort of communication. And apparently it was settled to the point where the local bees were like, they had made some sort of an agreement. The local bees left. And then the other bees. And then we went back to filming. But we had to stop down production for I think it was like a good half an hour. Where these bees had to work this out. And I was saying to the guys. These are so incredible. And I was so fascinated. And I was like, how are they doing this? Like, what's going on? We don't know. We don't know what they're doing. We don't know how, but I know that this time went. When they want to kill like a wasp, you know, they all sat around the loss and they all vibrate and make the temperature go up. Right. Yeah. They're incredible. Right. And how do they know? How do they know? You know, I have leaves. Even just their hives are so symmetrically perfect. Right. And how do they know how to make that? Yeah. They know they have. And they also, they're so efficient to just the uses of space and the way they design it is. Yeah. Like architecture that we can't even do that. It's pretty amazing. And they're doing it with their mouths. We have leaf cutter ants. It's very common out here. And you know, they'll destroy plants. They just take little pieces of each leaf and you see like a whole line of these ants. And I don't know if you've ever seen the leaf cutter ants hive their colonies. They have these incredibly complex systems that they build in the ground. And the way we've found out about these things is by, unfortunately, flooding them with cement. So they'll flood these bee things, these ant colonies, these cutter, leaf cutter ants, these, whatever they would call these hives or whatever they'd call it. And then they dig it all out. And when they dig it all out after it's covered with cement, they get a little bit of it to see how insanely complex these structures are. So they have these little pods that they have, these areas that they have designated where they build these holes, so they dig in and they remove all the dirt and these long tunnels. And they even have ventilation systems where some of the leaves were ferment. So they have leaves that are slowly decaying and fermenting and they build them so that these leaves have access to oxygen. They have no idea how these leaves, how these leaf cutter ants are communicating, how they know how to do this, how they figure this out and how they consistently do this all over the world. Like look how enormous this structure is that they're digging out. And this is all because they've filled the entire thing up with concrete. So here's their pouring this concrete. You see, there you see the leaf cutter ants, you see the surface area. And then they slowly dump this concrete in there, which is like a fucking genocide of leaf cutter ants. Unfortunately, it's the only way they can find this out. And then once they do that, once they've done it, then they allow it to harden and then they slowly dig it out. Takes a long time. But the result is this knowledge of this insane insect that has these complex structures. That is crazy. It's amazing because if you think of how tiny an ant is and how big that is, that's akin to like Manhattan. Like what the fuck are they doing? Yeah, it's amazing. And how? What's going on? Like how do they know how to do this? How do they know how to do this in Africa? And they also know how to do this in Texas. How do they know how to do this? Yeah, it's time for the real. Yeah. It's crazy. Yep. Never underestimate anything. Yeah, but it also makes you wonder like what is being stored in the genes and what do we have and what kind of information do we have in our genes that's inherent to the species. So that's just like a part of you as a human being that's in there. Maybe that is like one of the reasons why people are naturally afraid of snakes. A lot of people are naturally afraid of, you know, monsters, scary things. But why are they? Yeah, hardwired for that. Yeah. Because like, kids aren't necessarily born afraid of car accidents. But car accidents are much more likely to kill you than a monster. Right. But kids are terrified of monsters. Right. But what's a monster from? Well, it's probably our memory, our genetic memory of cats, of big cats that want to kill us. Yep. In the dark. Right? Monsters are always in the dark. Yup. Cats are nocturnal. Yep. Scary. They're not in the wait for you. Well, that's why people are wired to feel really, you know, uncomfortable when they're standing on stage and have to speak publicly. It's like the number one fear and the reason is because the hard wiring is, you know, when we were on an elevated platform with lots of eyeballs looking up at us as our predators, as we're lions or other tribes or whatever it was. So we had to be fearful. So it's hard wired. So people when they stand on stage, they're not at risk of getting eaten by a lion. But they still have those really uncomfortable feelings. Well, I've been told that it's because you're being judged like you did something wrong. So but I think it's more deeply rooted than that. I think if you run an elevated platform and you have lots of eyeballs on you, you're an easy target. But it's not always elevated. Like sometimes people don't like speaking in front of people that are the same level them. I think, but it's just lots of eyeballs. Yes. Lots of eyeballs. And most of the time I think in tribal cultures, if you were being judged, you'd probably done something wrong. And you're probably being tried. Is it probably a combination because earlier before that, right, you know, when a lot of factors. Yeah. Yeah. It's a very interesting like what like how the mind works and how many complex layers are in there. How anxiety works, how fears work, how people can trick themselves into thinking the worst case scenario is definitely going to happen. And they just remind which is the survival mechanism. Yeah. Because that's the ability to anticipate danger. But you can change that part of your brain. Yes. You can slowly, the way your friends slowly built a resistance to be able to go into the cold plunge. Mm hmm. You can do the exact same thing with any fear that you have. Yes. Don't have any experience with scary things, everything's scary. You don't have any experience with adversity. Right. You experience with overcoming things and experience with doing things to make you nervous. If it's an every single thing you're nervous. Yeah. Yeah. You do shelters. You're fucked. Yeah. Yeah. That's the one thing that everybody's terrified of their children being too sheltered. Yes. We all know children that are too sheltered and they don't try dangerous things or scary things and things that meet from nervous. Well, those kids are fucked when they go out into the real world. Yeah. You haven't prepared them properly. Yeah. It's a tricky balance. It is a tricky balance. Because you know, it's a tricky balance. Because you know, it was a long, a lot as a kid and that also is really difficult. And dangerous. And dangerous. Yeah. That's the other thing. Like you never like buy your children. Yeah. But you learn a lot. You learn survival. If you live. When I would get mugged when I was a kid, I didn't have a dad growing up in Brooklyn, but I would see like a man across the street and I'd have like five kids mugged me and like that. And they would like run away because they were like 13. And I was like, so I learned quickly how to get out of bad situations. Yeah. How many times did you get mugged? I couple, you know, three something like that. Yeah. It wasn't a big deal. Right. But if you do survive those situations, you gain what they call street smarts. Yes. Yeah. And you learn. And you would that. And you learn quickly. You also learn that human beings are not always nice. There's a lot of human beings that are not nice. Yeah. Well, in certain situations. Yeah. Yeah. But you could also find human human beings that are not nice and you can make them nice quickly. If you know how to become and give the right energy. Sometimes. I had after a sky that I've injured, I broke my foot and I was walking around with a boot on and I was walking around Paris. And I saw a guy driving a truck and a bicycle delivery guy were in a heated argument. And the guy with the bicycle had his bike lock in his hand and they were about to beat the hell out of each other. And I just walked into the middle of them and I said, Paul saying, you know, think of a car at a fridge and they both looked at me like who is this weirdo. And suddenly the fight was disputes. You know, you're going to do a car trick? Well, I didn't get to the car trick part, but just there's a guy here and they're both heated up. But like if one goes against me, then it's too, you know, so kind of diffuse it. I have diffuse fights with core tricks many times. Really? Yes. Well, I see people like about to fight like an Union Square and I just walk right in the middle and like here, let me show you core trick because I'm not there at a big and they're so confused and then I do magic and then it's over. Well, I think also a lot of times when people are involved in an altercation, they're looking for a way out and they don't know how to get out of it. And so you disrupt that like, Paul now is a new thing to concentrate on. Yes. It alleviates some of the tension. That's right. Time you're done. It's already over. Yeah. That's hilarious. Is that you? So did you start out doing that street magic? Is that when you first started doing magic? I mean, I was doing magic since I was like five years old, so I would do really simple mathematical tricks. But then I started to learn more and more and then, you know, I was a magic nerd at the age of 10. And then I would kind of just walk around like practice shuffling cards and stuff like that. And to the city, one time I was doing a one-handed shuffle and a bunch of guys that were working at the parking garage, saw me doing the shuffle and they thought it was amazing. And they came over and I started doing magic and their reactions were amazing. And that's kind of when I realized, oh, like, yeah, magic's pretty amazing to perform. Because before that, I didn't, I only performed for a couple of friends. Luckily, because kids are a tough audience for a magician. And so whatever I have, like, whatever I'm teaching, a young kid magic, I say, do it to your friends' parents, not to your friends, not at school. Because one bad experience and you don't want to ever do magic again, you know? But parents and their friends are going to be a nice audience. That's a good advice. Back then, how would you learn how to do, say, card tricks? Because there's no- Back then all you had was books, which was amazing. I mean, you would read books and you'd read this trick and then you would learn it step by step and then you would do it and then you'd do it. And when you did it a thousand times, it started to become like your own thing. And then you might change something about it and then you'd really make it your own. And then to this day, they're still evolving. Like whenever I do magic, I'm still thinking and processing and adding little tweaks. So it doesn't stop. Yeah. Magicians are notoriously secretive about their methods. So like, how much do they teach you in books? Books in magic have a lot. But the good stuff is hard to come across. It's not in books. How old are the books? Like what's the old? Oh, they're actually- Well, the first one was like, I think it was called Discovery of Witchcraft from like 1584 or something like that. And a guy wrote all these secrets of methods that like witches were using and they were being burned alive. So he's like, here, this is how they're doing it. It's tricks. You got to stop killing the witches. Oh wow. And then they destroyed all the copies of that book, but some survived. And that book has incredible secrets that I've done on my TV shows. Like there's one where you take a dead fly and bring it back to life. That's written up from 1584. Wow. I believe it's 1584. That was one of the interesting things that I read about the invention of the printing press that once they started making books, some of the first books were about how to spot witches. Like I was thinking that, oh, back then, it must have been amazing because now all sudden people could like write down all this knowledge and people can learn like, nope. Some of the first books, like the most popular books are like how to spot a witch. And there was a lot of, I guess, I guess. Well like who was the first person to figure out card tricks? Is there like a like a fucking originator? I would, I would assume like there's a book written by a guy that called himself for Erdenase, the expert at the card table. And he had so many secrets in this book that are so relevant to all of the magic that any card magician does to this day. And he was using it mostly for cheating or to explain how people were cheating it because they would, they would. Yeah. And to this day, but when you're a cheat at cards, you have to work on the removes and beef flawless. Because you cannot get busted. So if you're a card cheat and you get busted, you're going to get your hands broken or worse, right? So these guys that were card cheats, their moves are technically perfect. I remember I was with a guy named Doc and we were surrounded by a bunch of magicians and he just did a cut the deck complete the cut, switched the whole deck and none of us could see it. None of us could see the deck being switched out was invisible. And he now magicians will work on thousands of moves, right? So they don't have the time put in to be as flawless as this guy, but this guy needs it to survive or as magicians using it to entertain. So you have room margin for error, right? Right. But these these card sheets, their precision is, it doesn't even make sense. There's moves that you see that you just can't rationalize and you can't explain how they're done. Well, yeah. No, how does one do a cut the deck cheap? Which is the whole deck. So if it was a red deck right here, he cuts the deck and half completes it and it's a blue deck and you cannot see it happen. And he's doing it with one hand? One hand. Where's the other deck? I'm not going to tell. But I couldn't give you one hand. Okay, give me hand. He does have some money in his hand. It could hold some hundreds or whatever. It's only hand-giving, but it's flawless and incredible. But there's lots of guys that just are incredible. There's a guy named Rod the Hop and he used to go to the New York. He passed away recently in prison, but he used to go to the New York underground casinos. And when he was a kid, I think he was like 15. He would just go to watch, right? To see because he he was magician, but he was like, what could be done? I think that's all you want. And one day there was a guy that was like in his late 60s and he said to the guy, I saw what you were doing. And the guy's like, no, you didn't kid. And he's like, yeah, I did. And he's like, then tell me what I was doing. And Rod said you were putting, he had a button up shirt and he said you were switching cards through your shirt. And the guy's like, how do you know that? Because it's invisible. And he said, well, I'm in magician. He said, you're not a magician anymore. And he taught Rod the Hop at a cheat. And from that day on, Rod the Hop became one of the best cheats ever. And then he went to prison because he had a card. I met him before he went to prison. And he had a little device that he put into all the slot machines that they'd all pay out nine grand. And eventually the casinos got whipped at it because it was twice every machine paying out nine grand here. Then here, then this gives and so they put him in prison and he passed away there. But that guy, but that guy's chops were every magician that ever saw him, which is rare. he didn't mix with a lot of guys, but he mixed with a few all blown away beyond. And it's just simply practicing something to the point where your hands are moving so quickly and so smoothly and miss, is it misdirection as well? No, you could be burned. You could have cameras up. You could do, no, no, no, these moves are invisible. Not as one make a move invisible. I mean, is it just repetition or understanding what to do to make it invisible? I mean, I'll show you move. It's just invisible. Okay. Let's see. And it's just a move though. Okay. So, I mean, so you just, so all you have to do is if you want to take a card and you know, that's invisible. Like no matter what you do, you can't see it. So but it's just a simple move. You know, it's just you take a card and then you take the, you know, but that's invisible. But that's used in magic. So people are just listening. You had a card that was a heart and the flippant to a spade. But, but that's, do that again. So you just take a card. You do like that and then you do that and then it's there. What the fuck? Yeah, but that, but what I'm saying is that's used by magicians. But imagine this beyond in a whole another way that you cannot see anything. My friend, my friend has been working on a move for years and years that he's never going to use that only I think one other person besides him in the world can do. And he, he was written up by all of every magicians, not every magicians, lots of magicians were really upset saying that move is impossible. There's no way to do it because and I, I saw, I watched it with my own eyes many times. And since I pulled out my camera, I said, can I film it? He put the cards on it. I've never saw the gap. Really? Can we film that? Can we film me doing that? So we could play it back at slow motion? You just doing that? Yeah, well, right now. It a little bit. And a little bit. Jamie, who's this little bitch? What's he doing? Jamie's got two cameras on you now. He's happy to. Oh, I see. You couldn't see it. Yeah, I'll do it. I'll do it in a bit though. Okay. But it's just a move. Okay. Hold on. It's actually my favorite move though. But it's just this. You take a card and then you take the card and do that. Does it just a move? Do it again? Yeah. Yeah. You take a move. You do that. You do like that. You know, it's just a move. But I'm just saying like there's so many moves that are so relevant and that are so amazing if you want to be a card sheet where you do this with such precision that nobody could ever detect it. Have you ever done that playing poker just to blow people's minds? Yeah. When I was like 18, I went to one of my friends like college games and I cheated everybody just to see if I could. But then I returned all of their money. So guys on my magician, I just cheated everybody here. But I just wanted to prove and I told my friend whose house it was that the game was it. Thank God you did that. That must have been balling them away though. Yeah. Yeah. I'm watching. But also nobody knew that I was in a jish. Right. Like all my friends going up, only my best friends knew that I did magic. What and I even I went through the silly phase of like trying the ridiculous tricks, like an appearing cane. I was like 11 and I did this thing where a cane appears and I popped my eye out. I had I had to work. Yeah. I was like I scratched my corny. I couldn't use that. But that I think that was part of the reason that I never went into like the allusions or the you know, I didn't have magic. It's at a deck of cards and then things that would you would find laying around. So I think part of the magic that I love is when you're using real things and real places and that is the magic. You know. And it's essentially learning a movement to get to it. And you have to make it look as natural as possible. When you're doing that, it looks it looks insane because it doesn't make any sense. Like I'm just seeing you know, you're moving fast. You're just trying to guide just flying from London just to he's like so incredible. And his name is Andrew Frost. He is amazing and he I just spent time with him just so I could sit there and have him tweet me because he's so brilliant. He has like that mindset of a card sheet, but he's a magician. And he's so precise. It's like I want you to watch everything that I do and I want you to pick apart everything. You know, because I also don't get the opportunities to sit there and do card tricks all day and all night because I do these other things. So it's like I lose time on doing this thing that I love doing because I'm like, oh, how can I learn how to do this thing with the snake? Right. But like these guys that just do this day and night are the best in the world. They perform from magicians because a magician can appreciate the amount of time and work that goes into what they're seeing. Yeah. When you see you just see a simple trick, right? But when I see a magician perform, I see how I'm like, oh, this guy's put 10,000 hours and on that move. How many hours you think you put it on that simple trick? Oh, my, that's my whole life. It's been forever. That's my whole life. So that started with my best friend who's my mentor also that showed me the correct way to do it. And I was like 18. And then I think I was with him at a card thing and Cleveland a week ago and he still corrected me. Wow. Yeah. Wow. After all these years, he's like, oh, I forgot to tell you, you need to do this. Oh, wow. But it's so strange. But that's like to me. It's a constant learning curve. Yeah. But it's fun to discover all these secrets because they're not readily available. You have to search hard for the good stuff. And then you have to put the work in. Yeah. And then me and my friend doesn't perform ever. He just loves the technical part of it. But then I have to now learn how to perform it. And then I go out and fail over and over and over and over. And then eventually it starts to become decent and then eventually it becomes something I'm happy about. I mean, I'm never fully happy. I'm always like tweaking tweaking tweaking. You know, did you film yourself initially to make sure that you couldn't see yourself doing this? No, I like to put myself in the hot seat and I like to just go out there, perform it and then fail and then learn from that. But yeah, it would be better to set up a camera, film yourself, watch it a thousand for sure. In the beginning, did you have a lot of people that busted you? Like I see where you're going. Well, the good thing about being in magicians, nobody knows where it goes. So at the end, you can always curve and that's like jazzing. So even if you're off, you can still go. You're improvise. Yeah. Which is probably like fighting, right? Like you're in a weak position, but you can... Right. You can adjust. Yeah. And that's what I think makes a magician really great as well. The ability to just keep turning. Yeah. You're turning. Interesting. You have enough tricks up your sleeve. You can almost like have them believe that the first couple ones. Well, it's all... Or it's all part... Yeah. The outcome... Yeah. But I fumbled before, but then I just keep going. Yeah. It's like bombing on stage. Or like fucking a joke up. And yeah. But bombing on stage is that's where you learn. It's like where you learn the most. So every time I've been on stage and everything is like a disaster. That's always the biggest learning curve. And then usually I get energized and then you really... Yeah, most certainly. Yeah. That's what the comedy is about because it's like you realize like, God, that's locked. I gotta get better. I gotta figure out what I did wrong. And then never do that thing that I did wrong again and figure out a way to make it better. Right. And the way you play in little venues and you're repetitiously to the comedy act and you keep the stuff that you like, you tweak it, you work it for like a year. That's what I think a good magician does. the exact same formula as a comedy show. How many different card tricks do you think you know? I could go on forever. Is that sort of the foundation of your magic? It's card tricks. I just love the way they feel. It's like a digital fixation almost. Just the way they feel and the hand, the size, the shape. And this is, this is must be something you have to practice constantly. Yeah. It's day and night. That's all you do. You see, you practice still all the time all the time. All the time. Yeah. Wow. Buy yourself most of the time? Yeah. I mean, I'm holding cards all the time. Yeah. Oh wait. Do you ever leave the houses out cards? No. No way. You never even if I came with you to do the cold plugs, the deck of cards would be right next to it. Really? Yeah. And I always still wake up with cards stuck all over my face, my net, every all the time. Yeah. All the time. Wow. That's crazy. You have to be very. That's so nice. It gives you a married to card tricks. And that's the only way to be as good as your hat. I think it's also like, you know, anybody could have access to a deck of cards and there's so much material and so much that you can learn. Yeah. I'm going to take some of that. Get some of that. Yeah. Thanks. Cheers, sir. Cheers. Always good to see you. Yeah, you too. I'm always blown away. I'm always blown away because when I see you, you do card tricks, I always think, next time I see him, I'm going to pay attention and I'm going to figure it out. Nope. Did you get it? I mean, I think I forgot to switch the camera, but I'm watching him do that side angle from zoomed in. Couldn't see it. Four times in a row. Couldn't see it. And even if you slow it down. No, I'm watching the guy. He just said Andrew Fosse. I'm watching him do amazing. Right? I'll show you. It's the first motion. Yeah. I did it frame my frame. We don't know where it went. Let's see. I'll do it. I'll see. Here. It's called too many aces for those that are just rocks. OK. So just for you, sir. So you've already, if you had cut me a queen, we would have ended up with like 12 aces. Mm. Let's have a look. This guy is so good. Yeah. Just this. Oh, four aces. But having 12 aces, right, would be inconvenient because then you couldn't fit them inside like a box. You couldn't do anything like that. Right. And you end up with just the four aces. And the real thing is, is if you lose track of what aces come from, what card? Because then you can't put them back together. And you end up with this useless deck of cards, which is just full of aces the entire time. And then, yeah, you just can't come up and back. Which is why it's important to do this. What? What? What? You can go back inside the box. And you don't get this useless. Yeah. What's up? No, but by the way, that's the least of what he does. I mean, he is a phenomenon. But there's lots of guys, by the way, that are just mind-blowing with their sleight of hand. How many guys do that in poker games? Oh, a lot. It must be a lot of games. A lot. Yes. Of course. Yeah. You know that. I don't play poker. You know, but there's tons of teams. I never asked. I met a guy once. I was the first time at Mike Tyson. I went to his hotel at the Trump International. And I was doing magic to everybody. You know, because Muhammad Ali used to do magic and he taught Mike at a levitate. So like that. So Mike was kind of into the whole magic thing. And I started showing all these things. And a guy pulled me aside. And he was like, you know, I do some stuff too. And I was like, what do you do? And he's like, well, I gamble. You know, sometimes I go out with these guys and I win a lot of money. And I was like, so what are you doing? And he said that when they're playing in New York, he would go to all the delis near where they were playing. And he would take the decks of cards that they sell the deli. And he would swap them for identical decks of cards that were all completely marked but invisible. So now he would go into the game. Let's say on upper park Avenue. And as they were about to play, it's a wait. I don't trust the house deck. Let's can you get new decks in the person whose house it was would call one of the local delis. And the delis would come up with a bunch of decks and now all of the decks that were sealed and everything, they would crack them open, put them into play and he knew every card. Oh my God. Yeah. No, how does that by the way? And that's not even a slight of hand version of cheating. But think about a guy that's doing crazy, slight of hand. Right. Now how does one mark, how are cards marked? There's a million ways. There's even something you could do with a red back card that's called Dab where you put some sort of like a red waxy thing that's almost invisible. But if you have a contact lens over the pupil that has a little red spot in the middle, you could see it better. But there's lots of ways to mark decks. I mean, I'm not going to get into those, but there is a lot of easy ways to mark a deck. I'll show you after. Okay. How can we not want to get into it now? No. No, no, no. I get trouble by. Yeah. No, no. How about other magicians? Oh, yeah. I understand. But I worked for two years on a system. So these decks have a system that's amazing. Can I see that? Yeah. That was kind of like as a kid. I had one deck of cards. And when I would drop it on the subway, I'd have to pick it up. And I would have like, it doesn't feel right. And I would carry it everywhere for years. And my dream was to one day have unlimited decks. And then when I started to make my own decks, that was kind of like highlight. You make your own decks a couple of times. Yeah. Are these yours? Yeah. Are these these ones are mine that I have in my show and Vegas. So I put my name on it so they keep it. Are these marked? Those ones are. But by the way, I never use it in magic. I just like it. I just like to work. Because when I was young, I would go to the magic store. Tanans. And we couldn't afford the marked decks, of course. But they looked really special. It was called Magic Sea Through the Card deck. And they were so expensive. So I started selling my decks of cards that I worked diligently on the system for years. And magicians would have them and not know that they were even marked. And then I would see magicians. They would say they would hold up the card and they would tell them what it was. So this is a marked deck right here. Can I open this? Yeah. OK. And if I open this. You want me to open this? No, trust you. I don't trust you. I don't want you to swap it out for something else. That's a good way. Yeah, that'll do. Trust us motherfucker. The Google images are marked cards. It's kind of interesting. There's a few fun ways they do it. Yeah, this one I think is very clever, though. I think this one's marked in their actual corner where you can see the art, I guess, has done that way. Oh, and then number two. I don't like it though, because those decks, I don't like if you leave them behind, they can see that there's something. This has the contact lens one. So when you put the lens on, you can see it. Oh, wow. Exactly. Wow. You're so good at finding everything. I think a lot of card sheets are going to be really angry about. You think so? Both card sheets. They're dirty people. They should be angry. Should be angry. Should be angry that we're onto them. OK. There's anything I can see. No, you won't see it, but take out the two jokers on the top and bottom. Yeah. Why? Well, what is that? Yeah, joke right. Design me swallowing a story. Oh, my God. You just take that out. Take those out. Take out the top of the card. No. I don't trust you. No, you don't most. Why? Do you trust him? I trust him. How the fuck are you? OK. What is this? Nothing. It's a... What does it say? Well, it reads real? No, but then turn it upside down. What does that say? Magic. Yeah. OK, so this is marked. Yep. But if you show it to me that way, I can see it. But if you hold it up the other way, then I can't. You know? I can see this. I need to study this shit. I'm broke my glass. Think it's figured out, Jamie? I mean, you have to know what he did. There's a model. Well, I feel like there's a way I can stare at it long enough. No, you're not. No way. Nope. You're not going to get it. I know what the water will do. You'll know what he looks like. Yeah, you're not going to get it. All right. Uh-uh. No chance. Zero chaps. He did though. No. I'll do jack shit. But the way you could really look is a bit... No, wait a minute. I see the bottom is different. Nope. But the way you look at it is if you put two cards side by side, that, because otherwise you can't tell. OK. I'm putting two cards side by side here. And what do I notice this different? By the way, even from here, I can see, like the top card. This one right here? Yep. See, shit. Yeah, you're not going to. So you could tell just by looking at the... Yeah. Like, what is this right here? Two of spades. Jesus Christ. How? And any... if you brought this to Vegas, any competent dealer would recognize that that's a mark card or no. I don't think so. No, because I brought it to the 40 who's like the best card sheet. And he didn't recognize it. He said it was a very advanced and really good system. Queen of hearts. Damn, son. How about this one here? Three of diamonds. God damn. But you know, I'm going to show it... No, but after... I'll give you another... No, but after I'll give you a little hint. After after... After a shot. Not again, right? No way. I'm telling everybody. I'm going to get on Instagram. You're going to... No, you're not. You absolutely won't. But you're... Oh. Yeah, give him the... I don't know. Really? OK. Hold the left. Hold on a second. I'm going to bring some... Well, here, this deck also... Here. OK. Why do you do that? They're going to have one more just like compared to something. By the way, I worked on this for years. Makes. Zero. Should I give one little hint? No. No. I'm going to give one little hint. What is the little hint? The ace is the easiest one to identify. The ace is the easiest one. Yeah, that's my only hint. OK. I see nothing but patterns that look... I worked with my very good friend who's a great magician, Doug, on this for two years of work. Is it the budget guy? Yeah, yeah. My guy. No, I mean, like is it... Magic guy, like, and he's still here at out? It becomes the thing. Are you on the phone? That has a little bit to do with it, by the way. All right. Jamie, that's really good that you just... Jamie's going to... I have another deck as well, but it's in the car. Oh, there's a lot of other decks. Jamie's also got a touch of the Tism. You can see some things. You're seeing something? It's a spectrum. He's got a sense. He's got a different mind. He works different. He can see things that other people can't see. I can't really unfocus my eyes, though. But yeah, I don't know what to do. By the way, as a magician, I never ever use it in my car tricks, but it was just such a fun thing to work on. I mean, that one's a really hard one that you're looking at. They're all fucking hard. They look exactly the same. It's just so interesting to me that there's something that is so clear to you. That is... Yeah, but when I teach you this, you're going to be like, whoa. It'll make perfect sense. And the podcast right now, just like, it's hit. Cut it out or go in the other room. No, I'm not doing the podcast. No way. It doesn't trust you. I think we're in the other room and talk about it and come back. I'm sure you would, but still, I would feel weird. Okay, well, I'm seeing something here. Hold on. I want to give one more hint, but I'm not doing that. Give me that hint. Give me that hint. Come on, son. Now I'm not going to give the hint now. Give me that hint. I'm seeing something. I'm seeing something. What are you seeing? I'm seeing a disruption. There's something that's different about this. Yes. Really? Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm seeing something. Yeah. Goddamn it. What is it? And you're going to lose it right away. I can see a very specific, there's very specific lines that go up and down like this. That I see that are clear. And if I look at a certain way, I can see it clearly. So you're blurring your vision. You can blur your vision. Is that what you've got? I thought I had it. And I was like, oh, this is going to be a diamond. Oh, and I see lines of the bottom. So I see something. Not at the bottom. Two. No, not at the bottom. What is it? Wrong. I'm going to have to. Wrong. I thought it was a diamond. It's not a spade. Okay. I'm an idiot. No. No, it's a, it's an advanced. I think it's pretty. Oh, it's looking advanced. Shit. I'm doing all kinds of weird things in my eyes to try to pick up patterns. But there are different. There's some different, 100%. There's a different pattern to this. One on my right. And there is the one on my left. That's true, but it's almost imperceptible. But sure, if you can blur your vision in them. There's clear lines on this that go up that are slightly different. They go at an angle. There's two very clear lines on the one, this one on my right hand that don't exist on the one on my left. And you can see it without your glasses on? Yes. I can see it better. I'm trying to see. Yes. I'm going to get killed in the magic world by the way. I see. This is a clear pattern on this one too that exists that doesn't exist on this one. Oh, God, you have to look at it so weird to see it. But I do see it. But you know, like some magic kind of abstractly, I can see that pattern. What is it? Wow. Lots of magic is like logic puzzles. So it's like you have to break something apart in every single possible direction to figure out a solution. Guys, this just makes me so, I mean, I don't play cards. But if I did, I'd be so uncomfortable. Because I'd be like, how do I know? How do I know that I'm again fucking robbed? There's a lot of guys that cheat. Oh, and imagine. Yeah. You think like in a lot of these high level poker games, you get a lot of dorks that have a lot of money and they want to pay high roars. Yes. And they get robbed by people. Come on. I mean, you've heard about this as people getting trouble for it all the time. Yeah. Didn't fill. I think go to a casino and he found a flaw in the way the cards were printed that nobody could see. I heard something like that and they didn't. And one of the millions of dollars and they wanted to take the money back. Well, how could they say that though? What he didn't do anything wrong? Just because he saw something. That means it's saying. Did he tell people? He didn't say anything. He didn't say anything. So how the fuck do they know? They said that he was able to detect a slight misprint where the pattern was slightly off. He could detect it and then use it to play. God, your vision must be so important for a player like that. Like, if you have a like, if you're a small thing. I think you can imagine. No, I think you can adjust. I think you can adjust. I think you can solve around it. Yeah, but I mean, as your vision goes shitty, as you get older, it would be harder. Yeah. You have to get caught to that. Sure. Yeah. The show is boring as fuck because I am just staring at cards. It's never. I'm never going to hear it out. But I do detect that there's something going on. I can see when I blur my eyes, I can see that there's discernible patterns that are in certain cards that aren't in other cards. If I do teach it to you, you cannot. I won't tell anybody except Brian Cowden. He tells everybody. No. I won't tell anybody. I promise. I promise. I'll tell Jamie. But he'll ask me. Yeah, no, no, I'm going to teach both of you. I'm not going to isolate Jamie. Jamie's fault. There's no doubt anybody. Plus Jamie will figure it out anyway. Are you going to find the secret that you're doing so? Yeah. Jamie can find any. So you didn't have a podcast to prove. No, he'd find it. Yeah, he would find it. Yes, I'm sure. Interesting. I definitely see differences in the lines when you look at it as specific way. I just don't know what I'm looking for or what I'm saying. By the way, the deck is called the white lions. Ooh. Why is that? Ah. Oh, yeah. Those are white lines in here. Nope. Nothing to do with it just on the box. Yeah. Anyway, what does that have to do with that? I'm not telling you. That's the direction. But it's not to do with lines. Oh, wrong. You are. We'll discuss it later. I'm not going to discuss it in there. I'm not going to see a line in here now. You're not going to see a line. What am I going to say? How many different? This coffee is good, by the way. Black rifle. That's good. How many different kinds of mark cards are there? There is so many. Yeah. Yeah. But those are used by cheats. Right. Not really by magicians. They're not necessary in magic. God, how does someone know? If you're a person who's like, I enjoy playing cards, like you're going to get a fucking rob. Right. There's also people that can mark the deck as they play. Oh, of course. How? I'm not telling you. Oh, come on. But there's people that as they're playing, they mark the whole deck, but it's imperceptible. I believe you, but I don't want to. You know what I'm saying? I do believe you, because I've seen you do things that I can't believe you're doing, and you're just doing them right in front of me. But these guys that cheat, it's very different because they work on the remove for years and years and years, and they are flawless. So if you're in a like, that guy Andrew Frost is technique on the stuff that he's doing, I think it's card sheet level. Right. And he's doing it on camera. Yeah. And he's doing it where you're like zooming in, slowing it down. You still can't see it. Yeah. And it's a way better on person. I can imagine. But it's just, it seems like I would never want to play cards with people. So I get fucked. Like unless I get this covering my cards, like a fucking person. Yeah, there's no way to tell no way. And a good cheat won't win. Oh, like a pool hustler. You'll have that person win. Oh, yeah, good cheat's not going to win. Oh, lose every time. Mm. And you're like, that's a bad player. Let's have a big good. Interesting. Like a pool hustler. Yeah. You lose a little bit. And then, no, you always lose. And it's once in a while you win. But that guy wins. Oh, so that guy's your partner. Yeah. Interesting. So how does anybody not suspect him? Well, he wins just enough. Mm. It's not like a obvious thing. Like a pool hustler. Yeah, Vegas behind every table says we have the right to refuse anybody for any reason. Because if they suspect that you're cheating somehow, they just boot you. Well, Vegas will do that even if you're not cheating. No, even if you make two small bets in them, one big bet, they're like, oh, watch that guy. Really? And of course. And just like, I feel like a big bet's going on. Yeah, but they don't need that. They need time. They need people who are going to play long and steady. Because that's how they make their money. Dana White is a crazy blackjack player. Like crazy. Like what, last time I saw him, we left. It was like two o'clock in the morning. He was down $600,000 playing blackjack. He won it all back in one 600,000. Wow. He played to like six o'clock in the morning. Yeah, if you have the backing, if you could back yourself over and over and that also helps, meaning if you're not afraid to lose a certain amount of money because you know that you can keep backing or so. That's a big advantage. But he's busted. He's gone. He's lost millions. Yeah, I'm sure. Like one millions as well. Yeah. But he's a real junkie. It's wild watch. Like the crazy look they get in their eyes. Yeah. It's so terrifying. Because you like, you see the numbers like, oh my God, this is so much money. Like what are you doing? You have to play. You have to play as though there's no money. You have to play the exact way you would play if you were playing for free. I guess. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I guess when you're as rich as he is as well, like you really have to play for a lot of money just to get that juice to feel it. Like for 50 bucks for him, this is nothing. Doesn't mean. Yeah. 50,000. 50,000 hands like this is real money. Now we're playing real money. And then when he wins, he's probably still like, oh, that wasn't enough. You know, football player Taylor Lewin was with him and Taylor, he listens to Dana and Dana like Betts Forum. And we were talking about it. We went to Shane Gillis' comedy show. And then afterwards, he's like, we're going to go bet with Dana White. We're going to go gamble in the comic. Oh my God, I'm going. Let's go. I want to see this because he's got his psychos. And I always knew that Dana Bette crazy numbers. So we went down there. And he was down $120,000 in the first five minutes. And I was like, oh, it was the anxiety. You're sitting there watching. It's your fucking freaking out. And then he won. And he was up $60,000 in the quit. So I think he won like $65,000 or something like that. But it's just like watching him down $120,000 in five minutes. It's like, oh my God, my hands are clammy. I'm like, fuck this. This is so crazy. I got really lucky once. That's what was at the palms. Mm-hmm. To get us the palms. So I was filming my TV show. And then at the end, I was like, oh, let's go play some crabs. And they had a bet on the crabs table, which was called the fire bet. And you have to open and close each number before you crap out. Right? I don't know how to play crabs. So you have to hit like a fourth. And you have to close a four before you get a seven. And you have to hit a five and close a five and a six and an eight and a nine and a 10 before you throw a seven. So it's very unlikely that you're going to do that with all of those numbers. So it's a great bet for the casino because nobody ever hits it. And I was playing at the low stakes table throwing the dice. But I said, oh, can I throw dice? And they were like, no. And then the pit boss, she called upstairs. David Blaine wants that the dice can you give approval? And they said, yeah, so she's OK. Take your shirt off and joke, ha, ha, ha. And then, but yeah, pull your sleeves up. You can throw the dice and keep your hand out, not out of the table. And I just, for the hell of it, put a bet down for everybody at the table, including the dealers. So I put like a bet that they would all win, I think like five grand or 10 grand if I hit. So I was throwing the dice. I didn't, nobody even, the fire bit never came out at the palms ever. And I was throwing the dice on it. It was hours. And by the way, I think the Super Bowl champion table was over there. And they were all screaming going crazy at the craft table next to us, the high stakes one, right? And kept throwing and all of a sudden, the dealers, I mean, the pit bulls has stopped. And I was like, what? Because I was winning on hard eight, and all these double fours, all these bets. And they said, you just hit the fire bet. And everybody at the table is like, what does that mean? They said, everybody at the table just won. I think 10,000. And all of a sudden, everybody started jumping up and down and they go crazy. It was like pretty amazing. They had to stop the casino, that whole area, they shut down. They had to review for two hours to make sure I wasn't switching dice or doing anything funny. And then everybody had to fill out a W9, and then everybody got paid. But it was pretty amazing. And then they came from playing. They're like, you keep playing. No, after that, I was done. But it was two hours of dice roll. But then they removed that bet from the palms. I think that's what I was told. Wow. Yeah, I just got lucky trust. I don't know. You're lucky. I don't fucking believe it wasn't. I did. I promise. I got lucky. I'm telling you. It was like a, I'm telling you. I'm telling you. Sure you did. I did. But that's the problem with someone who's so good at sleight of hand. But you could do things with cards in front of people. And they'd go, no, he wasn't cheating. It was a spade. And then also, it was a diamond. But you obviously did do sleight of hand. When you did that trick, right? How do I know that you can't do that with dice? You surely could. Well, I can't. But there are people that can't. Must be people that told you about last time. Yeah, but not me. Because that's not your area of expertise. Yeah. And cards spend 10 hours a day throwing dice against the craps they were both. But if you went to a card game, people would immediately be like, what? Yeah, there's a magician that's a lose lose. Because if you win, you cheated. Right. I had magician. So I just don't play. But I would be so tempted to just see if I could get away with it. Well, I did know it was like 18. Yeah. I would be so tempted just to see if I could get away with it under the scrutiny of all the cameras in Vegas. Not trying to rip them off. If I would like to do it, like say, hey, I'm going to rip you off. Please watch this. You don't have to give me the money. Yeah, you could do that. I would like to see that. But even just card can. People at count cards. They banned Dana White from the palms because he won too much money playing Blackjack. And so he pulled the UFC from the palms. Really? Yeah. We'll see counting cards. No. Just playing. Really? Yeah. He's won like $7 million in a night. Wow. I fuck you. You're banned. Which is crazy. Because if he lost $7 million, they'd be fine with it. If you throw it. But you can win $7 million. And you can lose $7 million. I mean, I would literally tell him in the line. Most casinos, the profit is from slot machines. Oh, yeah. I heard that too. Yeah, which is crazy. Because that's just rigged. I mean, that's just a fucking computer. It's just tempting. But that's also this weird human instinct to just keep pressing the button and hoping it wins. Try again. Try again. I mean, it's not choice. It's not you're not making decisions. You're just pressing buttons. You know what I mean? Really? Scratching six numbers. Yeah. Which is also super addictive. Yeah. Yeah. It's so fascinating to me that people can do things right in front of your face. And they tell you they're doing it. You still can't see it. Like, what the fuck is happening here? Yeah. That's you. Yeah. Yeah. They're all the funny thing now, though, is it's very different. Because in the old days, not everybody had a video camera. Right. So you could just do whatever and not worry about the angles this, that now when you do magic, if to be hypersensitive, because everybody's filming from everywhere and now. Right. So you know, it changed the way you could perform. Yeah. You have to be better. It not just better. But you have to think about things that you've never thought about. Right. The human eye can't see it. Right. Human eyes worse than the first cell phone camera ever. It's just so low resolution. The image is upside down. We have a big optical nerve in the middle. So the eye doesn't really see the brain paints the picture. Right. The video camera records. Then you can see. And so if anybody's doing something that has a flaw, it's caught. Right. So it changes. It changed magic a lot. But yet, you could still do it. You just have to have to think about all angles at all times and be hyper aware of everything from behind, from here, from here, or here, or anything. Well, you do it so interesting because you do that. And then you do things like kissing cobras, which is like, there's no trick there. That is not a trick. That is learning. Yeah, but learning from an expert that does it over and over. So there is a technique to it. I'm just on a rush. Yeah, but it's not a trick. Like you fucking kissed a cobra. It's not a rubber cobra. It's not. You know what I'm saying? Like two by the way. Yeah. Two different ones. Yeah. Listen, David, it's always a thrill to talk to you. You have a fucking amazing person. And what you do is so fascinating to me. I don't want to learn it, but I'm so blown away. I want to end this podcast because I want you to show me how to count the words. And tell me, when does this show come out? Well, then the National Geographic, I think it's in like six months or something. We're still filming episodes. Nothing is dangerous as the kissing the cobra anymore, hopefully. And yeah, I think it'll be. I think it's interesting. Well, just the clips you show me are amazing. It's crazy. Which, I mean, I'm going to give it all away, but you showed me a lot of wild shit. And it's fucking insane. And please tell me when it comes to it. By the way, you didn't come see my show. I didn't come see your show. I didn't know when it was Vegas. Well, you didn't tell me. Well, you have to come at one point. When is it? It's at the win. And you have to see it. When is it? How often do you do it? It's only like a few days a month. Because it has this magic and everything in it. But it has the physical stuff as well. So I can't overdo it. But that show isn't going to last for a long time. Because physically it's not possible. So you really should come see it. Well, when are you doing it again? Are you there on December 15th? No, it's like end of the month. Always end of the month? Yeah, but it's a few days per month. So you should really see it. You tell, OK, there it is. It's up there. So I will figure out when I can get to Vegas. And I will do it. Yes, I'll try to do it in line with it. But it's a show that I can't keep doing for much longer. So I really would love it if you did come. Got to hold it. I don't go to one wheel. It's very possible. I don't want to. No, but I know. But I know. But that's a part. That's the stuff that keeps me. I will figure it out. I will come. OK, so then we'll discuss this. OK. All right. Thank you, brother. Appreciate you very much. You're a flat plate. All right, fire buddy.