Johnny Mitchell. Thank you. Come man. Yes, sir man. Thanks for fucking having me here dude You're like a social media sensation right now. You're like blowing up all over YouTube Instagram Thank you. And like you started all this shit less than two months ago. Is that what it is? As soon as Andrew take out band I saw my I saw the void in the market, you know, and I stepped in That's what they're calling me my friends are fucking breaking my balls back in LA They're like you the entertain of comedy man. I'm like, I don't want that Please how much time are you spending? Is this your first time in this like part of Florida? Yeah Yeah, I've only been to Miami pretty much just to do comedy right that makes sense. Yeah This is a weird this is a very different town than where where you live right now. Yeah. Well LA Yeah, yeah for For sure it's so funny because you made a comment when you walked in here about like this town This kind of like bum-fuck Florida town we're in right now. Yeah, it looks like cops It looks everything in this everything in Florida looks like the show cops. There's no sidewalks Right it's just it's like it looks like there should be a couple of People to escape from an insane asylum walking down the street a couple of crackheads, but no we're in a nice area actually Yeah, there's a couple men not not really that's a decent area. It's okay. It changes quick It changes quick. There's like one you could be like a plantation style house and then Yeah, there's a gas station. Yeah, it's funny that most people who make all the like the comments or that notice this kind of town Or sticks out to them all those people are from LA. They always wanted to make the comments. Yeah I think the only like the last person who in here was freaking out They was Jamie Kennedy when he crawled in here. He was like looking over shoulder. He's like, where's the fucking crackheads? He's a bit of a high-book contract. I know Jamie quite well. Oh, do you really? He's a bit of a hypochondriac. Where's the crackheads man? He still won't touch my hand like after COVID really still he's still like elbow bumps me. Oh my god I'm like, it's over Forget it. Just give me a goddamn handshake weirdo. That's hilarious. Yeah And your podcast is fucking fascinating. I just listened to every episode So it's like you brother. It's like the format of that you just decided to tell your own story Episotically of like your life and crime and then time transition into interviewing people or yeah exactly like I Would watch you know in my YouTube feed I see You know every different kind of like drug and prison show because they're fascinating right, but it's either like some You know big cholo dude that is like the craziest shit I seen in prison and it's fascinating But you can't listen to it for more than like five minutes because it's just the qualities usually pour You know, there's no kind of production value to it or it's like some you know Oxford educated guy from vice news who's like let me tell you about a cinema or cocktail It's like no no no motherfucker. I'll tell you about the scene of Laura Cartel I've been with those guys so I was like maybe that's what I could do I could do Like a prison in a drug in a crime show But from the perspective of somebody that's been in the life, but who also can kind of I don't know articulate it bring like a news element to it like a news quality Element to it. So that's that's where I got the idea from but no I didn't I didn't plan to make it episodic like Track it through from the beginnings. I just kind of I just kind of started I just kind of went and it Organically kind of became this like chronological Thing, you know what gave you the idea to start it I think because I wanted I tell a lot of jokes on stage You know I do comedy I do stand up comedy for the fans. I don't know and I tell a lot of these Prison stories just because it's such a good humor. It's a such good fodder for comedy and I wrote a book actually during the pandemic days of the trap and It was pretty well received so I was like well, what if I Extrapolated these stories and made it like like true crime documentary style like what if I what if I told you actually how drug trafficking works because we always hear about like You know the drug cartels drug routes. Well, what does that mean? What's a drug route? How do you actually? Make money selling cocaine What what is prison actually like day to day? What what do these things mean? I didn't see a lot of people doing that so I was I don't know That's just kind of what motivated me to get going with it and how long ago did you get a prison? Oh, it's been years been like over a decade over a decade. Yeah. Yeah, I came home in 2012 beginning of 2012 And I was on parole at a three-year tail, but I just blew parole and just moved to LA like immediately Like I went home live with my parents saved up some money and moved to LA within like five months of being out of prison and just started writing screenplays Started doing stand-up comedy. Yeah, so you were a little hyper-motivated hyper-motivated high-promoted Fuck yeah, oh my god for anybody anybody who's like loafin. I recommend prison I mean I recommend a little prison bit for everybody because when you lose time like when you see the days of your life Just getting flushed down the toilet your nothing is a better motivator Like you want to you want to get that time back. Yeah, you know what I mean And so it's like a really also that I what was went too far with it like I was like manic when I got out You know, and I probably had PTSD from seeing shit in there or whatever, but But yeah, it was it definitely changed my life for the better. I think you know I mean I do regret like losing all this money I made but I think it I think gave me direction You know, yeah, man I say it all the time because I've had a quite a number of like ex-cons in here and people that have Been in prison for a long period of time. Yeah for long periods of time And they're the most interesting people I've ever talked to yeah, I always have the most character They always have they just they're just the most interesting people. Yeah, some reasons something about spending lots of time Staring at a wall reflecting on your life and your previous experiences. It does something to you that it's just unique Yeah, well also criminals I don't know what comes first sometimes. I think the personality comes first You know, I think that personality that proclivity whatever it is to you know like Roger Reeves Right Pablo Escobar's main cocaine pilot like what is it about? There's something in him an angst an energy that is just in him naturally that made him want to like You know go be a bad boy go, you know step outside of like norms That's because that's what being in prison. That's what breaking the law is. It's like it's it's anti social behavior So that's kind of that's kind of in all of us. I think but prison either makes you worse makes you really go further into the darkness or it makes you channel that anti social Inclination into something positive So it made me want to go into show business and become a stand-up comedian. That's definitely anti social You know like that's that's not normal either. You know what I mean like neither is podcasting no right? Yeah, for sure like what the fuck is this you know This is a job, but so so yeah, that's I think it comes first I think that being interesting prison doesn't make you interesting gives you interesting stories But you end up in there because you have something different about you. Yeah, Rogers a very unique case I think he's interested I mean he is like he's such a soft smoke it spoken polite gentlemen. Yeah, the guys escaped prison like eight times Yeah, he's been in Mexican jail getting tortured almost a death Wild unbelievable so In your early years what how did you get into drug trafficking? Well, I started out at drug dealing right just like from the bottom like everybody Pretty much everybody unless you're like, you know, the son of a Mexican kingpin and you kind of just get handed it down to you in America everybody starts just with hand-to-hand sales so you know was the early 2000s And it was just kind of the culture in the northwest And in California on the west coast. That's that was where like the revolution happened where you know in the 90s But we'd started to be grown en masse in northern California Southern Oregon and it kind of started to replace the Mexican marijuana that dominated The US market up until then right so so we were on the precipice of that so weed was abundant. It was cheap And it was just a way for high school kids to make money. It was like I I described The the green rush of that era of the early 2000s as like the You know the crack boom of the 80s for you know black people in the ghetto like everybody was Everybody was involved with it somehow I knew multiple people that you know went away for for selling the shit So that's just kind of how it started. I wanted to smoke weed for free and I always wanted to I was fascinated with it To be honest with you. I was always like I think I Think that's the show the connect that I do now. I think that like that is my fascination With that I've always been fascinated. I would see people Older people, you know older brothers of people that I went to school with like making a living from selling pot I'm like how do they do this like how I thought you had to be scar face to make money selling drugs So how do you how do you get the money to buy? How do you get how do you find people to buy the drugs? How do you find people to sell you the drugs? It was like it was this fascinating the underworld was fascinating because like drug dealing it's like It's like magic I say that in one of my episodes they used to call the Columbia and cocaine kingpins of the 70s Mahi Coz magicians like how do you just take this thing and just turn it into money How does this street bring you back money? It was like it's like the invisible hand so I was Yeah, so I just wanted to see like how far I could go with it So I was just started off just like buying ounces You know, edition of my friends losing money. I lost money for years or I would make like almost no money So it was like business it was like it was having a small business and It just kept growing very steadily and we would have setbacks and robberies and police raids and all manner a crazy shit and Yeah, I didn't I didn't make you know, I didn't get rich until You know my last two years before I fell before I got locked up That's when you're getting into cocaine and stuff. Yeah, but I can get rich selling Coke. I got rich moving pot really yeah Oh, yeah Yeah, the markup is it's hard to make a lot of money selling Coke It's hard to make a lot of money selling Coke. I thought it was the opposite. It's you can make good money selling small amounts of Coke But to get rich selling Coke. I mean think about it If I could make a thousand dollars profit per pound It's feasible. It's easy not easy, but it's it's much easier to Sell 20 pounds of weed a week that it is to sell I don't know 10 kilos of Coke a week because way more people smoke pot than they use Coke, right? So I got I mean depending on where you're at though, right? Like depending on what city you're in or what country but I was moving it all over the country So you were based in northern California. I was based in Oregon. I was based in Portland, Oregon So I was shipping it to New Jersey upstate New York. Oh, you're shipping most of the Florida Oklahoma Philadelphia, right? So it was Chicago and this was it is in the era. This was a very unique era where we could get wholesale weed cheap and the markup You know on the East coast in the Midwest was insane So and we knew that was coming to an end so that's why we were like we got a good before before they start legalizing the shit and prices start to fall like we have to We got to make millions now. It was it was it felt like It felt like how the mob must have felt in the 20s like the Chicago mob. They were like They can't keep booze illegal forever. They can't even keep it illegal for a long time Like this is insane everybody needs to drink. Yeah, it's the only way ugly people fuck It's the only way it's the only way most people get together and procreate get through their shitty jobs We got to get rich now and that's what they did so That's that's kind of how I felt I was like this is this is a very Unique historical moment where a guy like me who's not I was never part of a drug cartel I would reup from multiple sources some of them were cartel growers and But I wasn't connect that I wasn't a killer. I never carried a gun usually and I could just go I was just a small businessman Who could make a million dollars a year plus just with this like? You know, I didn't feel like it was a huge trade right 80-100 pounds a month Could make me a million bucks and how old 22 23-2 making a million bucks a year. I imagine maybe just 80-90 thousand a month Just clean man. You don't know what to do with that kind of money. You don't you don't know where to hide it You don't know how to act. I mean no, that's just crazy Two when you have that much money at such a young age. Yeah, that sucks you up. Yeah, totally It hooked me for life dude What been for fun with that kind of money at such a young age? I would just read us working 24 seven I was working 24 seven. I was working 24 seven. I you know, I was flying to but I would go everywhere, right? like I would I Would go to New York City for the weekend and just be walking around midtown Manhattan staying and like you know luxury Hotels luxury suites with like you know Chinese businessman and I was dressed in sweatpants and like a fucking You know a backwards hat and I got 50 grand on me and cash like you don't I mean it was a superpower Yeah, shit like that, you know, I could go to Columbia and Whenever I wanted I could go I could just do anything go anywhere That's mainly it, you know like I didn't I was ever ostentatious with my money because I always you know I saw the future. I'm like this is a this is a golden goose don't fuck this up like I need to stash this money and Flip it into something legit After I get out of the game. The problem is I could never get out of the game It just keeps bringing you back. Keep lowering your back. I'm like oh one million's good But two's got such a nice ring to it. What were you doing with all the cash? Like where was I putting it? Yeah? Well, what was your plan? Where you like buying real estate? The plan the plan was to start because this was like the advent of Amazon really becoming you know, 22,9, 2010 was like the advent of like online commerce So e-commerce. So that the plan was to like just start Bying shit and cash and then reselling it online and legitimizing it right making a company around it taking that profit Right declaring it paying tax on it That's how you get the money in the system Okay, and then using that Glondered money to yeah by real estate by other cash businesses etc So here's the thing like when you buy a house for example, yeah, the easiest example and you have you have to fucking go You go to the bank or you go to a mortgage broker You got to show them your bank account. You go to show them your records. Where does that money come from? How many people are paying you each month right? Where does that like so? How do you justify? That's all these cash deposits. Well, that's that's exactly why I had started I'd set up a company Right and then I was buying goods, you know sneakers right and this was the beginning of so I would buy You know a pair of Nike's you know Portland is the headquarters Nike headquarters there So I'd buy you know some Nike shoes and then I would just resell them online on eBay to you know some guys in Japan for like a you know 500% mark up and Boom you take that money that money's run through your company So that's legit that looks like legit money and you pay taxes on it So the only the only sketchy part is how did you get the money to buy the shoes in the first place? Yes, that's the big that's the rub, but that's what's the hardest to prove Also Feel like I'm giving your right I feel it. Yes. So what do you do about that lesson on that? Well There's nothing there's no full-proof way to wander money You know, there's a full-proof full-proof way to do crime But yeah, that's so yeah in theory they could try they could go If the IRS wanted to look deep enough They could say well, how'd you get the money to buy this and this and this and then you wouldn't really have an answer But also They don't really have an answer right. It's why they can never put people they convict of like tax fraud away for too long because The burden of proof is on the state or the the federal government to convict you so Most of that is circumstantial so that's why I always try to keep the money in the drug separate because if you busted me with a bunch of money or you Or you know, I got audited by the IRS and just like you said they said well, how did you get 10,000 bucks to buy? You know all these like whatever designer purses that you were gonna resell well sure maybe I don't have an answer But you don't either and it's your job To and if you can't link drugs or illegal activity to that money. Yeah, well You're probably just gonna give me a fine right it's probably what it's gonna be right You know or if it's an egregious amount of money that I haven't declared within there might be some prison time But you know it's not gonna be like they can't make a reco trial out of that if they can't link the legal activity to that That money and I guess that's I guess the example I made with like like loans and mortgages It doesn't really matter if you're just buying shit with cash if you're going to somebody in buying their house Just with a fucking bunch of cash right you don't have to worry about any of that right right But how you gonna buy a three hundred thousand dollar house with cash? That's that's you might know that better than I I'm asking you I'd like to know I'm in the market when you tried to buy a house in Columbia. Yeah, yeah, but I know but the the the scam there was You couldn't even do it in Columbia at this at this point, you know like there their money laundering laws because they've been You know influenced by the US for so long now right so they have Relatively strict money laundering laws too But my plan was because I wanted to buy a hotel because at this time this was yeah 2010 Columbia starting to blow up as like a tourist destination. So is this like when you Before you actually moved on there This is at the same time. Okay. This is the first time you get down there exactly I would spend a lot of time down there I would come I would go back and forth. I have a friend who lived there for years. He met his wife there Yeah, that's the best place lived in Medellin for like probably 15 years. Oh wow dude. He's a straight picep at that point He's saying dude. It's on I couldn't I couldn't live there long term. I'm too tall I stick out too much. I swear to God. That's the reason. I'm way too tall You're just at six six you're bopping around Columbia. You just I don't know I just always felt like there just could be a bullet that could just fly out and fucking hit me You know what I mean like I just I never feel totally and maybe I just seen too many movies Maybe I just met too many you know gangsters, right? That's probably what it is, but I I don't feel Even though people are like oh, it's so safe. It's Columbia and everything's changed. I'm like I know for a fact that hasn't so I was always kind of paranoid, but but yeah, I would go down there and I had this idea to buy a hotel on the coast in Carta Hana and Actually this town called Santa Marta which is like it's like an hour or so outside of Carta Hana and If I man if this was like the perfect like getting in early on like a booming like tourist economy So what I was gonna do was I was going to buy the have you bought hotels and ship before it out like anywhere No, okay. No, no, no, no This would be the first foray into it But I had some guys were gonna run it for me who I'd met traveling actually like a couple of like a couple of Americans who wanted to live there So I was like perfect. I'll joint venture because I don't want to run the shit you guys run it live here You know to me and make sure everything's profitable So the way we were gonna do it was they wanted the guy who was gonna help me buy it He was a money launderer. He wanted to Basically basically this is how it was set up The buy price of the hotel was 300 grand and he was gonna charge me a hundred thousand on top of that to do the Laundering to do the washing he had a contact in the United States Right he had a Colombian guy who worked with him on the East Coast So he said what you're gonna do is just bring him cash you're gonna bring him the money and then I'm gonna buy with my own money in Colombia I'm gonna buy this hotel for you and then I'm once I know that I have my contact has your dollars in the States I'm just gonna transfer the deed of trust over to you. See what I mean super clean that one He was charging a hundred grand just to do this. Yes. Okay. Yes. I was gonna say because I don't think I caught that on your episode So I was immediately like why the fuck is this guy doing this for you for nothing? Like how did me be so suspicious of that? Yeah, no big a hundred grand and yeah, yeah, absolutely absolutely This is what this guy does. Okay, so so yeah, that's just like a very clean way right like if you have You know the Colombians have a diaspora in New York in Queens and so you just take you know You take a foreigners cash. Would you call it? Diaspora so they have like yeah, so they have a big Colombian community in In New York on the East Coast. Okay, so they a lot of drug traffickers Coming over there originally from the 70s a lot of them stayed so they have a lot of communication back and forth They got a lot of criminal activity going in and out of you know from Kali metajin to To Queens, you know, okay, yeah, they still smuggle drugs from Colombia directly to the States They just don't do it and mass most of it goes through Mexico. Mm-hmm, you know Yeah, I met girls that had like were mules that would swallow pellets of Coke You know they braid them into their hair that you know They make the pellets like dark and they fit them inside of these girls like weaves and they walk through the airport that way You know people wrap through Miami Yeah, no, or wherever right whatever airport they're flying through but you know I heard of one a guy that had like wraps like his little niece his little like four-year-old niece, you know It's stuff some cocaine and her teddy bear wrapped it around her legs and shit I mean there's there's throwing the book at it. That's a good idea. It is a good idea Or the or gonna be certain babies for or old people too They do that with like infirm people that are in wheelchairs, right? They build them inside of the wheelchair. Yeah, so they're they're less likely to be searched But you can't get weight in like that. That's really it's difficult to scale a business Doing stuff like that because how many kilos can you really fit around? You know a little girl's legs a couple of them maybe I've heard some horror stories about people like putting them in Like pellets and then swallowing them. Yeah, busting oh god dude brutal right? Roodle way to go. I had you It would be great at first when it's your first pizza. You're like damn. Yeah, the first two seconds Fuck yeah, oh a little too Oh man. Yeah. Yeah. I'm a rea full of grace. That's the classic Movie about that have you seen that? I don't think I've seen that. Oh, it's a great movie And it's about you know impoverished girls from the compal from the countryside in Columbia And they get approached by a guy right and they're a hard-up, you know one of them just found out she's pregnant I mean this is you know obviously you're not gonna swallow cocaine pellets unless you really are desperate right um Yeah, and and and it's just about their experience You know swallowing shit and flying into New York and yeah, it's a dirty dirty game man. It's a dirty game So when you met this guy who was helping you Go to New York and pay the guy in New York to cash the three-integrant cash and then he was gonna buy this Hotel for you. Yeah, what happened when you went and met the guys in New York and gave me cash Well, I never even got around to it because that guy ended up getting the guy in Columbia the guy who was laundering my money ended up getting killed So we never even went through with it. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. How wild is that? So I could have and that was some totally like separate shit, but I could have and I and I I tried to call down to figure out what happened. They think That that guy that money launderer was also either like a DEA agent or he was like working for an opposing cartel was like playing both sides because a lot of these money Londers they deal with a bunch of different car tells money, you know what I mean? Yeah, and and So you know he might have been informing on a different cartel like playing both sides like giving up information So you know who knows, but I dodged a a huge figurative and literal bullet with that I think and you were banging his wife Damn, dude Bring that up Danny Was it his wife it was your podcast. It was his fiance dude. Oh, it was it's fiance. It's different Oh, that's fair game the guy was a scumbag the guy was a real You don't have to justify was a and I fuck so good He yeah, so his his fiance was You know all the cart all the criminals it's passed down through the family So the girl that I his fiance the girl I was you know running around with She you know her uncles are part of a big you know drug trafficking organization down there You know, it's all very incestuous. So yeah, it was a It was fucking surreal. I was like I started out as a middle-class kid from Portland, Oregon selling Dimesacs little fucking grand bags of pot and now I hear I am like running around with like kingpins right it was Yeah, dude you get what you wish for you really you really like become who you want to be and That's I realized even even negatively. I'm like wow. I really like In a certain way I wanted this and now I had it and I was like this is a bad feeling Yeah, that's what I realized I wasn't a gangster was like when that happened When you talked about getting in the taxi cab and then a Green to put a blindfold on yeah, I was kind of like thinking I was like I think I would have turned around at that point. I don't know if I would have gone. Yeah, it was inertia It was it was a inertia Forward moving energy Yeah, that was crazy that I'm actually going back to Columbia next month I'm trying to get an interview with some of the people from an all-faccina that organization Yeah, really yeah, yeah, and that's in a neighborhood called Envy Gal in metajine and it's a pretty nice neighborhood, but we were in a slum part of it and I didn't know this at the time, but I looked into it further. I'm like oh, that's where they took me and It was that's just standard procedure like Colombians are good business people. Okay, like they're not You know these bloodthirsty they have no reason to kill a tourist, right? Like they brought me to a trap house and they were like yeah, how much money you got to spend? And I'm like I could how much drugs you got to sell me right I got plenty of money Right so I wasn't I you went planning on selling drugs though when you went down. No, no, no I was just having a good time. I was just having a good time And I was like oh whoa How much for kilo blow why not? How much was it for a kilo? It was for there was two kinds There was the pettico which is the step-down kind and then there was the pure shit and I think I paid 2000 like I bought the pettico which was a little step-down. Oh, pettico means a step-down That's how they refer to it. Yeah, yeah, and Mexicans just call pettico. Yeah, exactly. It's just it's it's that's just a Across the board term for Coke. But in metajine pettico is shit. That's like a little cut So I was like give me that and it was $2,000 bucks for a key. That's $2 a gram Thousand grams for 10 times better than anything you'll find absolutely absolutely. Yeah. Yeah, yeah Yeah, so I was like give me that because I had so Coke before and I'm like I don't want shit that's gonna Like I want shit that's a little it's not gonna keep people up like it's meth You know what I mean like I want I want shit that's gonna really like like give people like a smooth landing so I was like yeah Give me that you know Yeah, oh, it's hilarious. Yeah, that's why I broke Yeah, so how how are the dealers there? You know? Yeah. It's hilarious. Yeah. That's why I'm proud. Yeah. So how how are the dealers there in Columbia different from in Mexico? Great question. Well, they're much more customer service oriented. I'll tell you that much. They're very, Colombians are great business people and they're very friendly people and they really unlike Mexicans who by the way, I love Mexico and I love Mexicans. They don't give a fuck about Americans. Green goes. There's this like it's almost an animosity. It's almost an animosity because you know with so many different ways over the last hundred, hundred, fifty years since really the history of the state of Mexico, America has been more or less fucking them. Yeah. You know, from how we stole their land, Texas to you know, the free trade agreements that fuck the farmers. Right. There's there's some things that the US has done to Mexico and they just are very prideful people. They remember they don't forget. So operation, not what was that operation fast in the furious. Right. Right. Yeah. Under Obama, right. Under Obama. Yeah. Yeah. But that just scratches the surface, dude. That's happening. That's killed like that. Those guns killed like thousands of tens of thousands of people for sure. Same for sure. Well, dude, you know, it's so crazy. We when we were down there filming two weeks ago in Sino, Loa. Was that when I talked to you on the phone? Oh, maybe with Roger. Yes. Yeah. That's right. We were in Sino, Loa. We were like in a graveyard or something. We were on our way to anarcho graveyard. Oh, yeah. And we were not supposed to be there by the way. They were like, this is how wild Sino, Loa is. Coolia, Con Sino, Loa is like how Kali Columbia was in the 90s in the way that the cartel has eyes on everybody. Right. Like as soon as we got off the plane, our escort, our guide was like, yeah, they know you're here. They have people working at the airport. They have people working at the rental car company. They have people working at the hotel where we're staying hotel, Lucerna. Right. So every time you leave, probably what somebody does, is they just pick the phone up and they just give whoever that area manager is, a call, be like the gringos are on the move. Right. So we were not supposed to go and film at this graveyard because it's supposed to be like, it's it's really off limits because it's a narco graveyard. It's where the big drug cartel kingpins get killed or whatever bosses or, you know, they celebrate that, like the dead are like a very celebratory thing totally, totally, absolutely. But we weren't supposed to go there, especially now without an like a Mexican escort with us. Right. And so we were like, well, we're definitely going to go there still. And so we went there, filmed and as soon as we got back, our guy, Luis, who's been on this podcast, Luis Chobato, who's been on this podcast, Luis Chobato, Luis Luis from Bice Cruz. Yes, Luis was like, Yaman, they knew you went to that graveyard. Do you? I was like, I was like, that gave me fucking chills. Like, yeah, they know you went there. It's it's okay, but they knew you went there. I was like, what the fuck? Yeah, bro, they got so so they it they called the colleague cartel. The the the KGB cartel because they they spy on their own people like the Soviet KGB would spy on on citizens like under communist Russia. That's how it is in cool. It got right. So that shit's nuts. I don't know how I got on that subject. Oh, yeah. So Mexicans were basically the difference between the Colombian dealers is that they want to they're actively trying to sell tourists. High quality Coke high quality drugs because they like the tourist dollars. They want you to come back. Whereas in Mexico, that's not the case. They just because it's so firmly controlled by just a couple of cartels now that they they step, they sell you if you go to Puerto Vallarta, you can't find good Coke because this it's all it's stepped on because they're like, this is for the tourists. We keep the good ship for ourselves. Yeah, that's the difference. That's the difference. But Columbians are like, yeah, come on, we want you to because we that we know if we sell you the best shit, you're going to come back and you're going to tell your friends in Australia and they're going to come, you know, yeah, aren't the like the tourist areas like kenkun, port of Vallarta, Cabo, those are like all run by cartel are all cartel owned like areas, right? That's like the hotels, the resorts, they all have an interest in them for sure. They all, you know, for sure either maybe it's not a direct interest, but it's like how the mob used to have, you know, give loans out to casino owners in Vegas, right? That's that's kind of how it is. Yeah, yeah, I can definitely see that, you know, the the way the culture thinks of Americans and Mexico versus the way they think about Americans and Columbia. It's right. It's got to be so different. That's got to play a huge part in that totally because Columbians don't, you know, Americans are new to Columbia and their new to places like Peru, relatively, right? So it's kind of like, you know, we're kind of sexy to them or we're kind of cool to them. You know, Mexicans are so familiar with, they just know what it is. So we would ask, you know, Mexicans about how do you feel about like fentanyl killing off Americans? They were like, well, it's you guys asked for it, right? I'm like, well, choppo kind of, we did ask for it, but he kind of started the thing that made everybody start asking for it. You know, like there was, they invented the fentanyl market basically back in 2016. So, but anyways, but that's kind of how they see us, you know, I would ask people, how do you think of Americans for the Chinese given that didn't they introduce them to that? They, they, I don't know if they introduced and that would be a question for the least, but they're the ones who sell them the precursor chemicals for sure. Right. Right. Thomas, that taught them how to use right, right, perhaps. Yeah, could have dude. I mean, we can link this all. We can go back to China and they haven't forgotten the opium wars from the 1830s and 1850s. Right. Right. So when we go, when Biden goes over there, it's mainly the British, wasn't it? Uh, yeah, but you lump it in with, uh, we were, yeah, you lump it in with America because, you know, Teddy Roosevelt's grandfather was an American. He that's how he got rich was, was participating in the opium wars. So, um, yeah, so they haven't forgotten either. So it's coming back to roost, but, you know, and Mexicans asked this one guy, uh, he was a bodyguard for El Mayo, Zambada. He was like, Oh, is that who you talk to when you're down there? That was one of the groups we talked to. Yeah, we talked to several different, uh, you know, families. How did you get in contact with the bodyguards of El Mayo? Yeah, Luis, Luis, Luis had a guy on the ground. Um, yeah, I'll shout him out. Uh, his name's Ellen Fettemol. And he's a, he's a trap rapper. He's like a tra, tra, tra, tainio, they call it. It's like, you have an Instagram. It's, uh, yes, of course, uh, he, uh, it's like trap music. It's like Mexican trap music. It's dope. He's really fucking good. Yeah. So he, he would bring us around and he met some of these guys. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was fucking cool. They didn't let us get a, they didn't let us film them on camera though. That's what I know. No, you gotta have money. That's how that works down there. If you have enough money, you can get these guys to put masks on and carry their guns around and, and just do an interview with you. But you don't have the, you don't have the coin. It's, uh, it's, it's pretty difficult because they're like, why I don't need to, what for your stupid YouTube show? Like I don't need to be on camera. What does this do for me? Right. So was they have a YouTube channel? Right. Was Luis actually with you? Was he just like setting this all up on the phone? No, he was with us. Oh, no. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We were down there filming, uh, like he was down there documenting how, uh, the scene alone cartel has, has moved in on like the legal weed market more or less, like weeds about to become legal down there. So they've opened all these dispensaries. I feel like I'm stealing Luis's scoop right now. Uh, what they've done is opened up dispensaries all throughout Kullia Khan, which is the capital of scene alone. And so it looks like LA. There's, there's fucking, there's dispensaries everywhere you walk in and it's like different strains. You got pre rolls. You got edibles. I mean, they're, it looks legal. Of course, it's not an all car tell owned. All cartel owned the cartels own the grows, right? They own, so they, they're growing a bunch of indoor bud throughout the city and in the mountains, they still get outdoor weed too. And like, so it's vertically integrated. They control the grows. They control all of the dispensaries and they get independent operators to, to do everything. But that's fascinating because they're, that's how they've adjusted to losing profits when we became legal in the states, you know, they lost a big, big export market. So this is kind of what they've done to like, you know, make some of their money back. That's fucking wild. Wild. So when you, when you were talking to the bodyguards of El Mayo, yeah, first of all, people who don't know who El Mayo is, he's like the number one guy. He's the boss of the bot. He's the old man. He's the guy. It's never been caught. He's the only person. He's the guy like one of the two guys who started the sinaloa cartel, right? He actually didn't start it. He was, um, his, there's not a lot of history on him because he's so secretive. The guys who started it are all the guys from the original, if you go watch Narcos Mexico, it was on health, at least, Guillardo. It was Raphael, kato, quin, tero, and the other dude. Can't remember his fucking name. Funseco, maybe. Um, but he, uh, he was working for them, just like Chappo didn't start the cartel. He was working for the Guadalajara cartel that later became the sinaloa cartel. So maybe he was one of the founders. Fuck, I don't know. But he's the, he's one of the originals. Uh, and the only guy who's never been caught and he's the most wanted, uh, drug trafficker on earth. I wonder if he really is wanted or is totally dude or if he's gotten agreement, right? He's gotten agreement because, because, you know, that's how a lot of these guys according to Luis, that's how a lot of these dudes, uh, survive so long is, you know, they cut deals with either the DEA or the CIA, uh, or the Mexican government or both. And, you know, Chappo gave up information, right? All of these guys have given up info on their rivals in the past. Um, you know, so who knows what, what is keeping him out of prison? But I'll tell you what, he's got a huge security apparatus. That's for sure. What did, uh, what did, uh, his security have to say? Well, first of all, the guys got eight different layers of security around him. He lives in the mountains. He's got owns, ranches all over sinaloa, right? But we went to, when we went to visit his, we went to visit his number one security team. There's seven different security layers that we pass through on their, on our way to meet them. So, and that means just guys who are posted wherever he's at and it's like a circumference, right? It's like that you just keep going out, now and out to, and these different security layers make a ring around him. Like a fucking military. These are, they're not like a military. These guys are a military and equally a con. They are the law. They are the military. Um, so every time you, so as you, if you're driving along like the highway out of the city, you know, people are on radios like, yep, uh, these guys are moving towards the boss, right? So, uh, but, but his main guys, the guys we talked to, they're like, fucking 25 year old kids. It's crazy. It was, it was wild. Like, you think they'd be like, you know, have boklava is on and big, you know, you think they'd be like these tough like ex-marine guys. They're not, they're just, uh, they're just dudes that probably have parents or uncles in the cartel and they just got these jobs guarding him. And, uh, you know, it was very weird. It was like, these are like normal dudes, you know, guys got acne. If you have braces on, right? Smoke and weed, watching, uh, Instagram videos. Yeah, that's not what you think. It's like, uh, it's, uh, it's not what you think at all. It's very easy for that. Well, I mean, think about how easy it is for them to recruit kids to the cartels. You know, you're a young kid and idiot. You're, yeah, you're gonna see other big flashy shit. You're gonna want to see the money and then you're gonna graduate to the within the, the city and the area obscene, although itself. It was actually pretty safe because the cartels are such a stranglehold. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Big time. Big time. Um, I just think the kids, nobody wants to be like sitting around. You know, it's boring. When you're guarding this old man in the mountains, it's fucking boring. You just sit around. Probably nothing's gonna happen because there's so many other different security teams that are gonna let you know if like the Marines are on their way. Like it once, once the fucking military makes it pass the first couple of layers of security, they were really worth dumb enough to pull a raid. That old man, they would have that guy on the move so fast. Um, and plus they won't ever do that. Cause I asked him that. I'm like, what if, what if the fucking military does rush right now? And they were like, well, the same thing will happen. Even worse than when they tried to arrest a video. Chappos son. Do you remember that? Yeah. Back in 2019, they tried to arrest him and the fucking they burnt that place to the ground, dude. We were staying right by there. Bro, the video of him of them, like pulling up on that house and pulling him out of the house is so crazy. Yeah. Yeah. He's so fucking calm. Yeah. He's like, exactly. He's like, whatever. Yeah. He's like, it's okay. Let me get on my phone. Let me make a call. That's right. That's what they do. They do. They say they're panicking the military, like, whoever the sergeant of the lieutenant, he's handing in the phone and he's like, yeah, call them off, because they they're every little clan from the mountains descended on to Kooli Akan and just started going to war. They did it like that. And the guy who ordered that was myo. So I'm about to really, yep. He was the guy that said, do not let them take him. So you imagine what would happen if they tried to arrest myo? I mean, it would look like Afghanistan. Yeah. So that kind of threat of violence is is so ingrained in the culture that you don't really, you don't really have to worry about much when you're in the inner circle of the security apparatus inside the cartel. You don't know what I mean? Part of this brief interruption, but I want to take a minute to talk about this incredible supplement that I've been using for over a year now after it was recommended to me by a nutritional scientist, Dr. Dominic D'Agostino on this podcast. I take Dom's advice when it comes to anything related to nutrition, diet, and longevity, because as we get older, these things become more and more important. That is why I started using Verso. Verso is a company that is dedicated to translating scientific breakthroughs into products that hold the potential to increase longevity. I take cell being this one right here, which contains Nicotinamide, Mononucleotide, or NMM based supplement paired with naturally derived, micronized, trans-risk veratrol, and TMG. These two chemicals are actually precursors to what's called Nicotinamide, iodineine, dinonucleotide, which is commonly known as NAD. And NAD is essentially the precursor to energy, cell repair, and longevity. If you've ever tried fasting or even intermittent fasting, and you've gotten that feeling of super high energy or mental clarity is because your body is activating genes called Sertuins, which are actually longevity genes. The downside is as we age NAD declines. When I found out I could naturally increase my body's activation of Sertuins and naturally activate my body's production of NAD, I was sold. And it is so much more affordable than doing NAD IV drips. Head on over to vr.s-o and use the coupon code ConCreat It Checkout to save 50% on your entire order. That's KO and C-R-E-T-E at checkout. And get 15% off your entire order or you can just go to vr.s-o-k-o-n-c-r-e. It's linked below back to the show. It's so fucking crazy to think about. I've asked this question of so many people, and it's always like a laugh for people when I ask them this. But I'm like, could you imagine if the US, I don't even know if they have motive to do it or not. There's so many conspiracies about how the US is involved in the cartels. There's that documentary that I forget the name of it right now. But it's the documentary basically about the DEA agent who was murdered by the C-E-S-C-I-A-A. Yes, okay. At least Rodriguez. Not Felice Rodriguez. Felice, his name is, yes. Come on, come on. I know the day. He came from Kiki, Kiki, and he was the DEA agent. Felice Rodriguez was the C-I-A. He was a CIA. Yes. He was a CIA asset. We got to remember that. The CIA doesn't have that many people. I thought he was a jit officer of the CIA because he was working on the contract. Who knows? Because Felice Rodriguez, we got to figure out who knows because it's very easy. It's all about deniability. This guy obviously wasn't educated in America and didn't like he didn't apply for a job at the CIA. They recruited him because he was in a Cuban exile who could help fight communism. This is post-Castro. This is when, yeah, that dude right there. Do you see it? Cuban-American former central intelligence and military operations officer. Oh, wow. So maybe he was on the payroll. He's definitely on the payroll. Maybe he was a card-carrying member. He was involved in the Bay of Peace. Oh, so this guy goes back to Kennedy. This is crazy as it's tied to Jordan. He's going down. Early life, good of his early life. He came from the wealthy family in Native Cuba, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Attended school in Pennsylvania, dropped out, joined the anti-communist league in the Caribbean. When did he join? Okay. In September, 1960, he joined a group called of Cuban exiles in Guatemala, supported by the CIA to receive military training. So that's probably when he got recruited because the CIA organized a bunch of Cuban exiles to pull the Bay of pigs evasion off. So that's probably when they recruited him. It was like 1960. Because I think the Bay of Pigs was 61. Okay. In 1967, the CIA again recruited Rodriguez to train and head a team to hunt down Chegwivar. Wow. Holy. He was part of the because Gabbar, I got killed in Bolivia. So he was part of that. Oh, so this guy is deep in it. Deep from holy shit. So he was, he was the one in the house in Guadalajara when he came around the DEA, it was getting tortured to death. Yep. That documentary. Can we pull up the name of that? Everybody who's interested in this subject needs to watch. That is the best documentary on this subject. It's because, and then if you, if you watch Narcos, you see that they leave that part out. If you watch Narcos Mexico on Netflix, they talk about that whole thing except the fact that those, the guy, Jaime, who was the white guy, Jamie, he was leading in the show. He was like the head of the DEA office down there. He actually, in real life, according to the documentary, I think he like stonewalled the investigation to make sure it couldn't go any further. Right. You know what I mean? It was, oh, dude, my fucking nipples are hard. I got chills down my spine right now. Search crazy. Kiki, camera, no, no, no, no. You got to search Kiki, camera, rain a documentary. Yeah. It's on Amazon, it's on Amazon. Yeah. But it's, but it's incredible. Yes, the, uh, I had his fuck. Yeah. Yeah. He was going on his way to lunch to meet, have lunch with his wife and gets kidnapped right out front of the DEA office. Yep. Yep. And that happened during the Cold War, all the fucking time so many times. It's like, you know, uh, supposedly trying to do the right thing or, or trying to fight drugs. It's been the CIA stopping, actually helping the criminals. They didn't, it's not just with, you know, Rick Ross and the Nicaraguaans and cocaine and it was with, you know, the, the heroin kingpins in Southeast Asia. Yeah. Right. Uh, during the Vietnam war, they were allowing all of this heroin trafficking to go on because the last narc, the last narc, ah, that's it. There's a doc series by the 1985 death of DEA agent, Kiki, camera, Ray. No. Yeah, dude. Yeah. Amazing fucking dog. Yeah. But that guy, that guy, Felix, he never, he's out free. I think he lives in Miami right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Which is wild. I wonder why they left that out of narcos. You know, it's a little too deep because I think the powers that be were like, this is a little too wild. I wonder what the pressure was on that to leave that part out because that is like one of the most intriguing parts of the whole story. I think, I think it's self censorship because we all know about, I think it is. I don't think it's the CIA coming down to the offices in Netflix. No, no. In Hollywood. And it's not that because we all know about the Rick Ross story now, right? They've made movies about that. We all know that the CIA was, you know, assisting Nicaragua drug traffickers who were supplying Ricky Ross, Freeway, Rick, right? We all know that. So we know that the CIA is this shadow we fucked up organization. So I don't think it's I just, yeah, I think it's, I think it's just a little too much. It's almost unbelievable. So I think maybe the showrunners were like, this is just, we want to make a Hollywood ending, you know, and this is not, this is not a neat ending. It's why I wonder what I was getting to originally is people like El Mayo, like what really are his threats other than rival cartels. Like, yeah, I don't think which are barely a threat and is the Mexican government is not a threat, right? Like their bought, their pay bought and paid for by the the car. Like the Mexican government is essentially a branch of the cartel. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. From what I gathered and of course, like I'm, you know, a novice at this, but from what it from speaking to, you know, guys like Luis and reading and, and there's, there's like a tacit agreement between, you know, the cartel kingpins and the Mexican government. When the Mexican government feels pressure, especially from the US, they, they will tell the kingpins, like somebody's got to go. So the most powerful, yes, they're a, they're an arm of the cartel, but really the cartel is an arm of the government. That's how I see it. Because the most powerful, you know, gang really is the, the high political class, that's, you know, been around for generations in Mexico. Right. That's the only reason that the, the cartel could exist as it does. So I think it goes government cartel, not the other way around. Right. And then that's probably why we got El Chapo that probably just became a totally he was a PR not married. PR not. Yeah. Yeah. It was, it was this bad publicity. And I might be speaking out of pocket. I wish Luis was here because this is his scoop, but he's not. I am. So this is my clickbait. Sorry, Luis. And I mean, we all know this. My old gave up chopple. He had to have, right? We know he did. It was his son. So his son, one of my, one of my, was many children, but the son that was organizing cocaine, transport through Mexico City. This is back. Can't remember mid 2000s. He basically gets kidnapped by the DEA. They come to him and they say, we want to have a meat. We want to discuss a deal with you. He meets with them. They fucking kidnap him. They arrest him, but that's kidnapping. Right? You're American agents on foreign soil. They take him back to Chicago to the States. And they say, look, you're never going to see the light of day again. Around this time, chopple is making a lot of bad publicity for, uh, seen a low, right? And my own never liked that. My old, he was just like a smile. He was like, old school, right? Chappo is mainly like he grew up being a butcher, like from very young. He was just a killer. Um, I'm not sure. He probably, I'm sure he dropped a lot of bodies. He was a farmer. He attended the poppy fields, right? Um, but you know, as these guys get more famous, they fall in love with the cloud, you know? Um, so yeah, he, uh, he was making a lot of bad publicity for the scene of lower cartel. And he was really a glorified manager too. I want to point out like they have him on a wiretap talking to the floris brothers who were their main scene of lowest main heroin distributor through Chicago. Right. And he's discussing a heroin deal. I heard that. Why would a kingpin ever be talking on the phone about a deal? That's what a manager so Chappo was really, he was a glorified, uh, general manager, right? You know, right? So, so when myo's son gets popped, we've all got all this going on, right? Uh, myo is on, he's on a recorded jail call. His son calls him from jail. And basically myo goes, you do what you got to do. And that, and, and, and so that was basically him telling his son, you can go ahead and give up info on, on Chappo. And that's exactly what he did. So, and that got him out of a life sentence. So they gave myo's son 15 years. But the info that he gave up on Chappo led to his final arrest. Okay. Wow. So, so flash forward to 2019, Chappo's son, O'Villio El Rato in the column gets raided by the the military in Kulea Khan, a block from where we were just staying. And myo out of whatever sense of guilt for having been responsible for getting his dad incarcerated in the United States forever says you're not taking his son. Wow. Yeah. Wild. And so they come down and they stop the military from taking his son. So it's, it's, it's dude, the Mexican tell it of Ellis, the soap operas, it's lived out in real life. And these stories, I mean, there's a million of these stories. So many of them. Yeah. So many of them. Dude, Chappo's one of Chappo's brothers was shot to death in prison. I didn't even know that he was a maximum security prison. He was shot to death. I don't know exactly. But it's just like that kind of shit, right? It's, uh, they live a very gout show, machismo, uh, dramatic lifestyle. It's like played out in real life. Yeah. That's where they get these stories from, even though they seem corny to us, like you watch these like, you know, uh, these like beat, I call them B movies or, you know, these kind of like low budget shows on Netflix, right? But they, they're taking these stories from real life. Yeah. Well, you know, the other thing about the cartels is how much fucking money they make by trafficking people across the US board. Yeah, that's big too. That's big too. Eight grand ahead. Yeah. And that's way better business because, you know, like there's no way those people are getting intercepted like coming from Columbia. You don't understand? Right. Like it's, it's actually way better. I had much rather smuggle people. Yeah. Wouldn't you? Yeah. And you always need people. Like there's always like it's a never ending supply of people that want to get across. And it's just, yeah, I don't know. Seems like a better gig. Yeah. I had, um, uh, Ed Calderon in here a couple weeks ago. And he was basically talking about how the cartels love Trump because he put on that whole border thing. Yes. They love that makes the price go up. Yes. That makes the price go up. Exactly. I'm like, dude, the cartels love the Republicans. Cartels are fiscal and social Republicans. They really are. You know, that's so yeah. Yeah. Okay. So check this out. I'm talking about money. Talking about this is in the episode. The drops this Thursday connect, check it out on YouTube. You've heard of YouTube. Um, the fucking we are, our guy, our, our trap rapper, the guy, our liaison. What was his name again? Uh, Ellen Fermall. Ellen Fermall. Yeah. Yeah. We may have to bleep that out. I'm considering bleeping it out because what I'm about to say, what I'm about to say, I don't know. I don't know if I can get him in that much trouble. I think it kind of, it's exaggerated a little bit. But anyways, he brought us to a little section, like a three or four blocks section in the, uh, like the downtown area of Kooli Akan. And we're start, we're driving by and he points out all of these little stands. They're like almost like a little outdoor, uh, yeah, they're just little stands. Look, they could be fucking lemonade stands. But. And he points out all of these little stands. They're like almost like a little outdoor. Yeah, they're just little stands. Look, they could be fucking lemonade stands, but they're, their money exchange places. So you can exchange dollars for pesos there. And what do you think is happening there? Lot of dollars, a lot of dirty narco good dollars getting exchange for pesos. He goes, yeah, they say they wash about $7 million a day just in this little four block area, seven million a day, a day, that's a billion and a half dollars just in this one little neighborhood in this one little city, seven million dollars. And he's like, yeah, they own the, the, they own the machines too. So they're laundering money at their own businesses. Right? Yeah. So there's a lot of money and drugs, though. They are to, they are to metajine. Cocaine is to metajine. What all drugs are to see in a lower and specifically Kooli Akan. Like I say, that it's, it's like silicone valley of drug trafficking. They're on the cutting edge of everything. And it's, it's so ingrained in the culture. And I think Columbia, Bolivia and Peru are the number one countries that are actually making Coke, right? For sure. Yeah. Yeah. I had a guy in here two days ago who lives in the Amazon rainforest. Oh, I saw that. I saw that. Yeah. So he was telling me that there's literal factories and that like pop up shops. And the jungle where they're making this ship. Yeah. And he says that like under the Amazon, under like the canopies of the trees, they will cut out like tunnels where planes can fly down and land under the forest. Wow. Just to reload their fucking planes. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. That's insane. Yeah. Everybody's getting in on it. It is why ever he's getting it. Like it's totally changed. Everybody is kind of an independent operator now. You know, the car tells exist, but you know, I don't know how exactly it works in Columbia, but I know for I know in with seen Aloha in Mexico, the cartel is now just an armed military, paramilitary group that guards, drugs coming in from whoever basically wants to import them. No, wild. So there's no more salary. There's no more payroll. It all got flattened. It all got after Chappo fell, the entire organization restructured. So nobody's on payroll anymore. There's no, they used to have everything used to be structured like a company, like a corporation, right? You know, the bodyguards, the, uh, the people, you know, cooking the meth, all the way up to like the people that smuggle it across the border. Everybody was just paid a salary. Now that's all completely changed. Everything is independent. So it's just groups, families of different drug traffickers, smuggling drugs, cooking drugs, growing drugs. Nobody tells them what to buy. Who to sell it to? How much to pay for it? How much they can earn? Where to sell it? Interesting. What they do, the only thing they have to do is pay protection money to the cartels, because they're the ones who have the drug routes, the drug routes to, to America. And they're also the ones who pay, pay off the cops, the military, politicians, et cetera. So it's a way different time and it probably operates much that way in South America too. I would imagine, right? Because you can't, there's just too much technology. Now you can't have a Pablo Escobar style metaging cartel anymore. It's just, it's too easy to take something like that down, but you cannot take down the scene of lower cartel. You just can't compartmentalize. Exactly. Now you said something about Australia being the biggest market. Oh, the best place to sell drugs is 1,000% Australia. And a gram of Coke is like 400 bucks. That's one gram of Coke. I bought Coke for $2 a gram of metajine, two bucks a gram, and a thousand grams shot. So imagine you get two of those two Australia, two keys to Australia and just sell it out, gram for gram. You got, you got a fucking house on a city harbor. That is what you do. And you do it. It's saying it's mind blowing. Yeah. And it's obviously because it's so far away. Yeah. So hard to get you. But I mean, you're paying all these expenses. So like all like that's all cost to get there. So how does that equate to more profit? Because I mean, like if it costs you that much to get it there, like, yeah, but it's not that much. It's, it's, you deal in volume, right? That's how you make money in the drug trade. You deal in volume. And, and, and yeah, you just buy the most for the cheapest. And you sell it for the highest. That's crazy. Do you do? Yeah. Are there a lot of like in where you visited in Columbia? Are there a lot of Australians and European definitely definitely? There's a lot of Europeans, a lot of Canadians, a lot of Australians, a lot of black Americans are in Columbia now, which is crazy, right? And I was like, why is that? And I was like, oh, because they like a nice, you know, black guys like a nice fat ass. We all know this. How are you doing with that? And you can feel fine in nice fat ass in Columbia. So, but yeah, but, but they don't, they don't do coke as much as like, yeah, the people like the tourists that live there. I mean, bro, I sold a kilo just out in grams and eight balls to, it took me less than a week to get a thousand grams off just to the tour of staying in these hostels where I was staying. I mean, it was insane. These motherfucker, the majority of them are European, right? Yes. And, and Australia, and they're so used to paying so much for coke that they go there and they just lose their fucking mind. They were like, what, what 20 bucks for a gram? It sounds like a fucking heaven on earth down there. Yeah, it's not. It's not. It's not a lot about like the women, like the women are like no other. Yeah, the women are really beautiful. Very beautiful, very outgoing, love to party, love to be a fun. They're not like women here. Yeah. Right. Well, Florida's got some pretty great women doing Florida. You know, a lot of prostitutes. Oh, yeah, but none of those in Columbia. Yeah, no, it's probably on a whole nother level. Yeah, here you got lot lizards. Yeah, so a lot, a lot, a lot of lizards. Yeah, Columbia is, I don't know. I'm jaded by it. Everybody loves going there. I'm like this place is like, this place is like gross. Now, because it's become like Cancun of South America. It's become like, you know, you name it really. Yeah. Yeah, it's gross. Like you see these fucking, you see these like retarded can I say that? Yeah. Cool. Yeah, we're in fucking Florida. Florida, dude. Get at your fucking gun. Let's play some Russian roulette before we go into the ad read. So, yeah, dude, but you just see these like brain dead fucking junkie. Cause that's what they are. Junkie tourists who are like, you know, in the tourist sections, like the red light districts, just you know, stumbling that down the street, like looking for fucking Coke and Hors. It's just kind of a bad look. You know what I mean? It's just kind of, I missed the days when it was just a little more dangerous because people kind of acted right, you know, yeah. But what's starting to happen is these people are getting robbed and killed. And I'm not justifying it, but I'm saying these people that act out of pocket like that, these people that go there, just like looking for hookers, like they're just so obviously like you're saying now. They're from. Yes. Yes. Like I even had a buddy. He met some girls on Tinder down there. And you know, he went out and met them at a bar and was drinking with them. And he's like, man, I feel fucked up. And they go back to his place and he passes out and they robbed him for all his shit. They had drug them. That happens all the time. That's like a business. That's a, that's a straight up like industry now is the drugging and robbing tourists in Medellin. They used that thing, uh, vice news did a piece on it. Years ago, scapolamine. And it's called and that's the devil's breath. And that's like they take it out of a piece of flower that grows, uh, indigenous down there. It's you take like a, like just a little, like some seeds out of the middle of this flower. And you can just like blow it on somebody or put or make it into powder and put it into somebody's drink. And they'll, it will make the person completely black out, but they'll have all of their motor skills. They'll have all full physical mobility. So people will get drug with scapolamine and they will be walking around. Uh, and some, I could say, hey, take me up to your apartment and give me your TV and all your money and all your furniture and you'll, you'll just do it. Really? Yeah. And then you wake up the next day. You want anything in your apartment. You know, like what the fuck happened? What is this you call again? Scapolamine scapolamine. Scapolamine. Scapolamine. Scapolamine. Can we look that up? Yeah. We gotta look that up. But it's, uh, I'm gonna get my hands on this. Yeah. Right? Yeah. Dude, it sounds rad. Black to fuck out. So it would be like a quailude. It would be like, you know, new podcast on some scapolamine. Yeah. Like it would be like how quailudes were back in the day. You would have full function, full physical function. Uh, but you will, you black out. Yeah. Pull up the, uh, also notice the devil's breath. Yeah. There you go. Oh, hi, so con. Heist high, oh skin, high skin or the devil's breath. Yeah. Naturally, we're in synthetically produced. Tro pain alkaloid and anti-chlorine magic drug that is formally used as a medication for treating motions. Oh, it's for treating motion sickness and postoperative nausea. Huh. Yeah. When used by injection effects begin about 20 minutes and last for up to eight hours, maybe also used orally. Or with a transdermal patch. Yeah. So my buddy thinks he got maybe drugged with this. Huh. And, uh, but yeah, it's, it's wild. Like just look up scapolamine, Columbia, and you'll see you'll hear all of these, you know, horror stories about, you know, guys that can't get laid in their own country, going there. And, uh, you know, this is kind of what happens. But, you know, I don't want to shit on it. I mean, there's got, there's tons of great things about it. But yeah, you know, drugs are, uh, they're a corrupting, you know, influence on society. Well, they're, it's only because of their illegal, though, right? I mean, if drugs were illegal, it wouldn't be nearly as bad as it is. Yeah. I suppose that's true. But it depends how you do it because it does. America, we, we try to make drugs legal in San Francisco and Portland and Seattle and all of these places that are decriminalized and it's made things like five times as bad. So if you're going to make it really, yeah, dude, it's house locked up. The tenderloin and San Francisco dude. Oh my God. They ruined that city because you let, you let people basically, there's no consequences for getting caught with drugs. People are openly fucking shooting up and, you know, having fentanyl over doses. And, you know, all this crazy shit, it fucks up like, you know, ordinary people's lives, right? Yeah. But if it was legal, wouldn't any eliminate the fentanyl because it had to be regulated? Like, like if you could buy an ounce or a gram of Coke and no, like from a pharmacy and no indefinitely that they're fucking fentanyl in it. Right. I guess you're right. I guess the government would have to oversee it and basically make it, right? And the US just doesn't do that kind of shit well. We don't, we don't do medical because what that is is like a public health revolutionary thing. The US doesn't do that well. We make money. Exactly. That's always good. So you have to really like, it has to be paired with like law enforcement and like mental health treatment and like housing and all this shit that we just don't fucking do good. Yeah. That's true. So you have to, you know, I just learned, you know, we thought the cartels were going to go out of business when we became legal in the US. And look at it. It's just making them stronger. Just made it seem to low, it's stronger. So it's how you do it. Right. And I don't think we're, we're far behind Europe in the way that they like treat drug addiction, you know, do you think the whole scare about Coke intentionally being laced with fentanyl is real? I'm glad you brought that up. I'm glad you brought that up. We cover it in this week's episode. Oh, really? Yes. Dude. Let me be. Can I just break this? Nobody's talking about this on the internet. Yeah. I talked about multiple times in this podcast because it doesn't fucking make sense. Oh, well, fuck me. But I would never, but this, but this response. The cartels are almost without a doubt, not spiking the blow. They're cocaine with fentanyl. In fact, they're taking measures now to prevent people from using cocaine that's laced with fentanyl. All right. Do you remember when I told you earlier that the drug cartels have become completely decentralized? When they move drugs, they move them to the border, right? With the US and usually sell them wholesale to Americans or, you know, Mexican Americans, Latino Americans, who then smuggle them across the border. After that, the cartels out of it. They're like, there's no more cartel members that come to the States, basically that, and that sell drugs for their bosses back home. They're selling it wholesale and then retreating into the safety of Mexico. So the people that are spiking the Coke with fentanyl are stupid dealers in the US that are trying to stretch the brick. Trying to stretch the Coke, but are they trying to stretch the Coke with fentanyl? Because if I'm a Coke dealer, I want people to keep buying Coke, my coke, not dying, not using my product. So is it I mean, is it here's what I've kind of assimilated from the whole thing is there's all there's I've read an article about, I think it would might have been a vice article where a guy went to like every big city across the US and tried the Coke. Sounds like a vice order. Yeah. And basically what he found out was that the cheap dealers who like they're who are selling to people on the streets like low level drug dealers, they, those drug dealers are also selling shit like heroin. Yeah. So they're selling Coke and heroin. Yeah. The high level drug dealers were dealing with like rich people or whatever. They're not selling heroin. Right. Most likely, right. Right. So the people that they, we know for a fact that they cut heroin with fentanyl, right. Because almost the same effect, right. Just more stronger. Well, but, but they is not the cartel. Car tell those dealers in the US. Yes. Yes. Yes. So so yes, low level guys, guys, buy an ounces. They are using fentanyl to stretch Coke because, uh, A, if there's an overdose, this is crazy, but fiends one at more, especially with heroin. But also I think with cocaine a little bit. If there's, if there's an OD, uh, you know, whether it results in the death or not, you know, the junkies find out about that. And they're like, oh, he's got the bomb shit. I think that's one of the reasons. Um, I think the other reason is a little bit of fentanyl goes a long way. So, and if you built up a tolerance to it, I think, I don't know. I think it's a different high. I don't exactly know the mindset behind somebody, a dealer that would do that. But we can say for a fact that the, uh, that the cartels are not spiking their Coke, their wholesale Coke with fentanyl because what we found out when we were down there from Louise is that the fed, in order to prevent that, the cartel is starting pressing the heroin they make. The car, the, the, sorry, the fentanyl that they cook, they've started pressing it into pink pills and exporting the pills. So that way, if a dealer is chopping up fentanyl with Coke, that Coke is going to be, it's going to have a pinkish reddish hue to it. So yeah, you guys stay away from that. If you use Coke aim and you see that it's got a red hue to it, that means it's got fentanyl. So the car tells are doing us a favor. Trying to. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because so what I assumed is that the low level dealers were selling Coke on one hand and hair on the other hand could be mixing it up on the same table. It was cross contamination. Cross contamination. For sure. Yeah. That's a bunch of what you're saying is there, it would be a case where having fentanyl in Coke would make somebody more addicted. Yes. Yes. Exactly. Exactly. Oh, yeah. Yeah. There's no way after spending time with these guys, I'm like, they are way too shrewd. They're way too on point. They would never be intentionally killing off, you know, their clientele. They would never be an in fact, the penalty within the cartel for selling fentanyl in Kooli Akan is death. No questions asked. There's a mandate from on high. The man himself, he's like, there is a Zumbara. Oh, from Zumbara. Okay. Yeah. And whoever leads, you know, a video leads the chappetos, right? That's the other wing of the of the Sino Lo cartel. Yeah. There is to be no selling of fentanyl in Sino Lo estate. That is for export only. So it's like, there's they know how dangerous it is. Right. They know how bad it is. They're like, we would never taint, we would never taint a wholesale load of, of Colombian Coke with fentanyl. Right. Like we keep that shit. These markets are different, you know, yeah. So, and I believe it makes, it makes sense. These guys are smart. The China thing is really weird. How they have really like sunk their teeth into Mexico. So much with, yes, with the lithium mining. Yeah. And the fentanyl and all the other things that they've been deep balls deep in Mexico for a long fucking time. Yes. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yep. And they just keep shipping more and more chemicals, pre-cursor, chemicals over there. It reminds me of like the Russia Ukraine thing right now, because like Ukraine is like a tug of war between the United States and Russia. Right. And it's Mexico is like in a tug of war between the United States and China. China. Yeah. But the US doesn't really, I mean, the US does a little bit of business in Mexico, I guess. Yeah. But China is really fucking sinking their teeth in Mexico. They're playing Cold War with Mexico. And it makes me wonder if the US would ever just fucking invade Mexico. Yeah. But we're just like, we don't really need to invade because we're already, we already have like so many on people in Mexico. Yeah. Like the DEA and the CIA and all the people. I think Mexico is going to become like China in their manufacturing capabilities. That's what I think. I think I think Mexico is on the come up. I think yeah, there's a lot of natural resources in Mexico. Totally. And there's cheap labor and it's it may not might not be as cheap as China, but who gives a fuck it's going to be better. And it's right. It's our southern neighbor. So what China has proven is like we cannot depend on them to manufacture our goods because the next crises that comes up, that's just more power that they have. They love choking off, you know, products to us. Right. That's like part of the war that they make. Yeah. Part of that subtle war that they're always making with the US and they're still walking people down. So it's like you can't depend on them to, to be, be your main manufacturer of your import goods. So why not make it Mexico? Right. You know, yeah. I think, uh, I think it was Apple. I've saw a written article recently that Apple is like diversifying a huge portion of its manufacturing of the iPhone and the MacBook out of China to I think Bangladesh maybe. Right. Some are crazy, but they're already starting to diversify away from China. Yeah. People are getting away from it. They're like, it's the cost is not, it's not worth it anymore. Like when you factor in all of that bullshit and the fact that they're going to steal your idea, like if you're an inventor, right, and you have a product and you want to go over and manufacture it in China, they're going to take it from you. So it's just not worth it. It's cheaper. You might as well just manufactured here in the US, you know? Yeah. China is such a weird thing too. Like I think if you get caught, Apple explores moving some, oh, they're exploring, moving some iPad production to India sources. Hey, where was this published? There are, it's a bunch of companies doing it. Oh, this is just published. Yeah, there's a ton of companies doing it. I had this guy on here multiple times who was a former mortgage fraudster. And we, we, one time we had, we did like a whole episode about China. He's like a fucking, uh, he's a genius. He knows that ever. He's an encyclopedia on China. And it's funny when you look into the laws in China and like how many laws are punishable by death. Yeah. Rod, any kind of financial fraud is death. That's wild. So you run a Ponzi scheme. They're cutting your head off or mortgage fraud or are you fucking right a bad check? You, you, you white out and change your fucking income on a mortgage application or something. Wow. Can we look up all of the, uh, uh, death punishable, uh, things in China? Yeah. Find a list of all of the, uh, the crimes that are punishable by death in China. It is pretty wild. And, uh, it, it would. So funny as though, like obviously like the biggest fraudster is the Chinese Communist Party. Yeah. They could just take all your shit. Like it doesn't matter. You have to there, you can't do business in China. Like kind of how you can't do business in, seeing a lowo without the car tells blessing. You can't do business in China without the government default. Right. You have to go to them first, you know, betrayal of the country. Number one, can you zoom in on that a little bit? It's kind of small arm rebellion and writing arm rebellion and writing, collaborating with the enemy and betrayal. I love, I love these words that you use. Spying or espionage. Does that say flooding? Yes, flooding. What the fuck does that mean? explosion. Spreading hazardous, keep going down. Spreading hazardous substance hijacking an aircraft, trafficking in women and children, robbery, rape, potential injury. That could be these are all, these are all things that like you would, you would not be surprised about. This is all things that was gathering crowds to raid a prison when weapons. Defying orders. Okay. Defying orders in wartime is partnership. We'll think about that. Like it's bad, but we're looking at a list of things that are punishable by death. Yeah. Right. Surrender punishable by death. Unreal. That's some old school Soviet shit. Retreaters will be shot. Google, like fraud and drug crimes punishable by death in China. I think China actually executes like way more people than any other country every year. They have mobile death squads. They'll come to your house and kill you. Right. Right. That's very convenient. They got an app for it. It's like Uber. It's just like, yeah, Uber gallows. Yo, that could be, but that's, it's literally covers almost everything. That could be anything like, yeah, rioting. You could call the people that are protesting against the lockdowns. Ryan news. Yeah, 100%. Oh, I would be. I'm terrified. I will never go to China. Not until things change. I'm terrified, dude. Yeah, bro. That's fucking scary. Surrender. So yeah, how old were you? And at what point did you get busted and actually go to prison? I was 24 when I got locked up. I was 24 and I had made my million bucks. You know, I'd done my, I, I, I'd set, achieved what I'd set out to. And I just got popped. I never got caught with any drugs. Actually, I got caught with a bunch of money. I got caught with money. Yeah, it was the people that were shipping my, uh, that was shipping my money back from the East Coast. Uh, it got picked up by either like a drug sniffing dog, probably in like a sorting facility and they put a little tracking device in it and it brought them to me. Yeah, that's simple, right? It wasn't, I didn't even know the dogs could sniff money. Oh, dude. It's like one of the main ways that cops go after drug dealers now is their money because I can lose all the drugs in the world. I could just go to my, my guy, my grower and be like, Hey, I need you to front me 50 pieces, right? And he can always do that pretty much. But dude, if I lose half a million bucks, that's gone. So these guys would, these guys were not the brightest. Some of these guys were a little, they got a little loose at the end. They would send me over packages of 30, 40, 50 grand and it was just a leak, which leak of fucking weed smoke. It was like they were smoking blunts as they were counting my money up and like blowing it on the money. I'm like, are you guys, are you doing this on purpose? Do you want me to go to prison? Are you the fucking feds? I would tell them you got to, you got to wrap my money with the same care that I rallied. Oh, yeah, I remember you saying that back you've sealed my cash. Yeah, you have to. So, but no, drugs are, uh, I think about how drugs are on money all the time. Coke weed, everything. So those dogs must have hit on it and it brought them to me. So yeah, yeah, that's simple. Wasn't a wire tap. It wasn't all these fucking cartel members that I was dealing with in Columbia or the scene of lowens that I was picking up, you know, massive 100, 100 pound orders at a time from in Northern California. It was something as dumb as simple as, uh, them intercepting a package of money. Yeah. And that's how it goes in the game, dude. How did it go down? Like what was it? What was that day? Like what do they sell on your door? No, no, no, no. I was, I went down. I had different locations where I would get my money packages sent to. I would get them either FedEx or UPS, right? The, uh, the next day, like next day air. Yeah. And I went to pick up, uh, one of the packages at a, like a PO box where I would receive, you know, it was under a fake name, right? But I picked the package up and I walked out and I got my car and I see it's the fucking I see these two Suburbans following me and I'm like, oh, shit, this is it. So I took, I was like, well, I'm definitely not going home now. Right? I'm not going back to where I live now. So I fucking hit it. I took, you know, I took them on a little high speed chase through the neighborhood. I actually got away. I got away. And I talked, I talked about this on an episode. I talked to my lawyer. I was going like 90 through school zones, right? I talked to my lawyer. He was like the reason they didn't pursue follow you because they kind of backed off when they saw that I was like revving it. I was, I had a Dodge Magnum at the time. That was a hot car in 2010. And that thing, you know, it's got a fucking hemmy, that thing bolts, move. So that's what the cops drive usually. So I had a better car than the cops. And my lawyer was like, yeah, they didn't give chase because most like local pigs, most local cops don't speed through neighborhoods because if they hit somebody and get killed, that person can sue their liable. So it's kind of a safety thing. So, you know, if any of you are considering a high speed chase, do it through a school zone. On a road trip, yeah, be responsible and do it through a school zone. So, uh, so I was daytime. And school wasn't out yet. So yeah, but then I, so I made it back safely. So I parked the car in a little, tiny, little residential area. And I, it's dark. It's almost dark now. I make it back to my place. I don't have any bills in my name or anything. I never sold drugs in my place. I don't think anybody knows what my parents didn't even know where I lived. Um, only one person knew where I lived. Okay. One person that I dealt with, okay. He was another drug dealer, but I didn't sell drugs to him. Okay. I didn't deal with him at all. He was just an old friend from the neighborhood. Okay. Uh, any would come over or any we would smoke weed every now and then catch up. So anyways, I go back to my, I get back to my place. And I'm like, nobody knows where I live. I should be fine and see anything. I get into my house, fuck the lock the door, get under my covers. You know, I'm fucking shaking. I'm traumatized. I lay my head back to fucking take a nap and then I just wake up to just pounding on the fucking door. Police, police, police. So I, I go down there and I'm like, guys, relax, relax. It's just me. There's no guns in here. Right. I'm a fucking rich guy. Like, I'm not, I'm not selling meth. Like, do you know what I mean? So they run up in there, fucking search the place, find some keys to sub-safe deposit boxes, find a bunch of cash right there. And to the day, I think they, they must have confiscated like $750, $800,000. Oh my God. So that, that one hurt. But I kept thinking, how the fuck do they know where I live? Mm. My lawyer looked into it later. I gave him the name of this guy. The only person I'd ever been in my house. I'm like, this guy's, he's a drug dealer. There's no way. I didn't sell drugs to him. There's just no way he was involved. And he goes, I think that guy might be rattying, working for the cops. And they're letting him operate on the streets. Right. Right. And I looked into it further. I talked to some guys also who knew this kid from the neighborhood. And they were like, yeah, that dude, that dude's been caught before. Never done a day of jail time. That guy is working for the Portland police. They're letting him sell drugs. And just like, just like the cartel members, just like my, oh, fed chopper to the cops. is working for the Portland police. They're letting himself drugs and just like, just like the cartel members, just like my, oh, fed chopper to the cops, right, to the fucking feds, Mexican military, this guy had quotas. He would have to feed different guys to, you know, the cops. So to basically to stay out of prison. So, you know, that's how you, the same deal. They wanted to get me to this niche right away. Yeah. They thought I was there, they saw this money and they were like, Oh, there's, you're absolutely, you are definitely working with the cartels. There's no question. They were like, give us, give us your suppliers right now. We'll kick you out right now. You will not, we won't even put the handcuffs on you. But what would they do if you're like, oh, okay, my suppliers, the fucking, in the men, you can cart or in the fucking, well, the Sinalo cartel, like, what are they going to do? They can't do. well, well, but remember, I am buying my pot from Sinalo and cartel members that are operating in the US. Yeah. That doesn't really happen anymore because weeds basically legal, they, they stay in Mexico now. But I was buying from a guy in a little town on the border of Northern California and they had these huge pot grows up in the forest. They would hike on federal land hours away from everything and they would run irrigation through it. I mean, only Mexican guys have that kind of work ethic to be able to like find enough sunlight and enough water and I mean, it's amazing. And they would have like, you know, thousands and thousands of plants every year. And, and so what the cops wanted to do, they could, they would, they would have been like, dude, well, we'll give you marked money, right? You can use the money we just found. We could use your money. And yeah, we'll wire you up. We'll mark the money and you go start making buys for us, right? Like that's probably how they would have done. I imagine if I had decided to cooperate, you know, but I'm like, you guys don't have any fucking drugs. Like I'm, I'm fighting this, you know what I mean? Right. I can't say, dude, if I was facing 30 years in prison for drugs, I can't sit here with a stray face and say, I wouldn't cooperate. Like, who fucking knows, right? You know, why? It's one of the biggest, like, uh, wives tales about prison. I feel like, yeah, at least that's from what I've heard is that like the whole, like, snitching is the worst thing you could do. How dare you, you consider being a snitch when like 99.9% of the people that they're both. Most people in federal prison probably have cooperated in some way because the drug laws are so harsh that, um, especially back in the day with crack that just because a guy, a guy is doing 10 years doesn't mean he didn't snitch. He was just keeping himself from doing 30 or life, you know, taking deals cooperating. Um, so yeah, it's, uh, it's a, it is like it's such a cruel thing that the law does, you know, they take your life and they just dangle it in front of your face. Do you like your life? I got a way out. I got a way out. It's evil, bro. And they act like you're there, you're savior. Like we're going to help you out here. Yeah. You know, so, um, but yeah, it's so you knew because they didn't find any drugs. Just cash. Yeah. Yeah. I would never cooperate on the spot anyways. Like if you're, if you're, you know, you never talk to the cops, you get your lawyer and, and there's deals that are made behind closed doors, but you would never sign anything. You would never, you know, you don't have to talk to them. You could just clam up, you know, like because you're not going to talk your way out of it. Tell you that much. I mean, I tried. I was like, look, I tried to bribe them because these were like, these were, there was only four guys over at the house. Okay. So I, and these were like guys in track suits that they hadn't made a big commotion. They didn't come in there. These were under covers. Okay. They didn't come in with a SWAT gear. You know, they, I don't even think the neighbors, because I lived in a nice area. I didn't think the neighbors knew what was going on at this point. They didn't kick the door down. I let them in. You know, because I, they had that they had the warrant. I was like, dude, look at all this cash. Like your boss isn't here yet. Your supervisor's not here. Take this money. I will go get you another 200,000. Just give me a day. Just give me a day and I'll come back. I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll be around. I'll, I'll work for you. And I'll give you this money. Just let me get out of here. And what I was going to do is go get the rest of my cash if they had, if they had gone for it. And I was going to flee. I was going to go to Columbia. Do you think they would consider it? They considered it all. No. What was there? No. Fuckin dorks. They got pissed. He's fucking nerd. This is such a Northwest white boy bullshit. If these were Italians from fucking, you know, the South Bronx, or, you know, Boston, yep, some Irish cops, they would, they would have been on their fishing boats already. Yep. They would have been retired. But anyways, you know, like they got, they got, the guy, one of the guys got pissed. He was like, you mother, fucker. Like they took it as an insult, you know, I'm like, Hey, dude, just offering you dorks. That's stupid. Yeah. So, so what did it happen? You ended up so they brought me in. They couldn't buy it. They couldn't get anything out of me. So they arrested me. They brought me in. They booked me. I was denied bail. Like I didn't have, I had bail money. They were like, no, you don't have the judge was like, I, I will not set a bail for you because you're clearly a high level, you know, you're, you're, you seem to be a high flight risk because of the amount of cash we caught with you. Uh, we're, yeah, we're scared. We're, we think you have international criminal connections. Uh, so yeah, you got to fight your case from jail from county jail. And that's the hardest time. That is the hardest. Every day feels like a week in county jail. Yeah. Every week feels like a year. It is brutal. The deprivation. Where was the jail at? This was in Portland in in Portland. Okay. Yeah. And you think Portland's like this nice, you know, you associated with like, you know, vegan donuts. But man, there's gang bang and going on in county jail, dude. The first thing you do, you walk in, you have to fight first. So like one of the first things I did on my first morning, walked out there, like, Hey, skinny kid, who, who you fighting? You got a fade. You got a fade. Now we're going to have to, we're going to beat you up and you're going to have to go to protective custody and hang out with the child. And I'm like, all right. Well, I guess we're going to fucking fight. See, I know what your fights. Yep. Dude, I got into like five or six fights in my, my eight months that I was in county fight my case. And that's what, that's what kicked my security level up to like, uh, you know, the highest, the highest level it could be. And that's why I got sent to a maximum security prison. So I'll fucked up as that. That's like a guy who doesn't even, I shouldn't be around. I shouldn't be in a cell with a guy doing 500 years who was a shot caller for the hell's angels. Like why am I a non violent kid, you know, stepping over bodies in a maximum security prison? It's because I had to fight when I was in jail. So they make it, they make it so you can't prevent it, you know, yeah, yeah. Yeah. So what was it like finally getting transferred out of the county jail to the soup, it was a super max. No, no, no, no, we just, it was just a max. It was just a max security, um, two rivers, correctional facility. Um, there's a medium atom, maximum. Uh, it's like two different facilities on the same, right, right, right, right. You know, piece of land. But, uh, you know, you're begging to go to prison after being in county for that long. You're just like, oh my God, like, let me get to like a home. Let me get this wrapped up, you know, like whatever my fate's going to be. Let's go. So, you know, they put you on. First of all, they send you to like a whole assorting facility. So you're sorting prison, you didn't go to the prison until you got sentenced, right? That's right. You get sentenced. So we came. We agreed. Uh, we took a plea deal finally. So the longer you wait, the longer you fight your case, if you've got a good case, right, meaning it's not a slam dunk for the prosecution, the more willing they're going to be to make a good deal with you. So my lawyer would tell me just hang on, buddy. Cause the longer you can wait, the more they, like the prosecutor wants to get your case off the books, right? Cause they, it's all about statistics. They want as much incarceration time as possible. Cause it justifies, you know, budgets every year and all this stuff and just keeping the apparatus going. Right. Their job. And I'm sure you didn't have a public defender. No, I had a good lawyer. I had a very good lawyer. I, he was at obese fat. We called him the fat man. We called him the fat man. Gorski. That's his real name shout out Gorski, one of the best defense lawyers in the Portland metropolitan area. And I hired him because I'm like a guy with this much money to eat has got to be winning some cases. So he, uh, he was like the longer you stay in here, the more they're willing to, to play bombs. So signed a plea deal for 36 months, money laundering, conspiracy. Um, yeah. And then they ship you out of jail that night. They wake you up and they say roll up and you wrote, you know, you put all your belongings in a sack and they, they put you on a bus, they put you on the chain. And then they sent us to a prison, like a, a, a holding facility where you wait, right? Until they find a bed space for you and whatever prison you're going to go to, right? Right. Right. So I was there. And that's like being in like solitary confinement. They keep you locked up basically 24 hours a day in a, in a little cell. So that was torture as to, um, and yeah, and then the day they say, Hey, you're, you're, you're going off to two rivers. And I was like, fuck, it's the last place I wanted to go to. It's that's a rough prison. And it's eight hours from Portland in the middle of nowhere, right? Eastern Oregon. And, uh, and so they put us on a chain, right? We call it the gray goose, you're locked up, you got, you, you're, you're, your ankles and your wrists are bound. And, you know, you're on the, you know, on the bus for eight hours, they take you off, right? You step off the bus, you're chained upside by side. And you know, you're like, wow, this is, this is your new home. You're completely, it's an out of body experience. You've never been through the, the prison system before. And nobody tells you what's going on either. So you're like, I'm just being brought through this gigantic bureaucracy. And I don't even know, I don't even know why half of the things are as they are. And so we're, we're lined up, they get us off the bus off the gray goose in front of two rivers. We're lined up chained up together. And this big, Samoan dude, he's maybe like three or four men down for me on the chain. He fucking, as soon as they uncuff him, he turns and he fucking punches this guy next to him. He drops him like hard as fuck does drop some that do it ended up dying. He killed that dude. That was and the guy a punch in the punch. Yes. And that guy was a Samoan guy. And he was a lifer. And so he was trying to prove his stripes right away. Yeah. And I was like, oh, my over some marijuana over some fucking weed. And now 11 years later, my fucking, you know, my mom smokes it to take gummies to go to bed. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that's, you know, and, and there's been far worse stories of guys, you know, get locked up behind weed and drugs specifically. Yeah. How many of the guys that you met that were in that prison were in there for something similar to you? There's like non violent drug. Um, I was pretty unique. I was pretty unique in that way because in that prison, that was mostly, you know, violent criminals and a lot of sex offenders and a lot of, yeah, a lot of people doing life. Um, most guys at my level of the drug game would have gone to federal prison or there would have been in a lower security prison. Um, so I was pretty unique. Oh, so you were in a state prison. I was in a state prison. Yeah. I didn't catch a, I didn't catch a fed charge. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't catch a fed charge. The feds confiscated my money. So at the day I got arrested, they sent the DEA and Homeland Security down to investigate me. And they originally did charge me with a federal crime. But when they couldn't link, when they didn't have any links to drug sources, they were like, this is, I guess they thought it wasn't worth their time. So they just seized the money and then gave the case back to the state. Yeah. It would have been way better to be in a federal prison, right? Not a maximum security federal prison. Those are far, that's a myth. The lower security, yeah, the, and I have a lot of these guys on my podcast and you hear their stories and it's like, it makes my time look pretty tame, considering, um, yes, the low level federal securities, like the camps, that's cake, right? That's where like, you know, they send the wolf a wall street. He's playing tennis and shit. Exactly. Uh, so I don't know, it depends where I would have got sent to, but no, those max federal prisons are, are as tough, usually a lot more violent than an average state prison. Really? Because people are doing so much time. And there's people from everywhere. There's gang bangers, uh, and drug dealers from Chicago and New York and LA and, and yeah, it's, it's wild. Go listen to my podcast. I got some stories coming up from these guys and you're just like, this is some third world shit. You would hear, you would hear stories about this. You know, like my, my, my friend who was on my, my show, uh, Big Herk, he's got a great, I'm familiar with that. Yeah, you know, yeah, he's got a, he's got a great YouTube channel. Uh, he would be like, yeah, um, yeah, people will get stabbed and if the guy didn't die, like the guy who was doing the stabbing, if the guy he stabbed didn't die, they would just send the dude, the perpetrator of the hole for 30 days. And then they bring him back out. They didn't want to deal with it. So it was so much. And that going on. Yeah. Yeah. So my, they would send the guy who got stabbed to the hole. That's so crazy. My friend Matt, who is in prison for mortgage fraud for like 12 years. Oh, thank God. I wasn't trying to do it. He, yeah, exactly. He went to do Big Herk's podcast. And when he was doing his podcast, he explained to to him that he basically found everyone he could to snitch on to lower his sentence. He would do, he got like 10 years off of sentence by snitching on people. Wow. He even found people in prison, like all like the one old guy who ran a Ponzi scheme kept walking the yard with him every day and getting into telling stuff. And he just gave it the guy ended up only getting like an extra year and a half on a sentence. But Matt got like five years off his sentence for basically stitching on this guy. So he was telling Big Herk about like casually, he's like, absolutely. I thought anybody's could possibly could. And I guess Big Herk almost ended the podcast. Right. For sure. He wanted to like, he was like started sweating and he was about to like stop like stop recording and like kick him out a little while. Yeah. I would have. That's despicable. Matt said it was the most uncomfortable conversation he's ever. Yeah. I fucking I believe in dude. That kind of shit is despicable. Like there's there's one thing. It's it's one thing to like give up info. And this is what a guy was explaining to me too. Like there's a difference between snitching and rattling snitching when you're in jail means like you're cooperating with authorities about something outside of the prison. Right. Whether it's your case or whatever. And then you might just get beat down for that. You know, you might just get beat down or exiled or whatever. That's kind of like nobody's business. You know, right. But fucking rattling, rattling like that in prison where everybody's supposed to be like we're like in this together. Yeah. That's despicable. But he's like I committed moreage fraud. Like you can't expect that guy to be, you know, no, that's a gigantic one. At least he doesn't lie about it. Right. Like he's just lying about the stitching. Right. You know what? I'm fine with that. I guess that's that's we can we can give him that. You got to get this guy on your podcast. Oh, I will. You and him. I will not end the conversation. I would him would be like I could. You live in LA. No, he lives here. Oh, we can't. I'm not. He lives like an hour from here. You and him in a room together. I could listen to that for fucking hours. You guys would you guys would be great. Uh, yeah, it was, um, yeah, you know, people do a lot of things to save their skin. But man, that guy's lucky. He didn't get a fucking bone crusher. You know, he didn't get a he's not get stabbed up. He is five foot five foot five with a good pair of shoes on. Wow, he's a tiny little twink. A tiny little guy. And that's what he said. That's what pretty much more motivated his entire life. His whole like his stature. He had a thing for like hot single moms and buying him fake tits. Right. Right. Every single thing he could he had met openly. I could honestly if I really think about it, every single motivation in my life that has driven me has all gone back to my height. Short man syndrome. Who's on who is that honest about that? Wow, that's pretty crazy. That's incredible. He's gone as far. I mean, he's got, he's spent like like 10 grain on his hairline to get his hair. He's a better hairline than me. He's looked into having, uh, his shins elongated. Oh my god, dude. Wow. Dude, like, just driven what about some therapy? What about what about just being okay with yourself? You know, he wouldn't be as successful as he is now. What's he do now? Now he's a podcast. He's a true crime podcast. And he writes books. Wow. He writes books. He's successful. Oh, he's so sexy. He's one of the most like the first podcast I did with him on here was when he was still in the halfway house. He had never done an interview anywhere. He just emailed me because he saw my show like that. Yeah. Some of the little documentaries I was doing on real estate. And he emailed me and he's like, Hey, uh, I went to jail for mortgage fraud. Could you help him make a TV show? And I'm like, I don't know about that, but he come to my podcast and we'll see if anyone likes it. Yeah. That was like the jump off for this podcast. Oh, no shit. So that I did that. And within a week, it had a million views. Wow. So I'll definitely, I might be able to get a TV show made for him. I'm out in LA. You know, you never know. He's already now he's got now that he's like, now that he's made all this success. Now he's got like production companies and networks knocking his door. That's that's the way to do it. Oh, wow. Yeah. Matthew Cox. Oh, yeah. Yeah. People have reached out to me telling me to get this guy on the show. Oh, man. He's great. I've done like 10 podcasts with a member sense, but he's like taking that. He like ever said we did that first podcast. I've never seen anybody take an opportunity and go so far. Yeah. He's the spokesperson. He's like the Ronald McDonald of home title lock. Oh, really? So like he is on all these internet, like these nationwide TV commercials. Wow. Like doing all this stuff. People fly him to do like talk at conferences. So he's basically become like the Jordan Belfort. Yeah. He's he talks about how you get away with it. He probably talks to law enforcement. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Guys go full. That's hilarious. Guys go full rat, dude. Guys go full rat. He looks like a rat. Doesn't he? He looks like a fucking rat. Oh, my fucking God. It looks like you could have trust as far as you could know. No, dude. That with that, with that grin, with that fucking teeth, they're just, just shining out of his mouth. Home title lock has a fucking dedicated web page on the website for him. Fox, Fox falsified documents to make it appear that he own properties and then fraudulently obtained several mortgages on them for five to six times or actually acquire millions of dollars. As opposed to between five and 25 million. Wow. That's interesting. Wow. He began his life as a dedicated criminal and central Florida after that offense. So he was forging documents. Yes. Lots of dogs. He was, he would go and rent a house and somehow get his hands on like the deeds and the mortgage paper where he would photo shop it unbelievable and then go to the bank and say, you know, I forget exactly the fucking mechanics of it, but he would somehow get a hold of that. Those documents photo shop them and get a fucking loan on the house he was renting and put like a family, like a family with kids. Like this, this one family had like a special needs child and he basically put them like stole their house from them by like forging the documents. It's kind of genius. Like I could just never, I don't know the first thing about any of that. It takes a certain kind of mind. I'm at a guy getting ready to go do FedTime that he had a huge counterfeit money ring and the guy. It wasn't like a, yeah, and it wasn't no like amateur shit either. Like he was printing millions of dollars. And, you know, the way he was describing like how he got his hands on a money printing machine, you know, like from like some again, Chinese guy, it was just like fascinating. So you get a lot of these guys in federal prison that are like geniuses like, it's like masterminds. This guy probably didn't go to a prison where there was a whole lot of stabbing. Yeah, maybe he was in a medium. He was in a medium. Okay. So if you go to a medium, shit kicks off every now and then, but like, if you kind of keep, keep yourself, right. I don't know if people found out he was ranting though into anybody know he was ranting in jail. I think I think a couple people actually did find out, but he found a way to get leverage on that person. Like right away to go to them like, hey, bro, I heard that this has been going around. I don't think he want everybody to know about this. Do you write? Right? He would like, he would use his dagger tongue. Oh my God, I'm scared to have the sky. My God, he's going to dig shit up on a very nice guy. He's a very nice guy. He's a very nice guy. So did it. He doesn't talk about like the Lord. And does he found like, he looks like, he looks like a cult leader. Absolutely. He looks like he gives it up to Jesus before every ad read he does. No, not at all. Oh, thank God. My friend, cheesy does that. Yeah, friend cheese. He's like, I give it up to Jesus Christ. And he's like the big, he was like the ex mobster that was making like crazy money. And I'm like, oh, do we have to give it up to Jesus? That was so 90s. Anyways, his podcast of Big Kirk is a fucking nail bider. Oh, wow. That's so funny dude. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, Big Kirk was a, he was a lot of fun to have him to show the buzzing. Yeah. But he talked, I mean, these federal prison stories, dude. Yeah, talking about as soon as you get there, as soon as you get there, you go get a shank. You get strapped up. And the guy who was making him was like the guy who worked in the kitchen, you know, and he can get you, he saw fights with literal knives, not shanks butcher knives. He saw like riots kicking off where people were stabbing each other with knives. So it's like clearly, you know, the guards are all in on it. Yeah, all kinds of shit, definitely go listen to my story with her. But yeah, I mean, some of that happened in state prison. So how did you get, uh, selled up with the guy who was like the leader of the hell's age? So I asked him about that. And he was like, probably it's because you're the opposite of me. Oh, you asked him the hell's guy? Why the fuck are we selled up together? And he was like, I don't, I don't, I don't, gangbang, obviously. And he was like, probably because you're the opposite of me. Right? They don't want to put in two gangbangers and a cell together, right? Because that's just too much time for them to conspire. So, and I'm like, okay, that kind of makes sense. Um, but he Jimmy protected me. My, my cellmate, Jimmy was he in there for life. He was in there for life. Um, he ended up killing a guy. Uh, and he's on, he was on death row. And I think he beat his case, because it was a self defense thing. But if you kill somebody and you're doing life and you kill somebody in prison, they usually send you to death row. So, um, but he, you know, he's the one that basically told the other gangs, you know, the white gangs, because I refuse to click up, you know, I was like, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not a follower. You know what I mean? Like, I'm, I'm me. I'm not going to join your gang. Yeah. What? And then I got, I got to go put in work for you and kill somebody and then I end up doing life. Right. So by my logic was like, give me a strap, give me a burner, give me a shank. And if you feel frogish and you want to come at me, I would rather defend myself, you know, and stab one of you guys in self defense. Right. And at least maybe be able to beat the case, then me have to go put in work for you and then I never get out of here. That's crazy. So I refuse to do that. So, but before they could put like a green light on me, Jimmy, like intervened. He was like, this is a good kid. Yeah, he saved you. He was doing IO in my life. And he, uh, yeah, you know, to this day, I mean, it's like, um, it's, uh, I think about him all the time. Is he still in this? He's still alive? He is. He's kind of lost his mind because he's been on death row for so long for the last decade because he, he got sent to death row right after I got class down to minimum. And, uh, yeah, and why did they send him then? Because that's when he killed him, he killed a guy in me. Yeah, but it took fucking almost a decade to like adjudicate that. And so, you know, because he, he, he doesn't have any money. He's paying like a public defender, you know, so they just keep you in isolation for a decade away from everybody. So that, and you know, he was already in his 50s when that happened. So now he would be in his mid 60s. So, you know, he's, he's deteriorating. And his mind is probably mush. It's very sad. Do they have a death row in California, Oregon? They do. They don't, the, the governor put like a stay of execution on anybody on, on everybody that's on death row. Yeah. So it's, it's still on the books. They have executed people before, but, uh, they don't really do it anymore. California is kind of the same way. Like, as long as news impower, nobody will ever be executed again, but they keep people on death row. So they keep you in death row conditions. Yeah. Even though you'll never be executed, which is like torture. People, people that have been, have been on death row for decades, appeal the courts all the time to like let them be killed. Think about that. How fucked is that? And the courts are like, no. And also people on death row get exonerated all the fucking times. That's true too. That's true too. Right. Right. So we have at least two or three death rows in Florida. I went to the one in Stark, Florida at one time where I'm friends. I have a lawyer friend who represents, uh, some people who end up on death row. He rep, he actually, he represents a lot of car tail members. Really? Like he gets flown, he gets flown like private to fucking Columbia. Oh, wow. He'll literally, he explained it to me. He goes, he goes, yeah, he goes, I get on the plane, I get off, I get asked to go to a hotel and I'm, I wait in the lobby until they call me up. Yeah. And he, wow, he, he fucking, so he's getting paid a nice, nice fee for that. Yeah. Bro, wow. He is crazy. And the way he explains it, like how like some of those top level car, car, tell members are able to just basically live their lives with their high paid lawyers. Yeah. And the like the pawns are the ones that get in trouble at the low level. Totally. Totally. That's a whole another crazy stuff. Yeah. But anyways, oh, sorry. Oh, so, so he was representing a guy who was on death row. And he, I guess he believed this guy was innocent. Yeah. But apparently this guy had like raped, he was a truck driver who like raped and murdered a bunch of girls. And so we were there across the street from the prison from like starting from like 9 p.m. to like 1 a.m. And there was across the street, it's so weird, dude. It was so eerie because it was like dark and foggy and cold. And there was one big group sectioned off of people who were protesting the death of him. Right. Because everybody knew he was supposed to be executed at that prison. Right. And whenever the prison executes somebody, there's a bell that rings, I guess, on the prison grounds. So there was a whole group of people protesting the execution. And then 50 yards away is a whole another group of people who were the victims, people who have been raped in who have family members or daughters that have been raped and killed and people who knew some of the actual victims that were there. They were there to like get their sort of, you know, the justice suffered on the guy. Yeah. And we were going back and forth like interviewing people on both sides. Like, wow. You know, perspective. And it was fucking crazy. Because like the people that were there who had family members who were victims or knew the victims, you could, you could understand why they were there. And you could justify their pain and why they wanted to be there to see the guy die. But the people on the other side, the only reason they were there is because they knew people who were innocent, who got exonerated on the death row. Right. So they're like, we can't fucking prove this. There's no deed. There's not an other day evidence. Like trial. It wasn't done right. Yeah. There was, it was botched with the prosecutor. So like they both had a very good point, right. Right. Because I guess in this specific case, I forget the guy's name now, but there was not enough evidence to to execute this guy. And no matter what you believe about fucking the death penalty, I think the one thing that absolutely is true is you cannot fucking kill people when you don't have all the solid that they have. Of course, dude, that's look at that. And he was, and they denied an appeal to the claim that Gary bowels was too intellectually disabled to be put to death. This isn't the actual guy. This is in the same guy. This is must be different. So this is the guy, but the guy you're talking about, they ended up putting him to death. I believe. So that night they didn't, they stayed it. It was a stay-in execution. They have the governor. They had, they had the guy fucking strapped to the lethal injection thing, right? The people were in the room with the fucking movie theater, which is curtains watching and that the last minute they was closed the curtain to state it and they gave him like another couple weeks or maybe. What is the guy's fucking name? His name was, oh, that's going to kill me. Google, Google the lawyer, Bjorn, Bjorn, Brunvond represents serial killer, or not killer, put to death in the Stark Florida. lawyer, Bjorn, Bjorn, Bronvond represents serial killer, uh, or not killer, put to death in Stark, Florida, uh, Bjorn, BJ ORN, BRUN, VA, ND. It's a free plug. Yeah, bro, but it was, it was well, eerie and man's crazy. Like 30 minutes before he was supposed to be executed, all the new stations pulled out in there. Yeah, yeah. And they were fucking new everywhere. And it was just such surreal fucking scene. They'll put you to death in Florida, man. Yeah, they will Florida and Texas. You do not want to fuck around. You talk too. They will fucking kill you, man. Yeah. It's, uh, it's, it's, but I can't imagine that. If you think about the, you know, if people on the right politically would look at a country like China, who clearly their values are not aligned with, I would say most Americans values are not aligned with those of an authoritarian communist dictatorship. That's what they do. How they execute people. That's your, your, you're, you're doing your practicing the same thing. Like you're practicing, you claim you don't want communism or big government, but you're practicing the most big government thing when you let the state, the government, take somebody's life. Um, you know, like that's kind of how I look at it. It's like, I don't want to, I don't want to be like China. I don't want to be like Saudi Arabia. I don't want to be like these awful, savage places. So we constantly need to like be like, it's not enough to be like, well, China executes, uh, thousands of people a year. We can execute one or two, uh, innocent black guys in Texas a year. I'm like, right. What kind of standard is that you're holding yourself to comparing yourself to China? You know what I mean? Right. Um, yeah, it's a loo, yeah, it gives me the chills. It's got to be so different being on fucking death throw than any other prison. Because you're all, you're dealing with people who are like looking at the finish line. They know they're dead men. Yeah. Sometimes sometime again, it's, it's a state to state, you know, um, is this Oscar Ray Bolin that, that's him convicted of murder in the slangs of, uh, three women in Florida. So is he actually killed when was this published January 6, 2016? Go to the bottom. There's probably an update right there. Uh, man, who was convicted 10 times of three separate slangs scheduled to die for one of them. Unless the, okay. So this was like before I think I saw a lot of kill. Well, it doesn't say anything. Google Oscar Ray Bolin will come up. The appeals court denied the motion. Oh, so he has even appealed to the Supreme Court yet. Okay. Yeah. That was all happening. That's fascinating. Humans, it's, I would like to talk to family members of victims whose, you know, killers or alleged killers were executed. Like do they feel better? I think they do. Yeah. I think they do actually. Yeah. I was talking to a couple of them. I mean, it was sad, dude, talking to like, there was a guy there who was, who had his fucking, his like young daughter was raped in murder. He was sitting. He goes to every execution. I was like, what are you doing here? He's like, every time somebody dies for everyone gets executed for murder and rape, he's like, I'm here to support the fucking families and the victims and whatever. And it's like, uh, there it is. He's dead. January 7, 2016. Wow. Tammy's from Portland. He was probably guilty. I don't want to guy. Yeah. If I were just going to just scary, I think he'll look. I'm saying he's going to probably fucking guilty. The murders went unsolved for nearly four years. He was in prison basically his whole life. He got locked up in his twenties and 87. Mother shit gotcha. He got locked up in 87, bro. And he was just killed in 24 years ago for five. How many years ago? That's how long it takes. That's how long it fucking takes to get executed. If you appeal it, that's wild. That's why it's taken my boy, Jimmy so long to finally to, you know, get his day in court. So it's wild. Yeah. Yeah. It's because of Portland, Indiana. Well, I don't like the fact that he's from Portland. That's where I'm from. Indiana's the sketchy state in the union, dude. I've always had Indiana's one of the worst places because it's in the nowhere to do. It's too credible. in went to prison in Indiana. Yeah. Oh, wow. I didn't know that for shooting the guy. He was trying to rob him. No. What was his late late? No, he actually didn't go to prison for that. He got off. He beat that. I thought he got the good. He beat that for self defense. But he was in prison for I think it was like gun charges and like pushing a bitch out of a car out of like his, out of like a moving car. You can't push a bitch out of a moving car in Indiana. I mean, no, he did. He did it in Atlanta. But they sent him to prison. He did his time in Indiana. Oh, damn. Damn. Yeah. Now it's a fuck state. I love how so listening to your podcast reminded me so much of some of the rap music I listened to because you're talking about chickens. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We get that. That's West Coast slang. We call it chicken a kilo. A chicken is a kilo. Yeah. Yeah. So when I was listening to it, I was like having flashbacks like some of the Gucci Gucci man music I used to listen to back in the day. Oh, really? Because he talked about like whipping up chickens. Yeah. That comes from the West Coast. That comes from E 40. And because there's a lot of southern West Coast underground like crossover. So yeah, cooking a chicken is from the Bay area. But why slang is from the Bay area? A lot of those guys talk about how they would have girl like women cooking up the crack or like cooking the Coke, but he'd make sure they're all naked. Yeah. Yeah. That's a big myth. Oh, it's a big. I think it's a huge. There's no reason for me to be there. There's no reason I guess because they can't steal your shit. But why would you want to trust a woman anybody doesn't have to be gender specific? But why why would you want to trust a naked chick to cook up a kilo of Coke, something that valuable into crack? You wouldn't know. No, you'd have a chemist. You'd have a special. I knew guys from the hood. That's what they did. Like Mexican guys, they specifically they wouldn't sell drugs. They wouldn't buy them. They would be paid on consignment or they would be paid a fee to mix the drugs to whip up a, uh, you know, to stretch a kilo of Coke, right? They would know how to do that. They would know how to cook up crack. You know, you give it to a specialist. You wouldn't give it to a naked chick. Yeah. It's crazy. Damn it. I know. It's bust your fantasy. The music video so much better. I don't know who started that. I think that was like New Jack City, the movie back in the 80s. Oh, yeah. Yeah. But, um, yeah, I don't think I don't think much of that happens. Um, I think it's all it's all it's much less glamorous. You know, but there are like, you know, it's crazy. There's people in the Bronx right now, Dominican Puerto Rican women that are in like, uh, you know, a room like this and they're all sitting at a big table and they're just cutting up heroin. Yeah. Just millin it and chefin it. And they're, they're getting paid. And then it just becomes, and they're just getting paid like a salary. They're just getting paid like 60 bucks an hour, just like people are trimming up bud somewhere. It's like an assembly line. And it totally. It just becomes normalized. Like these guys, these kids, these, uh, saccarios that were guarding El Mayo. Yeah. You know, they're just sitting around like bullshitting like any, any group of friends would do. Yeah. They don't consider it what they're doing is criminal. They really don't. And it gets like that. You get so normal, especially in a culture like that. Um, where you're like, this is the family business. And Cal de Ron was telling me a lot of those kids, those saccario, like bodyguards, those young kids, a lot of them are like, TikTok stars. Oh, yeah. They do have a huge TikTok. They'll show the like flash all the fucking drugs and they're gone. Now, how can you do that on TikTok? But I say, cunt wants and I get flat. That's what I'm saying. You know, we're doing a bit like a comedy bit. Right. Can you do that that it doesn't make any fucking sense? Because it's in Mexico and like the laws are different. Like the TikTok laws are, are they different? I can't imagine that. Well, they're definitely different. It's different in China, obviously. They, because they're the ones that own TikTok and they're pushing that on us. Yeah. But I don't know if it's, do they have like rules for their kids that you've taken? Yeah. There's like an off time. Yeah, there's, there's a time, there's, there's a limit to the amount you can use and like what they show you in, in the feed is like a smart issue. And they get educational. Yeah. So I don't know. I can't imagine Mexico. They're allowing people to wave guns. I don't know, dude, that's fucking crazy. And a lot of prisoners of TikTok accounts now in prison. Yeah. Some of the biggest TikTok accounts are prisoners. What? Talk about that. How do you smuggle a gigantic iPhone? You don't. You can nobody shove in that. I don't care how gay you are. You're not fitting that in your ass. You're not key string and iPhone 14. You're getting that brought in from a guard. Let's talk about that. How do all these inmates have the latest technology? You know, I'm much, you know, this is the going rate for this. Might get in smoke. Well, this 1500 bucks 1500 bucks. Yes. That's what, that's about what you got to pay a guard. It's like a going rate. It's like a market. Right. How does the guard get paid? By somebody on the outside. That's how drugs get sold. Let's talk about that. How do drugs get sold in prison the same way cell phones get smuggled in and purchased in prison. Somebody on the outside, you're one of your people will bring money to a guard right on his day off or or if you're selling knee drugs in prison and you're also a prisoner. My, my person on the outside will bring your person in money or they'll put it on your books. Right. The put money on when they see their commissary. Exactly. Exactly. And when they see that boom, now we're, now we're straight now we're even that's one of the ways it happens. Yeah. If I was in prison, I would take up smoking cigarettes. I think yeah. Yeah. There's that, but they made stupidly. Right. They made cigarettes illegal. So what do you think that's it? But it made a huge market made a huge fucking market for it. Yeah. You know, worse it did. Of course it did. Right. That's the game's love. The obvious thing I want to do if I go to prison, I'm going to start smoking cigarettes. Yeah. Yeah. The first thing. Yeah. Yeah. I'll be working outside working out and smoking cigarettes at the same time. Yeah. Exactly. Like old old, like men, like real men. Yeah. We're going to fucking get jacks, but we're also going to be damaging our lungs. Oh, my God. Yeah. So, fuck they have ticked their big on TikTok. I always made, I always kind of like joke that if I owned a prison, I would have podcast studios in there because true crime is such a like blossoming genre and podcast. And biggest podcast in the world are true crime. Yeah. Yeah. And the inmates are hilarious. Oh, I don't know. And there's no shortage of content. You live in a content machine. It's one of the funniest places. That's why like I'm trying to get this show made this, I wrote a script like a pilot based around just guys in prison because it's so funny. There's so much funny shit that happens. That's why I started doing comedy was at these talent show nights in a maximum security prison. Really? Yeah. I didn't know they had talent shows. Yeah. If you're a well behaved, every now and then like a monthly, they had these like just talent nights and you would go down and dude, I've had some rough shows on the outside, but it's nothing compared to bombing in prison. Like you had to get, if you're talent, if you didn't hook the crowd in like the first 10 seconds, they'd start booing. They would throw oranges, fights would break out. Like that's, that's what taught me to like get to the punchline quickly. So if you watch my comedy, like I'm at the joke immediately. Like there's no like, there's not a lot of big set up. And that comes from prison that comes with doing comedy in prison. Yeah. Yeah. So when you got, when you first got out of prison, actually, let's come, I'm like, I got a pee. Okay. Let's come back and go like start when you got out of prison. Okay. Yeah. Cool. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. His, so his uncle was Frank Lucas. Yeah. Let's fucking get going. Keep this in the pot. I'll give a shit. I'll get David gets mad. He can. We didn't take a pee break. So we're just now, we're talking about David Lucas. David Lucas. One of like the best up and coming comedians in the country. He's so good. He's killing it right now. I love when he's an ingenious roast. I love when he fucking roast people in the crowd. Yeah. Yeah. It is so good. Yeah. Nobody better. It's school yard like bullying. Yeah. It's all off the top of the dome. You know what I mean? Like he's the real deal. He's the real deal. That's a, that's a talent. Yeah. I feel like, I don't know shit about comedy, but I feel like having comedy, like perfecting a, a bit is completely in a separate world. Yeah. I'm like dealing with the crowd. Totally. Totally. And it's, yeah, it's art versus being naturally funny. Yeah. We call it like back to the bus. Funny. Yeah. Yeah. And I'm not just saying XE's black. Like that's, he reminds me of a lot of the guys in prison. Like how just naturally funny they were. We'd be at the table playing dominoes or whatever. And people would just be snapping on mother fuckers. Yeah. You know, and it was like, hot potato. You didn't want to, if the hot potato came to you, you wanted to get it off of you as fast as you could. Right? So you would just, I would, as it was coming around the circle to me, like people just get roasted. Yeah. I would be like, I would be like rapidly fucking coming up with insults for somebody else, just to push it off of me. You know what I mean? So that was like training. That was, that was training. And then, and then during the talent show nights, that's when I would write jokes. And I didn't even really know they were jokes at the time. It was just like, I would observe things in the prison that were funny. Yeah. And I didn't realize these were comedy bits. I would just write them down and I would get up there. And I would be like, have you guys fucking noticed this? Right? It's one of my first bits was about how like when a riot is about to break out in prison, you can tell because everybody will bring their boots, their like work boots to the showers. Because if a riot kicks off on the yard, that means everybody in the prison has to start fighting. It doesn't matter. You don't have to be on the yard. People will break out in brawls everywhere in the day room at the chow hall in the showers. Wow. So you don't want to be caught fighting but naked without the proper footwear. That's, that's for real. That's a thing. So you will see motherfuckers but ass naked shower. We'd be showering off naked, but with our boots on still. And so my first punchline was it looks like we're all about to do black porn. Oh my god. Yeah. So that got like a huge laugh. So I was like, oh, okay. So that's kind of how I got into it. I would just be like roasting like the Mexican gangs. I'm like, Ernesto's been locked up for five years. But his baby mom is five months pregnant. How the fuck did that happen? You better talk to your cousin or an ester. You know, shit like that. That's hilarious. Yeah. Yeah. But David Lucas reminds me a lot of that just like, just, I mean, just incredibly like that level of funny just comes from not giving a fuck. Right. And I don't have that. Like I'm not that, that quick. But that it's just like this abandoned that he has that thing about him where he's like, he does, he's not trying. You can tell he's not trying that hard. No. Some people try very hard. Yeah. And they're still very good or not. But he is. He doesn't seem like he doesn't have to put in a lot of effort into it. He doesn't have to at all. He's completely himself. That's so funny. And that's when you become unique. That's when you go for being a good comic to a great comic. Yeah. When you just let go and just be yourself. Yeah. But you still got to like put in a lot of work on special today's age. Oh, of course. You do never ends. Bro, it never. I wish I was a comic in 1987. That's a thing I feel like sometimes doesn't connect. I feel like a lot of people who are just naturally good at shit talented at shit. Like David, they a lot of them, they can't figure out the discipline and the relentless work it takes. Yeah. Like make it absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah. That's why these guys I was locked up with would never dream of like going to Hollywood. Right. Or it just, you know, it takes too much discipline. That's why most comedians don't aren't ready for this new age because they they don't have like a business mind for you know, like all the shit I do. I'm like talking about like brand deals and then I feel like 11 podcasts. Yeah. And I'm going over talking about like, oh, do this on the thumbnail. So I'm being a graphic designer. I'm talking about titling it. I'm a marketing team. Yep. And then, you know what I mean? And then also I'm over here like trying to write about my my breakup, you know. So it's like you have to wear so many hats now. Meanwhile, you're in the fucking in cinema interviewing. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's what I'm talking to a hit man in Mexico. So you just like you have to be so dynamic now. Just it's unfair. Like I'll you can't expect people to be able to wear that many hats. So that's why it's like I want I want to turn this I want to turn this YouTube shit. I want to it's it's going to it's going to transition into comedy. I know it will, you know, but it just takes a lot of time and you got to break out somehow. So I was like, let me tell my story and let me get let me get hot this way and then I'll bring people over to the comedy. So what what was like the spark that was like I want to put all this stuff on YouTube and put these like like serialized podcast episodes out there and make all these fucking shorts. How did that all happen? And desperation nothing. Oh, it was like it was like I want to tell this story. I because it was the book. It was the book. The book is wrote in spy. The book is I thought it was going to bring it up to days of the trap days of the trap. Yeah, you could just go just type it in an Amazon. But I was like, there's so much more than this. Like it was just it was it was literally thinking like a business been like a drug dealer. I saw I looked at the market and I was like, this is being underserved. Like there's people that are with crime and drug and prison shows, but they're not. Yeah, I love their fucking title. Yeah, well, like the cover of it is beautiful. Oh, thank you. Bad people and like, yeah, that's it right there. Um, and I think it's only available on Kindle right now because we're re-printing it. We took the rights back from the publishing company and now we're going to relaunch it. Oh, cool. So you might only be able to buy it on Kimball if anybody's interested, but that'll be we'll be relaunching that soon with with an audio book. But basically I looked at YouTube and the algorithm and like I was saying, it's either one or the other. It's either dorks from the BBC that are like interviewing cartel members that are like, what would you do? Like I saw a motherfucker talking to a guy from the scene of lower cartel in a mask with an AK-47. He was like, what would you do if you found out I was a police officer and the guy, the Mexican guys like, where the fuck did you get this guy? You you're going to ask me that on camera. You're going to make me answer that. What do you think? All right. So it's like that shit. And then it was, you know, like, for lack of a better word, like hood dudes, ghetto dudes that are super entertaining, but they have like tear up their film in their iPhones and shit. So it was just a market niche. I'm like, nobody's doing this. Let me try to do this. I think I could do it. I think it can work. And so it's so far it's been working out. But that was really it. Like it was just opportunity. Yeah. You know what I mean? Have you seen some of the old like vice documentaries like what's it called? Chirac, where they go through Chicago. Oh, yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Trap houses. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like how basically it's all the whole like drug scene there is intertwined in the rap rap games. Yes. Yes. That's like fucking one of the most amazing pieces of journalism I've seen. Yeah. Yeah. Vice was really good back then. They were really fun. Yeah. Yeah. There are a little water down now. There are a little. Oh, it's completely. It's a 180. Yeah. Yeah. I even clued it. Yeah. It's just, you know, it's a different thing. But yeah, that shit's insane. Chicago's nuts. When you started putting this stuff out on your YouTube channel, did you expect it to like get as big as it did? I knew because of the nature of the material that it was clickbady. I was like, we're going to get some eyeballs on us. But no, I didn't expect it to pop this quickly. Fuck no. I was, I told my producer, the guy who films it sets it up. He's, he's now involved in creative decisions. Yeah. The guy who does all the editing, you know, is my right hand man, Brian. I told him, let's just give this a year. Like just give me a year. I'm going to underpay you for how much work you're going to do, but just just give it to me and then we'll reevaluate. And you know, three episodes later, we had fucking 200,000 subscribers. I mean, it was, uh, it's insane. Yeah. Yeah. Four, four months ago, I was working in a restaurant. You have like the short videos on YouTube that have like 100, 100 million views. It's like, oh, yeah. Yeah. There's one one. I think the first one I saw was where you tell how to like evade getting going to jail when you get pulled over. Yeah. Yeah. Talking about getting pulled over. Yeah. My time, my time getting pulled over. Um, yeah. So we had a lot of those, you know, and it pops. It ebbs and flows, right? Like with, you know, have the numbers are, but I'm just focused on like growing the show, taking it to, to a next level that, that nobody's doing. Like I want to be the Anthony Bourdain of like, drug shows. I want to travel all these different places. Yeah. Exactly. But make it entertaining. Make it a little funny and make it fucking different. You know, yeah. Like nobody's, nobody's talking about the shit that me or Louise is talking about. Like no, people are just like, drug routes. And the cartel is stronger than ever. Well, what is the cartel? And all the cartels coming to your city? No, the fuck they're not. Like nobody's nobody's really covering that shit. So that's kind of, I really want to like dig deep and have it come from a personal place too, you know. So yeah, that's fascinating. You know, um, Roger, he knows where Georgia or Chowa lives. Like he, he said he I really am. I'm like, I'm like, can we go there? He's like, yeah, if you want, well, he's like, I'll fly down that tomorrow. I know exactly where his whole franchise. I'll walk her up to the front door. That's a great Roger reason. But yeah, so the Ochoa's apparently were they say, according to cocaine, what do they call it? cocaine cowboys that documentary, that guy Billy Corbin, Florida boy. Yeah, he's been on here. Oh, yeah, that's right. That's right. He was saying the Ochoa's were really the number one guys. Yes. You know, yeah, and Pablo was kind of Pablo was kind of like choppo. Not maybe not a glorified manager, but kind of he wasn't the, he wasn't like the, the main guy, the main guy were with the Ochoa's old man, Ochoa. You would think that right because they fucking got Pablo and they killed him. Yeah. And they fucking posed with him like he was a fucking like a deer, like a deer. Yeah, exactly. So you would think that he had to have been part of some sort of PR thing just like El Chapo. Yeah. Yeah. So they said old man, Ochoa, just like El Myo's and Bava. Yeah, never did a day in prison. That old school patriarch, he was a horse breeder. Yeah, he was, he was part of the oligarch, you know, the oligarchic kind of circle in Columbia. But they say he was the biggest trafficker out of the whole metajean federation back. So yeah, his son, Georgia, Choa, I guess is free. Yeah. Just live in his life. Yeah. He said, uh, Roger said that he breeds horses now. Yeah. Yeah. Well, they all did exactly. The whole family does the jidemic. Yeah, they've always been horse pretty. They always have. They always been horse pretty. Oh, okay. Yep. Well, I might have to take a trip with Roger down in his, his sessna airplane. How sick would that be? Yeah, that'd be sick. Yeah, there's nobody doing that now. I don't think. I mean, now that you've been not a sense, vice, I don't think there's anybody really doing like that fucking raw running gun type. Yeah. Like in the jungle documentary interviews. Yeah. Yeah. And I don't want to be like, I don't necessarily want to be a journalist. You know, I want to, I want to incorporate like politics and culture and all of these different elements of what it wherever I'm documenting. Like I want to bring something, you know, yeah, like the way the board day and show really became about the culture and the politics of a country itself, not really about food. Right. Like that's kind of what I, I, where I'd like to take the show, you know, like I don't want to be a journalist, you know, I want to be a drug dealer, a former drug dealer who is just kind of like living out his fantasy, like getting the interview, like members of the fucking scene, a lower cartel. I'm like, this is so serendipanies. Like I used to buy drugs from these guys. Right. And now here we are generation later. And I'm, I'm talking to them. How much of your work is still like how much comedy are you know, how much stand up comedy do you still do? I still do a bunch. I mean, I'm a stand up comedian at the end of the day. So that's your number one. Yeah. Yeah. Of course. I still do probably five or six shows a week when I'm in Los Angeles. Yeah. Yeah. And then I'm still on the road every now and then, you know. So we're starting to sell tickets and we're going to make a big push go on tour and do all that kind of stuff. But this is the first step to like really like getting out to the people, you know, and you were one of the first people to actually be ambushed on stage. Yes. That was our first viral video. Do we have a video of us showing that to this is just me talking about it. We have a video of us in a trap house showing that video to cartel members. Yes. And then just laughing their fucking ass off. They're like, show us some of your YouTube videos. So we're all sitting around smoking. We find the one where he at the guy actually attacked. Yeah. Um, what's that? No, that's comedian describes being attacked. Go back by midget. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's true. I guess. I don't know. I don't have audio. Yeah. One of you motherfucker's watched the stage and trying to slap me. Okay. I got attacked on stage recently. Yeah. That one of you motherfucker's watched the stage and trying to slap me. Okay. I got attacked on stage recently. I was short. Tiny little little moment ago. I find the one. This stage of a comedy show I was doing in Hollywood. Oh my god. Will Smith really. I got carl. You know, I'm telling you how long ago was that? That was right. That was around the same time that Will Smith, uh, no, Will this slap on Chris Rock happened? Yes. This was like the end of February or early March. All around the same time. Yeah. Yeah. I've been to a lot of people. Exactly. I didn't happen to Chappelle exactly. And that dude, that's been happening to comedians, non famous comedians forever. By the way, I just want to buy that. Yeah. People hate drunk people hate when they fuck up and you make a fool of them. Like I was shredding that guy. Like they were, I had the crowd like doubled over and it was a black show too. So they were slapping the table. You were like, that guy's been fucked and every hole. Yeah. And I called the guy a snitch finally. Oh shit. Perfect snitch mode. He rushed the stage. So but after we go off camera right there, you don't see it. But I had the crowd so on my side. I took the guy by the nape of his neck because he was like, he's like five, seven and I'm six foot six. Yeah. So we just, I just like, like, WWE like power slammed him through a fucking table. And these dude, a couple of these fucking audience members black dudes run over because we're wrestling on the ground. I'm trying to like hockey punch him and shit. Like pull his hoodie over his head. These guys run over and they start stomping it. They kick it out. Oh my God. Yes. Yes, dude. It was wild. So, so that happened. And then literally, and then I was like, Oh, wait, they were filming that. So I told the producer, I'm like, send that over to me. I might be able to do some with this. And then like a week or two later, the Will Smith's slap happened. And that was on my Kim Kardashian sex tape moment. I'm like, send me that fucking video, dude. Yeah. And I posted it. I live in a month that had three, four, five million views. And now it's like over 10. This is the full, this is the full one. If you find the short, the short kind of stuff, you can see if you hover over the timeline Austin, it'll show you where like, so go like a minute before that. Like right there. Yeah, go right there. Play it. Oh, yeah. The guy's bragging about how he got into the show on a group on where was this? This is outside. This was like an outdoor on a patio in Hollywood. Oh, okay. Yeah. Now the big guy's going to feel emboldened. You know, so I had two hecklers, one of them left. I don't know. Yeah. Because I'm good with my right. I'm using my left when I got over here. Yeah. I see the danger. Yeah. That guy's got caught. Thanks to you. I was so high off an edible. I should have just dropped right there. Oh, my. I was so high too. That's what you don't know about that. So I was like, this is surreal. I was like, is he really coming up here? He's suing the venue? What is he suing the parking lot? Yeah, exactly. No, it's a, it was like a hooka lounge or something. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I was like, is he really coming up here? He's suing the venue? What is he suing the parking lot? Yeah, exactly. No, it's a, it was like a hooka lounge or something. Oh, shit. Yeah. So and doing it. If you go read the comments, everybody's like, that guy definitely snitch. Yeah. Yeah. If you got that mad when you called him a snitch, that was the one. Like the fucking and all the holes that I'm pissed off. I was about calling him a snitch. That was his trigger word, you know? Yeah. So I do, I chop that up into like multiple different clips. But yeah, so that was like the first like, that made my, my channel pop, my personal channel. Okay. And then, how many views does that have? That one, the short, the short original one is like over 10 million. And that's like 3 million on this one. Yeah. Just on the, on that's the long video. And then there's another one, like 6 million. It's got like a B side to it. So yeah. So I still get paid off of this. So I want to thank this guy who's watching. You got me paid motherfucker. That is so fucking funny. Yeah. So, so yeah, dude. But then, but then the connect just hit those shorts, man. Yeah. Short shorts or something else. And yeah, I was talking about getting pulled over with a bunch of bud in the trunk. And like, like the different throwoff methods that we would use. Can I talk about some of those? Yeah. So a big thing we did. So we would go, we took so many trips up I five, man with the trunk loaded. By the end, we would have like, I would have somebody go pick up the product for me, right? And I would have like a spotter car on him, right? But for forever, we just, we just went up that we just threw it in the trunk and fucking crossed our fingers, right? So, but sometimes we would like, we would put like police or military stickers on the back of our cars. You know, because cops love the military, right? This kind of the same thing. Right. The law enforcement. So that would be like a throwoff. You know, one time I got pulled over by a cop and I told him I was on my web to Portland doing list. And he fucking saluted me and was like, just be safe, quit speeding. Like that's the way I got out of it. And we're going buddy. Meanwhile, I got 20 pounds in the trunk. You know what I'm saying? Yep. Yep. Yep. I pulled that once. Um, yeah, I had different little tips for getting pulled over. Like I would immediately cop to like if I got pulled over, I learned to like immediately like confess to the fact that I was speeding or I took a turn. Because then then you, you, you would put the officer at ease immediately. Right. Like this guy, I clearly like I was going down like the side of a mountain. Like it was, it was really like rural up there. So I'm just speeding down this like stretch of highway that goes straight down. You can't not speed. Right. And it was a speed trap. So I got pulled over or going like 15 over the speed limit. And I immediately was like, dude, I know I hit that way too fast. I'm sorry about that. So immediately like you cop to like the small infraction. Right. So it puts the cop at ease and he's like, wow, this is just a good guy. He's a citizen, you know, so just immediately drops his, his, any kind of suspicion that he has, you know, funny man. Yeah. So I clip that and threw it up there and people seem to take to it. Dude, when I was back in like the mid 2000s, I used to make a lot of East Coast trips, like surfing like, like traveling from here to like South Florida. And I would go across alligator alley. And there was probably three different times where I just randomly got pulled over and my little pickup truck and my truck, my truck searched. Wow. Really not smuggling drugs, nothing like that. But there was just there was a time when they would just pick off random cars, like a huge percentage of them and just search them for some reason. And you let him search like, yeah, I was like 17. Of course, what are you going to do? Yeah. You don't know. You have rights back. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. Why would they never got any planted on me or anything? Like they never. Yeah. I don't think cops really have a reason to plant shit on you. Right. I mean, they've of course, you know, there's been huge scandals, like the ramparts scandal in LA and the 90s where cops were literally working for the gangs. They hire what hire like gang affiliated people to work on the police force. And they would plant shit on like, oh, I didn't know about that. Yeah. Yeah. Ramparts scandals wild. But yeah, cops nowadays usually aren't going to plant shit on like if you're a 17 year old kid, right? It's crazy to think they would search your car. Were you smoking weed? No. Did you look like a pothead? Maybe surfers? Probably looking a pothead. Probably looking a pothead. We're a surfer kid. Yeah. For sure. For sure. A little Toyota Tacoma pickup truck like tiny little. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Dude, speaking of surfers, there is this, you got to look up this drug bust. They need to make a movie about this. There were when I was in college, we heard about these college kids, these frack guys that went to like San Diego state. And they were surfers. So what they would do, and they were also coke dealers. So what they would do is they would drive down to Mexico to re up. They would pick up like I'm talking real, real weight, like significant multi kilo re ups. Yeah. And they would, they would build them. They would have like the cartel guys or somebody down on the Mexico side, like open up the surfboards, you know, hollow the surfboards out and stuff the kilos into the surfboards and then they would put them on the top of their win a bagos or whatever. And they would come in through customs. They would be like, yeah, we were just down there surfing gnarly. Yeah. Yeah. If you're shredding down here, that's not a man. And bro, they were fucking getting away with it. They're making millions of dollars on the roof of their car and playing side, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that was, and they were making millions of dollars as like high school juniors. What a friend genius idea. Yeah. Yeah. No shit. So I always like found that so crazy that like, you know, these white boys probably from like rich families, you know, we take risks like that. That's cowboy shit. I don't, I don't, we've never had sympathy for like guys like that. They didn't really need to sell drugs. I mean, I didn't need to either, but just did it. But we're so crazy with it that it was like, dude, you had this coming. Mm. You know, yeah, that's a funny thing too about like somewhere like the big, the biggest narcos their kids don't normally get into that. Right. They like moved to the US and do something respect to the depends. It depends. Or they take it over like myos kids, his sons are going to take the business. Are they really? Oh, yeah. Definitely. The weets was telling me that his kids are like, they're like big on Instagram. And they're like, they may be. But they're also, they're also like freely walking around the US. Well, those are the guys. One of them is the guy who got caught at Radarion Choppos. See, he's not going to go back to Mexico, obviously. Although there's out, there's reports. Again, I'm telling all the weets is business, but there's reports that he actually sneaks back to Mexico to visit his father. But yes, those two kids are out of the game or maybe one of them was never in the game, but there's two guys got like seven or eight kids. So he, two of his sons in Mexico still are definitely taking over the business. It happens. That's how it happens with the Calabrian mob. The, uh, yeah, the endra get that in Calabria Italy. It's all lineage. It's all passed down. Right. That's how it happens. That's how they monopolize the, the trade is that you have to, you can't just join it like, like you can in the US. There's no free market. It's all passed down through lineage. So I think a huge part of, of the game is passing it onto your kids. But in the US, that their kids go legit. That's the American dream. Like, like that's the reason that the mob in New York has to go to the other side. They have to go to Sicily now to recruit new members because their kids generally for the most part are like going into the legitimate world. I think they want to, you know, so it's much less of a cultural thing. It's more of just like starts out in the US is just a way to survive and hopefully your kids become legit. That's what's cool. That's what I always loved about the criminal's dream was being able to go straight after that. Yes. Like that's what I say on my podcast. That's why I say the criminal's dream is to no longer be a criminal. So that, that's, I was living proof of that almost. Like I was, I was going to get out of the game and have millions and, and just funnel it into legit businesses. And it was, it would have set me up for the rest of my life. If I could have pulled it off, you know, I just didn't get out in time. I got too greedy. Yeah. That's one of the funny thing. I want you when you get Roger and you got to ask him how many waterfront mansions he still. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He talks about he bought all of his friends fucking houses back then. Oh, my God. I cannot wait to ask him about that. I'll ask him on the patreon episode. Where's money is how much money is still still have like, I don't know. I mean, obviously if you, if you're buying them for other people as gifts, technically you don't own them anymore. Yeah. But I want how much money got away with. Yeah. How much money he still has access to if he did it. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Right. Well, he's so connected. He could probably get back into the game really quickly. But, you know, he'll never do that. I don't know. I hope not. But yeah, I mean, he may hundreds of millions, hundreds of millions. And this is back in the 70s. Right. But was he active after the 70s? Yeah. I think he was active. Yeah. He fell in the age originally got arrested. When did Barry seal get killed? Uh, early 80s, early 80s, I believe. Well, we could probably look that up. Yeah. If I know when Barry seal got whacked and it might have been the late 80s. I think Roger was in prison when Barry died. Oh, okay. Yeah. So that would would have been the 80s. So he was in prison the whole time from Roger was in prison from the 80s until like 2016. Yep. Oh, wow. Yep. On multiple different continents. Oh, wow. Oh, yeah. So he died in 86. 86. Okay. So Roger was locked up probably. Roger was already locked up. He got locked up. Yeah. I think 82. Does Roger Reeves have a page? Have a Wikipedia page? I don't know. That's a good question. Google him. You know, so it's a funny thing to talking about like the lineage of some of these drug dealers. Have you ever seen a Pablo son? Yes. Yes. He's fat like Pablo super fat and like super ghetto. Like super hood. Interesting on his Instagram. I thought he was a dork. Maybe as multiple sons because because one of them was a nerd who they moved to Argentina, right? After after after after Pablo got killed, the family relocated. Really? Yeah. I didn't know that. Yeah. This is not safe for them in Columbia. Okay. Everybody is from is dead that we're in Pablo. But look at him. Look at all of the projects right there in that episode. American pilot who was once the most prolific drugs, muggler in history. He works. He worked for Pablo Escobar and the Medellin Cartel. He claims that seal paid millions and brobs to the cleanse. Yes. Oh, I can have our way to ask him about that. I'm scared for Roger. I'm scared when he's open with this information. It makes me worried for him. You know, when he talks about it, he doesn't, he doesn't like, he's like, of course. Yeah. Like it's no secret. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. He's that's what makes me believe him is he's very matter of fact about it. You know what I mean? Mail and millions of bribes to the Clintons when Bill Clinton was governed to use is that is that in order to yeah, to let them use Mina, right? Like the news of the airport. Yeah. Yeah. Mina. Yeah. He was so Barry would have dinner with the Clinton's like, he goes, I'm having dinner with a governor, Roger. And he's wow. Yep. So so the Clintons, if we're to believe that, that would mean that the Clintons would then take millions of dollars. But then who would they I just unfastinated, how would corruption at that level work? I would then tell the, tell the people that worked at Mina like, hey, some planes are going to don't, don't you touch these guys? I guess because Barry said that I can land in Mina, Arkansas whenever I want any time a day is like any day of the week that I want. He's like, it just costs a million bucks. Like a million dollars per load. Wow. Yeah. So he could he had a green light and the airport, Mina. Right. And perpetuity as long as like it was a certain fee, I guess, right. Right. Right. Right. So. Oh, so the thought is, yeah, the Clintons are taking cash, bribes and probably paying off, you know, whoever is running whoever's in charge of like making decisions for, you know, the military in Arkansas. Yeah. Yep. Like that would that would kind of be sense. Yeah. I mean, I don't sort of fucking corruption. I don't know. Because the Clintons can't just take money and then call down Bill Clinton's not going to call the airport and Mina and be like, right. Hey, we got we got some, you can leave this boy alone. We're going something in. Yeah. No, I guess there was there was some sort of protection that was always there when they landed, right. There would be like vehicles. That's sure. Yeah. That's core. So everybody's getting paid out of everybody. Yeah. Everybody's getting paid out. You know, who's like the foremost authority on this whole fucking topic who actually wrote a book on it, you probably heard of the guy. His name's Sean Atwood. Yes. Ball dude in the UK. He wrote, he wrote like a series of books all about this time in the history. Wow. And all about the Clinton, it's it's called like. A legend with yeah, the title of the book is like, find out the name of his. Okay. That's not beyond the pale or he wrote a ton of books. Click on like the list of his books. It's called like the boys on the tracks or something like that. Wow. Keep scrolling. It's one of his first books. There it is with the Clinton. What's that one called Clinton Bush in CIA conspiracies. But there's yeah, so he has multiple books on the Clintons and the bushes and basically all of the quote unquote suicides that the Clintons have been involved in the first ones were like a couple of boys that were tied up to some real world. Road trap. Yes. Yes. And that's supposed to be a suicide. Right. And they were the guys who stumbled on. They like they were just playing in the woods. Yeah. And they I think they stumbled upon like one of the planes being unloaded. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting. So okay. That was the name of the book. The name of the book is from it's like blah, blah, blah, something from the boys on the tracks to Jeffrey Epstein. And he whoa. He ties everything from the beginning from the boys in the tracks. All the way to Jeffrey Epstein. Everything about the Clintons. Wow. Like this dude went in. And so it's pretty investigative. Super investigative. Like she went deep on the. Yeah. Yeah. God dammit. That is so fucking crazy. Yeah. They've been they've been dirty since yeah, the beginning. I just saw an ad on YouTube yesterday. Have you ever seen ads for that thing called master class? Yes. Of course. Yeah. They got one with fucking Bill Clinton now. Yes. Right. To teach about politics. I'm like, who better to teach about politics now? That's really what politics are. Yeah. Politics are corrupt and dirty and murderous sometimes. I want to buy that master class. Yeah. I know you're a fucking bill. You're doing on there. No shit. Passes. Look at this shit, bro. On leadership. On leadership. But all thing. By the way, did they really need money? Play this trailer. They need more money. Like why are they doing? Oh my God. They don't. This is insane. If you want to lead something, start by saying this is what I care about. This is what I'm million bucks a week. A million bucks planted more health. Partly a day goes by that I don't think how fast my life is from. I remember as if it were yesterday, the first day I became president. Oh, God. Oh, my God. Look at that. You can all the bushes. Oh, God. Can be done alone. This is a particularly disorienting time for billions of people in the world. You've got major uncertainties about what's going to happen in the years ahead. At a time like that, you really need good leadership skills. And you need people whose goal it is. Roger Reeves, you're very sure. Not driving on the part. People need to feel the potential to create a better tomorrow. This class is unlike anything I've ever done. I'll be teaching skills. I've developed and used in very challenging leadership. From the different F.D. offs. Fuck out. And you're paying skills will help you. And you're paying the one with a scarf. You don't agree with it. You ever fucking with his dog. It's not technically the chance. And you don't have to wash your dick after. I don't believe being nice as inconsistent with being tough and smart. You got to be tough as nails with your tender heart. I have encountered a lot of setbacks. This is like pot and politics. I've had ferocious opposition. This is a lot of strategies to destroy me as a person. Holy shit. How fucking why? I mean, how much could be he be baking off of this? Like they, there were hundreds of millions already. Like what do they need? They're just, they're just real like they're just real. That's weird. Who's signing up for this? What kind of people like think about it? Think about it. Can you put yourself in the shoes of somebody who is going to be fucking sold on this? Oh, yeah. MSNBC. MSNBC and the people that work in for the major news outlets. They're like, yeah, we're going to get Clinton because what a, what an American. What did he do for America? He raised the minimum wage by a dollar, I think, by the time he was out of office. Sure. He wrote the super-pettered bill. Sure. He took millions of dollars from, uh, in bribes from cocaine dealers. You know, sure he locked up, uh, more, more black people than like all Republicans combined. You know that, by the way? I didn't know that. It wasn't Reagan, it, it, Reagan's claimed in the mass media for like the war on drugs and, you know, all these like policies that targeted like, you know, black crack dealers and shit. He didn't give a fuck originally. He was like, he had that old school racism where he was like, just let the animals, you know, whatever. We don't care what was going on. Just let him like, you didn't give a shit at all. Yeah. It was, it wasn't until he was kind of like forced by like pressure, public pressure to come in and like start getting tough on crime and shit like that. But it wasn't until the Clintons that the prison population started exploding. And Biden, Biden was involved in all that shit too. Yeah. Exploding. Yeah. I remember seeing some of the old videos of Biden during that time, like in front of Congress saying some shit, they're going to kill it. They're coming after, they're coming after. If you're selling drugs to my mother, you do not deserve to be walking around. Why is your fucking mother buying crack? Oh, my mother's buying crack cocaine. Wow. Yeah. Dude. Oh, my God. I feel like we're living in the twilight zone. Yeah. It's, it's done. It's like, it feels like society. When you watch the bushes, now who probably also have an Instagram account, when you watch George W Bush, who's killed more people, like then all of like the cartel members combined in all of history, like you see him doing, giving a masterclass and everybody being like, isn't that like politely clapping? You're just like, this is, this is some 1984 big brother type shit. Like how quickly we forget, you know, yeah. Like we're applauding Dick Cheney for coming out against Trump. We're applauding this guy for doing the right thing. Who's literally the biggest war criminal, like, like since, you know, slow, but I'm a loss of it. You name it. The, the time are Rouge. Fuckin any kind of dict millions of people. Dead. ISIS all that shit all goes back to those guys. Contee anxiously coming up with that, that propaganda campaign. I know, man. And it's crazy to how more and more of these things that we always thought were like conspiracy cover up are like being declassified. Yeah. It all comes out. It all comes out. But it's like when you see, I don't know if you see shit be to classified, like Operation Northwoods. Oh, tell me about that. That operation, Northwoods was under Ken Kennedy with the head of the CIA, Allen, Delis, they had a plan to in order to justify invading Cuba. They were going to fly. Oh, that's right. Empty. That's right. Airliner blow it up. And blow it up. That's right. That's right. That's right. That's right. That's right. Yep. That was their plan to invade Cuba. Sounds like something that happened under the bushes. Right. Like this is not, this is not like anything new. This is something that's, you know, these are CIA deep state tactics that have been that have grown and evolved and been passed down since World War two, since the beginning of what became the CIA. Yeah. Absolutely. And it all comes out, but it's it's always after their dead. It's always so nobody has to take responsibility. So we'll know who killed Kennedy maybe in our lifetimes. Right. I saw something just came out about that yesterday. Well, did Biden push it back? Biden didn't. I don't know. I think Biden gave an order to not let that come out. Oh, did he really? Yeah. I didn't know that. That might be a Google. Google Jerry's my thing though. What the fuck would change if we fucking, if they admitted they killed Kennedy? Right. Well, what would you like? Like, okay, there was a CIA plot. Yeah. The CIA was involved. The guy was whatever he was enacting alone. He was a Patsy and yeah. And yeah. What would change in an American? Really? I mean, think of how many people would fucking pay attention to it first of all? Yeah. Most people wouldn't be like, okay, whatever. We know we all knew that already. I think what would change is that we certainly wouldn't be Biden official soon over delayed release of JFK assassination records. So I'm not sure why like they didn't, they didn't really talk about why they were, why they didn't, uh, delayed them. But it's absolutely a fucking conspiracy cover up by the government. If you pay attention to any of it. Yep. Yep. So I don't know what would change. That's a great question. I think, I think enough people would notice, I mean, people already don't trust anything anymore. Right. Thanks to the power of the internet. But if it came out that the government whacked Kennedy, I think, I think it would hurt Democrats more more. I wouldn't Republican, but it would hurt Democrats more because right now, most of the mainstream media is an arm is a mouthpiece of the like corporate democratic party. Right. That's what I, that's what I think. So yeah, so I think it would change. I think it would sway voting, um, interest, but you know, still doesn't matter. Like there's no good candidates on either side. So I don't know. I don't know how it would have changed like the future of America. Maybe, I don't know. Maybe you could get a guy like Bernie Sanders, right? Whether you agree with all of his, like, you know, policies or not, he's a guy that wanted to change the status quo. So maybe a guy like that could get it because enough people, there would be enough pressure to get like a third party candidate, you know? Yeah. Yeah. Maybe something like that. Have you seen the video of Trump being asked about 9 11 on the golf course? And they're interviewing him? No. And he's like, well, you know, there's a lot. We don't know about 9 11. Yeah. A lot of shit that we don't know about 9 11. We don't have the, we don't have the full story. He's just keeping it real, dude. He's, he's, he's, he's talking. He's saying what we're all thinking and talking about on podcasts. So he's back. If this is crazy, he's saying that though. If this were the 60s, he probably would have been assassinated. They probably would have tried to hit him if this were the 60s. They don't do that anymore. Yeah. But like, but what he's saying, he's, he's saying what Kennedy essentially was saying, like after he made the, the switch, like the in 63 early 63, maybe it was late 62, he made that speech where he was like, we're not, we're not going to pursue this cold war thing against the Russians anymore. We're not, we're going a different way. Yeah, that's right. We're taking society to a peaceful route. You know, we're not going to prop up the military industrial complex. Like he made that switch. Right. And that's what got him killed. Right. You know, uh, amongst like, you know, other things with like the mafia and his, his, his brother, you know, investigating and putting cases on the mob after they got him elected all that shit. Well, that shit, uh, fueled it. But it was really when he said, Hey, we're going to take society into a different direction. That's what kind of kill. So Trump was kind of saying that. Yeah. And that's why, you know, that's why they came after him with, uh, with Russia game, you know, man, what do you think's going to happen? What's going to happen when he fucking runs for president? Yeah. I don't know. I mean, you thought about that at all. I haven't, I don't have the, I don't have the bandwidth. I can't even think about it. I can't think about like, like what Twitter is going to look like. All these fucking talking. I forgot, I forgot Elon put him back on Twitter. He was back on Twitter. Twitter. Tweet. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. I love that though. This is everybody talking shit about Elon. He's like, he was on his knees crying eating out of my hands. Dude, he's so funny. He's so fucking funny, bro. Dude, yeah. Yeah. It's so he's, he's really going to run again. I don't know. I don't know what's going to happen. It's it could be cataclysmic or he might just not, he might not pull well at all. Yeah. It might not even make that it could be uneventful. It could go both ways or it could go the other way where like, yeah, you know, they're calling for mass emergencies and they're taking rights away. Right. You know, that's like the, that's where the South steps up. Right. When you guys stepped up, like I don't like the fact that everybody walks around with guns down here, but I'll tell you what, that kept us from going full China during the lockdowns. So yeah, it was, it was Texas and Florida and all these places that have so many guns that you just couldn't attempt to mandate anything like that. Because you just people will, will rebel. Yeah. So that really does keep the government that that's what it dawned on me. You know, a good like, I'm a good liberal kid for Morgan, but I saw that. And I was like, it's probably a good thing that the, especially in this country, the population are guns. I think there's more like the politicians. Yeah, but it's it is, but it's like that saved that, like, decision. This is what he did with the lockdowns. Like right, he came out glistening out of that for sure for sure. They should probably run him over Trump. You know, but yeah, it is kind of all backed up because the feds could like, now we're just talking crazy right now. Not that many people have guns down here. It's a very small minority. Seriously? Yeah. Is that true? Most people here, I get 99% of people that live here and that are here in this area, right in Florida right now, they're not from Florida. Oh, they're from the fucking North. Yeah. Or they're retired. They're retired. They come down here. They're snowboards or they move down here from the North. Like this is such a transient area. Oh, right. Yeah. And there's so many more like progress like liberal type people or older people that are right, liberal states like right down here. There's a very small group of people down here who are like big, like, like gun coding. Oh, wow. It's not, I don't think it's like, I don't really know much. I don't spend much time in Texas, but Texas, I think there's more guns. Texas is way bigger. And there's so many big cities. And yeah, everybody's got, I promise you, everybody except for now, Austin, but most people there have guns too. So everybody's got guns in Texas. Yeah. I do think it is. I just think if the federal government were to ever get so crazy to think, yeah, okay, well, they're defying our whatever emergency orders, the state governors are, we're going to send the feds to the Capitol building. I think they just wouldn't do that because they'd be like, Oh, wow, no, they're, they're, as they're more strapped than us, you know, the same reason that the, the military won't go in and try to arrest old El Miles and Bada down there and see, you know, right? Right. Cause they, it's going to be hell to pay, like a lot of people are being getting killed. Yeah. I couldn't imagine if that day came. Oh, no. I, I, I can't dude. Like it's, that will be the end of, I don't know. Maybe, maybe, yeah, maybe it's inevitable United States breaks up. Yeah. Somehow, but you know, I hope it's not bloody, but I don't see how else it could be because like say if Texas wants to split away from the feds, well, the feds want that revenue. Like the federal government is not in the business of like getting smaller. Like the government is not in the business of getting smaller. It's just this gigantic monolith that needs to keep eating. Right? Because everybody's got to get paid. And it's so it's, it's natural that it would try to grow. It's like the prison population, right? Right. So against their, their interests to like let it reduce. Yeah. So I just think if Texas or whoever California tried to break away, that the feds would send arm people in, you know what I mean? Yeah, man. It would take something crazy like that to fix us. I feel like because you have like a lot of the, like countries in Europe, they, they don't fucking operate the same way we have money and getting sick and replicating people and prison and cultural complex. And we live in a sick fucking society, man. And over there, they've already been through fucking hell in fact. We've been through it all. That's what it is. We're just not, we just haven't evolved. We just haven't been around as long. Yeah. You know, yeah. Colin Quinn is a great joke though, making that one of the greatest comedians. Colin Quinn, he's, he's talking about the fact that like it's crazy that this country's this big. When you look at Europe, that's why it's cut off into so many different countries. Because culture is different. Right. Like he's like, and then his joke is you can't tell me that Bulgaria and Spain have less in common than New Jersey and Utah. You know what I mean? And it's totally true. Like there's a reason that borders and mountains are used as like these natural barriers. Yeah. Because like we're not meant to have this gigantic community. It's impossible. Right. You're meant to focus on what's going on in your own community. It makes it better. Yeah. It makes it better. Like we're not, we're not meant to manage as many people. It's like it doesn't work. Yeah. The only question, the only big concern is if once we're split up into five, six, seven, eight countries, who the big superpower, who's that going to be? Only question the only big concern is if once we're split up into five six seven eight countries Who the big superpower? Who's that gonna be right? I don't know. I don't know. It's not gonna be China. China's fucked everybody thinks China's about to be the next thing They're not no they're not That's the only thing like I don't know. Maybe it's better that you maybe there's let maybe there is no more distribution of threat That's that's what it is. It's better that everything gets decentralized. You know what I mean I think I don't think we'll ever wherever in a solvent in our lifetime But it's something fun to talk about yeah sure yeah it makes for good clickbait. Yeah, yeah We're gonna get about a fucking five million epic We're gonna hire all shorts from this pop hopefully your channel gets a little pop. Hell yeah, man Thanks for coming but thanks for coming. I really appreciate it. Tell people where they can follow your shit and yes Please please go watch the connect on YouTube and on Spotify I tunes you can listen to it as well And that's we're putting up two episodes a week if you just go to type in the connect with Johnny Mitchell I'll pop right up on YouTube. We have an documentary episode every week where we travel to all of these different kind of interesting cartel places and and do crazy shit like that And then I have a podcast where I interview people once a week as well. What's that one called that's just called the connect as well We're just dropping interviews. Yeah, we're just we're not even what your other podcasts with a dude with the long hair Oh Leo, we don't do that anymore. It was called the fuck man. That was the comedy's comment But right now I want people to go check the connect out. Okay, but you can follow my if you like stand-up comedy Go to my page Johnny Mitchell on YouTube follow me on Instagram. That's a big one at mr. Johnny Mitchell That's where I'm posting all my alerts and my my my show dates when I'm out on the road doing comedy or when I'm in the Los Angeles So yeah, this is the big ones YouTube and Instagram. Hell yeah, yeah appreciate it. We're all in good all below. That's it Let me everybody goodbye world. All right