[Music] This whole world of modern art is wild. I've been diving into it like for the past year now pretty deep and every I I got inspired by that lost Leonardo documentary, which was fascinating. And then I recently have been reading up on all of the history of like covert operations during the Cold War to fund the modern art world. And and your documentary is fascinating. So so explain how you got into that whole world and what your book and the documentary are about. >> Sure. Remind me to remind me to tell you about the the CIA thing cuz I'm doing a big project on a Pollock from that program. Yeah, so I'll tell you about that. But I was doing you know I started as a kind of a cub reporter for Japanese TV in the '90s and during that time the Japanese economy had a bubble economy. And so there was just money everywhere. Real estate was going crazy in central Tokyo. And it turned out that you know like lots of bubbles here is a lot of shady business going on. And one of the things that was happening the Japanese had just started getting really interested in European art. Had all this money they were able to start buying European art that they hadn't really been able to afford or weren't that interested in. And turns out that they were getting a lot of fake art. You know because they were you know relatively unsophisticated buyers. And so you had these giant real estate deals in you know in Tokyo underwritten by art you know $50 million work of art. A lot of it was fake. Right? And so we started looking into this and they said hey there's this guy called Tony Tetro who's this huge art forger in America. He's in jail now but when he gets out when he gets out um go look him up. And so I did some investigation and I kind of found a lead. And I end up meeting Tony. And it was kind of funny because we met at this um kind of swanky place in Newport and he had all these people around you know he was smoking cigars everybody knew him he had a bunch of cronies around him was talking about his all these Ferraris and stuff. But the reality was that he was broke on his ass and he was living in a motel next to his room was literally next door to a Chinese restaurant and he'd walk across the street you know cuz he was really kind of down and out but somehow we had we had hit it off and you know within a couple of months like he gave me pretty much all of his stuff related to art. He just gave me boxes of stuff. He was like I like you you know I like what you're doing and you know knock yourself out. So that's really how how it started and then over the years you know I would hear more and more and more about Tony he'd kind of open up more and more about everything that happened. And you know it ended up that I knew him for like 20 something years. Um and so I really I I kind of it was funny because he would start to tell a story and he just got to jump here you tell it. You know you know better than I do. I just I kind of knew everything knew where all the bodies were buried and all that stuff. So um you know fast forward to 2000 2019 well 2017 really he started doing some work for this you know crazy coked up billionaire guy um named James Stunt. He started doing some work for him. And you know he started telling me about it. And I was like well this is this is weird who's this guy what's he doing? You know? And Tony said well I'm doing like 10 or 12 things for him you know he wants to put him in this mansion he had the biggest mansion in California. It used to be >> James Stunt? >> James Stunt. It used to be called Candy Land and Aaron Spelling the producer built this house for his wife Candy and it was this huge mega mansion. And Stunt married the heiress of the Formula 1 fortune Bernie Ecclestone. He married the daughter and so he got all this money. They bought this house and now he calls it Stunt Manor you know because he was a little bit of a you know narcissist. So anyway he you know as far as Tony's concerned he wants this artwork you know Picasso a Van Dyck a this a that for his house. Well these guys get to be you know these guys get to be friends. And you know they talk at night. Stunt's up all night you know doing drugs and stuff he's awake calls Tony in LA cuz Stunt at this time is back in London. Calls Tony in LA and they talked about art cars women whatever. And so Stunt says hey I want you to come to London. Well Tony goes to London and um he shows up and Stunt is kind of on a bender. So he's up all night and then he sleeps all day. So Tony's just hanging around by himself. And I mean Stunt's nowhere to be seen. So Tony is going to the British Museum with the you know with the bodyguards taking him to the pub and like showing him a good time cuz they don't know what else to do. Anyway he comes down one day and he's at the table by himself and there are these papers there. And he's like what's this? Cuz he's got nothing better to do nobody's there he's by himself. Starts looking at him and on these papers which are some kind of legal contract some kind of contract that has something to do with a place called Dumfries House he sees paintings. And the thing with Tony is these paintings are unique individual paintings they're not copies. So 99% of people think that forgers copy paintings. They don't copy paintings cuz if you copied a painting you'd just be like it's fake the real ones at MoMA you know. Right. So it's a work that an artist might have done maybe in the style of for a certain time period using the color palette and subjects of a certain time right? So it's an individual new painting that you create sort of a backstory. Here's why this exists. >> Right. >> Here's how this just showed up out of nowhere like the the lost Leonardo for example right? Here's an excuse for why this exists. >> Yeah and isn't it with typical pieces of art like this that there's a historical chain of custody that's written about and you can like you can corroborate it with other literature that goes back into however long ago. >> Yeah I mean that that's a that's a great point. So you know um there are a lot of people who can paint perfectly. Okay you can go get a perfect copy of something. There's a village in China that everybody there works making exact copies of master works. So you can get that right? However what Tony's genius was that he's extremely passionate about um the backstory of the art the the details the minutia. So there's a great example which I talk about in the book and um in a 17th or I I let's say 18th century expert book about uh Rembrandt engravings there's a footnote. Page 78 there's a little footnote and it says hey so-and-so said that there was a drawing of this and so-and-so says that there's not a drawing of this nobody's sure. Well that's really all you need to now go hey I'm going to make that maybe drawing exist. I'm going to bring it into being. So of course you have to execute it perfectly with all the right materials and all the right technique and the period and everything. Um so Wow. >> Yeah. So then now you've created a new piece that never existed or maybe existed but is lost and you have the back history supporting why it exists. Yeah but how does he know that somebody doesn't have that already existing in like a private collection? I mean it's it's a risk you take but you assume like you know it's been 350 years. If if it's going to show up it would have shown. >> Sure. You know? Uh so so Tony you know going back to the the the loan that he saw so he could see that these paintings on the contracts they're mine. They're absolutely mine. These are new paintings that I made they're my subject they're mine. Why why are they on this document that is going to Dumfries House some royal Scottish thing. So he goes this sounds a little fishy to me. He takes out his cell phone he takes three pictures. Right? When he gets back to LA he goes hey Jump Euro you know I was just in London and this funny thing happened take a look at these pictures what do you think? And I look at them and I go very fishy. They're loans to Dumfries House. And Tony had told me it was like Prince Andrew or something like that of the British royal family. But Dumfries House is >> this billionaire guy on a bender was loaning money. Was loaning artworks. >> Loaning artwork. To Prince Charles. Into his royal collection. And so I go well the [ __ ] is going on here? And he had mentioned something to Tony he had something said something about like I'm going to do a loan and I'm going to get all this money but I'm not going to have to pay it back. >> So he explained this whole thing to Tony. >> explain he just kind of mentioned he just kind of briefly mentioned like um this thing is going to kind of happen and I could make a bunch of money on it. Got it. And Tony's like well that don't make any sense to me and whatever. So he shows it to me and goes what do you think? And I go okay well Dumfries House is is Prince Charles the future King of England's uh headquarters of his charitable um of his charitable foundation. It's in Scotland. He's got all this art in it and everything. And I'm like, okay, well why is he lending money? That doesn't make it or why is he lending art >> Right. >> thing and how do you make money off it? Doesn't doesn't make sense. And the first thing that I saw was these artworks had crazy values, like $50 million for a Picasso that Tony had made. And he was claiming these were originals. Claiming they're originals. Like I'm lending this to you. >> Even a prince Picasso prints can be worth lots of money, right? >> Yeah, prints can be worth a but you know, not like that. I mean, this is >> Not $50 million. >> $50 million is an oil on canvas major piece. Right? So it's a major piece that's going to this foundation. He lent it. Right? And you go, what's going on? I look at it and I go, well, this is clearly there's something fishy here. They're not just fooling the people at Dumfries House. There's something fishy here because um for example, the Picasso said that it was verified by the Wildenstein Institute. The Wildenstein Institute only exclusively looks at French Impressionists. So they'll look at Renoir and stuff. They would never look at a Picasso. They would never verify a Picasso. They just don't. That's that's somebody else. Right? So I go, there's no no expert could have looked at this and accepted a provenance like that, an authentication like that. Then there was a Monet. You know, the famous water lilies, right? >> Oh, yeah. >> Okay. >> Yeah, yeah. So these these famous water lilies, there's a major water lily. It's worth I forget what it was exactly now on the contract, $30 million, something like that. And it has a date of uh 18 I want to make I it's it's been a while, but let's say 1890. And I'm like, well, that's could never pass muster either because that garden where the water lilies are and that Monet built specifically so that he could paint these paintings wasn't built until 10 years later. So you're like, you wouldn't even have to be an expert to go like this is [ __ ] and it's really like a pretty bad you know, it's pretty bad mistake. So this told me this did not go to the curatorial staff. Nobody really looked at this. Nobody really went, what are these things? This went to somewhere else. Interesting. >> Yeah. And so these contracts were signed with a guy called Michael Fawcett. Michael Fawcett was Prince Charles' right-hand man. Like literally his right-hand man. When Prince Charles broke his arm, he was putting the royal toothpaste >> familiar. >> Yeah. He's putting the royal toothpaste on the royal toothbrush. I mean, he is as close as you can get. Somehow he's in this scheme with Stunt. I can't prove it, right? But he's in the scheme with Stunt. So I look at this and I go this is a big story. You know, 300 million pounds, 300 million dollars worth of art going into the prince's collection, the former or the the future King of England, the future owner of the royal collection, you know, one of the greatest art collections in the world is full of fake art. What's going on here? I don't mess around when it comes to sleep. I want something that's built right, built to last, and that's why I switched to a Brooklyn Bedding mattress. You can literally feel the craftsmanship in their beds. Honest materials, real support, zero gimmicks. They handcraft every mattress in their own factory out in Arizona. No middlemen, no inflated price tags, just solid American-made quality. Mine's got that perfect mix of comfort and support. And the cooling tech is super legit. Their GlacioTex covers and Copperflex foam keep me cool all night long, even in the hot Florida heat. Brooklyn Bedding also gets it. Sleep isn't one-size-fits-all. They've got a sleep quiz that matches you to your ideal mattress under 2 minutes. Plus they back it up with a 120-night comfort trial. So if you don't love it, they'll get it right. Go to brooklynbedding.com and use my promo code DANNY at checkout to get 30% off sitewide. This offer is not available anywhere else. That's brooklynbedding.com and use the promo code d a n n y for 30% off sitewide. Support our show and let them know we sent you. Brooklynbedding.com, promo code DANNY. It's linked down below. Back to the show. So I was at the time exploring making a documentary with uh Keith Davidson, Academy nominated director. And I said, hey look, I have this idea. And he just looks at me, he goes prove it. I go uh not sure how to do that, but I said no problem. Which, you know, is a huge task because A um this kind of stuff is just very hard to prove. >> Yes. >> And B, the royal family has this culture of secrecy around them where their motto is um never complain and never explain. So if something happens you don't [ __ ] about it. You you just ignore it, no comment, not going to happen, nothing's ever going to happen. So I'm thinking, well, how am I going to go prove this? Never complain, never explain. >> Never complain, never explain. So >> That sounds about right. If you want to going back to Prince Andrew's interview about Jeffrey Epstein, that makes perfect sense. And you know, they have they have teams and you know, intelligence apparatus and stuff around them that just they quash everything. So I think, how am I going to do this? But you know, it's a pretty pretty good adventure. And so I started out. I mean, I thought this this is a big story and it's super exciting and I'm really interested in it and I'm just going to go for it. So on my own dime, I just said I'm going to I'm going to go try to do this. And we first contacted James Stunt and we said, hey James, we're doing a thing, you know, it's about art. There was there was some newspaper article that just said, hey, this guy is friendly with James with Prince Charles and lends him stuff and gives him gifts. What's the deal? So I called him up and I said, hey, you know, I'm interested in doing a documentary about great art collectors and I know that you've, you know, lent stuff to Prince Charles, could we talk? He was polite, you know, and he said, well, let me think about it. And then he just was like, no. He's he'd only given one print interview, had never been on camera doing interviews, had never done any press. So he just didn't want to do anything. So I thought, well, all right. How's this going to happen? You know, how am I going to figure this out? Um and then so so I thought, well, okay, I'm going to send somebody to Dumfries House. I'm going to sneak him in and I'm going to have them look around cuz mostly 18th century portraiture. Are they going to have some Picassos or whatever? >> Who's Dumfries again? >> Dumfries House is the headquarters where the stuff was lent to. Oh, got it. >> So I said I'm going to sneak somebody in there, take a look around. Do we see these paintings? Well, of course they went up there, they didn't see anything. So I'm like, well, that's not good, you know, cuz now I'm thinking, did this ever happen? Was this just a scheme that never went anywhere? Did they pull out at the last minute? So we thought, well, what if we went to James Stunt's house? Or his office where he keeps his collection. If it's on the walls it means it didn't happen. He didn't actually lend them. So no story. Mhm. The hard part is getting in there, right? Right. So during this time he was in a feud with the uh press in the UK cuz they were reporting on he was having trouble with money laundering and stuff. There he had been charged >> Shocker. Yeah. He had been charged with money laundering. And so the press was reporting on me. He hated the press. And so he would go on social media every day. He'd go on YouTube and you know, have these hour-long kind of coke-fueled rants. >> Wow. >> Yeah. About >> [ __ ] still on YouTube? >> No, it's pulled down. In fact, I for 2 years I got up every morning at 5:00. He got kicked off YouTube. So then he was on Instagram and he was doing he was doing um lives and stuff. >> Mhm. And they would disappear after 24 hours. So every morning for 2 years I'd get up at 5:00 in the morning and record his lives. You know, I'd capture him on my phone. >> he would wake up the next day and regret doing it and delete it or was it No, well, no, they just last 24 hours. >> Oh, gotcha. I gotcha. I see. So so I'd have to grab them and um now they're all deleted. So I think I'm the only person who who has um you know, the James Stunt collection in my archives. So um but anyway, he would go on social media and one of the crazy things that he was saying was like, I'm going to have I'm going to do a um a polygraph test. I'm going to have a polygrapher come. I'm going to have it filmed and I'm going to prove that all this stuff that the press is saying about me is a lie. It's a lie. So I contacted him. We contacted him and I said, hey we'll come film the polygraph and we'll put it out there if you let us come film your art collection. And he goes, I'm shocked. I I was amazed. He goes, great idea. And so there you go. So now we had our way in to go look at his art collection. And so for 2 days I actually used to as I was saying before, used to work with um Japanese TV. So I had a colleague of mine um you know, be the crew because I couldn't really go in cuz if I go in, if he finds out who I am, you could kind of reverse engineer that I was connected to Tony Tetro, that I'd written some stuff about him and so >> If he knew that you knew Tony, that wouldn't be good. >> He would uh this you know, this smells this smells bad. Um but anyway, so we went for 2 days, we filmed in his house and office. And um we didn't see any of the works. So, we thought, "Aha, I think they actually went to Dumfries house." Um and it was wild because this you know, my crew was in there and he's showing showing them around for 2 days. He's pointing out like another Tony Tetro fake and he's going, "Yeah, I bought this at Sotheby's. I think I paid a million dollars for it. Isn't it great?" All this stuff and I'm like >> knew that the Tony Tetro made them? Oh, yeah. And he was just lying to these people? >> Yeah, yeah. I mean, he bought them. I have millions of emails. I have all the emails with, you know, they're discussing the specific work of art and you know, they're emails with images of the work and he's going, "Oh, yeah, do it like this, maybe like that. Put the stamp on it." And all this other stuff. And he's sitting there talking about how, "Oh, yeah, I, you know, I bought this at Sotheby's. It's a real thing. Oh, I'm so great, you know, I know a lot about art." And all this kind of stuff. Yes. So, you know, we get back and I'm like, "I think we got something." You know, um and I'm pretty excited. And I had a contact through someone, I had a contact who's a senior figure in MI6, which is foreign intelligence in the UK, like James Bond kind of thing. And he was an old guy and I said to him, I said, "Hey, I think this is going on. Do you know people in the palace who could verify this or who I could talk to?" And he came back with this amazing email and um the person wrote back to him, somebody like the right hand, you know, people in the palace wrote back and they said, um "Fawcett, Stunt's right hand guy, who I think was involved, Fawcett the palace, the firm, meaning the palace, the firm know about this. Fawcett will have gotten a rocket, meaning Fawcett would have just been blasted for this, and Jean-Pierre will find all doors closed." Meaning, never complain and never explain. So, we're going to pretend none of this happened. We're just going to pretend none of this happened, it's going to go away. You can't prove it. Those paintings are going to be gone. It's over. So, we thought, "Fuck that, you know, we're not going to just let it go like this." So, we had made contact with some of the press in the UK. And we said, "Look, we have this story, can prove it all. I have millions of documents. I've all this stuff. I've done all this work. I can show you that this has happened. You publish it." And they go, cuz I wanted to force the hand of the palace. I wanted them to have to acknowledge it. >> Right. And so, uh on the Mail on Sunday, you know, we kind of worked the story up with them and they proved it up and they went to Prince Charles's people and they had to acknowledge it and they came back and they said, "We acknowledge it happened. It's extremely regrettable." And you know, we were in London at the time and the editor called me up and he said, "Hey, um tomorrow morning check the paper. Pages 1 to 5, check in there." Okay. So, I'm like, "All right, there's going to be an article somewhere between page 1 and page 5." I look It's literally the entire first five pages of the newspaper, of the largest circulation Sunday newspaper in the UK, is this story. And I mean, it's huge headlines, fake art hits Prince Charles and all this stuff. So, at that point, um you know, we knew we knew we had it. Um and when you do when you do something like that, suddenly, I mean, you I'm sure know this from when you, you know, do something about a story, people come out of the woodwork. And now there's all kinds of stuff that you can find out. And um you know, the the the the the first thing that happened is I was able to find more of his collection. And what I originally thought was that, all right, he he got four Tony fakes in there. I still didn't know exactly what he was doing. I'm like, "Okay, he got four Tony Is he like Are they going to lose them or burn them and then claim insurance, you know? Now you've just made, I don't know, 15, 20 million from some fake works of art that got stolen or burned or whatever?" Interesting. >> That's what I thought. But then I looked at I got all these other documents. So, one of the things that I got was um the assessment of his entire collection. And I'm like, "All right, this guy's got Renoirs, Monets, Picassos." In in the loan, there were 17 paintings. Four of them were Tony Tetro paintings. So, these other paintings, like Van Dyck and stuff like that, like very important paintings. I thought, "Okay, well, those are real. He fluffed it up with some Tony fakes, doubled the value. Okay, he kind of, you know, plumped it up a little." But the reality was when I looked at his whole collection, they were like kind of middling paintings, 10 grand, 20 grand, 30 grand. I think there was one that was maybe like 350 grand. That's a lot of money, but, you know, compared to the rest of this work, it's peanuts. >> were the four of Tony's? What were they supposed to be? There was a Chagall, a um Picasso. >> Picasso, a Dali, and a Monet. Right? So, that was worth 150 million, just that. >> God. >> Right? Yeah, it's a lot of money. It's a ton of money. But I'm still thinking, well, what is he doing and this doesn't make sense that he has these, you know, he's really got kind of cheap paintings. >> Mhm. And um a lot of the paintings were what's called like followers, studio circle followers. So, you and I today could go buy a follower of Rembrandt. Rembrandt's probably the most expensive painting painter in the world. Rembrandt, Caravaggio, 100 millions of dollars, right? 100 million dollars. Um >> I didn't know that. >> Yeah. I thought Picasso was the most expensive. >> No, probably most expensive modern Modern. >> painter, but, you know, old masters like like those guys. I mean, um extremely, extremely expensive. So, you could go buy a studio or circle or follower, not studio for Rembrandt, but circle or follower. And what does that mean? That just means somebody who was around at the time. They liked Rembrandt. Maybe they saw his paintings. They knew that he was great. They'd paint some of his painting, you know, something >> Same time? Same time. >> student or something. >> Could be a student. Could be a, you know, just somebody who's kind of around the milieu. I mean, you're interested in films, you could be a, you know, you could be a a follower of Martin Scorsese, All right. Okay. you have nothing to do with him except for the fact that you >> I'm a fan. >> You're a fan. >> Okay, I got it. So, anyway, you and I could go buy one for 10 grand, right? Now, if it's real, let's say it's 10 million, a Van Dyck. Van Dyck you can buy for 10 10 grand, 6, 7, 8 million if it's real. Well, what's the difference between circle and by the hand of the master? Mostly somebody's opinion. Right? Right. So, So, I'm going to get to it in a minute, but so what happens is >> Opinions can be paid for. You're a wise man. So, what happens is um Stunt had all these studio circle followers and he would go online and he'd talk about like, "Yeah, I'm I'm really great at finding sleepers." Well, what's a sleeper? A sleeper is a painting that's been attributed as studio circle or follower, but it's really by the hand of the master. And Oh, wow. >> Yeah. So, at the same time what I found was Stunt had put together a PowerPoint presentation. He got a financial advisory in London called W. And it's a little PowerPoint presentation. It had the Tony paintings and it had 13 other paintings. And it said, "The Stunt Collection at Dumfries House." And it was a presentation. Well, what's a presentation for? Well, what he was doing, well, so, he's got these paintings there. He's got these Van Dycks in there. Okay? He's got Tony's paintings, got these Van Dycks. And um if they're real, they're worth another 150 million or whatever. But all of these all of these paintings, I mean, we figured out that all of these paintings were actually studio circle and follower that he had gotten one guy who was the former director of the museum, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, at I mean, a big time director, and was the deputy director of um the National Portrait Gallery in London, one of the most important galleries in the world. He was a deputy director. And this guy is buddies with Stunt. Right? He's buddies with Stunt and somehow he's written 14 letters for him saying, "Hey, remember that painting that you bought as a circle at Sotheby's or Christie's for 10 grand? Well, I've looked at it and it's really by the hand of so-and-so. It's really by the hand of Van Dyck. It's worth, you know, 10 million." Right? Now, you find one of those paintings in a generation, it's a big deal. Right? It's a big deal to find what you thought was a $10,000 painting, it's worth 10 million. He's found 14 of them from one collector, verified by one expert. How's that possible? It's not possible, right? Right? And I we found this letter, you know, we took a picture of this letter of Stunt that said from Prince Charles, it said, "Oh James, it was so such a sad thing that you couldn't be there when Malcolm Rogers, this expert, showed up with your paintings at Dumfries House to show them to me and to lend them to me. It's so wonderful of you to do this kind of stuff." You go, "Why is Malcolm Rogers, this eminent director, hanging out with this, you know, crazy cokehead who smokes crack on on his social media and does his crazy stuff? Why is he hanging out with him?" Well, he's getting something out of this thing, you know. So, when I called him up, I said, "Hey, um you know, there's a painting that you had, it's in the catalog raisonné, there's a Van Dyck painting that you had. Um and it was a copy. In the catalog it says it's a copy owned by Malcolm Rogers. Well, how did James Stunt end up with it?" And he goes, "Oh, well, he traded me another painting for it." And I go, "Hm, that's interesting. Well, what painting was it?" And he goes, "It's none of your business." And that's kind of one of the things, you know, one of the reason why people like art, people with a lot of money like art is cuz it's it's not because they love art. A lot of them do love art, but it's not just because they love art, but it's kind of um the last wild west financial instrument. So, you can buy a painting. So, my my theory is there's no there's no record of this, there's no nothing. It's just I give you a painting, you give me a painting, great. It's a gift to you, a gift to me, everybody's happy, right? So, the painting I give you could be worth a dollar and the painting you give me could be worth $10 million. Now you've just given me $10 million, but there's no record of it anywhere, there's no financial catalog, there's no nothing, you know. This is a great way to just like transfer money. Launder money. That's why people use So, you see a lot of financial transactions. Why do rich people Why don't even care about art? Why Why would you Isn't it stupid to pay $50 million for a Picasso? It can't be worth that much money. Well, it is as a financial instrument, right? Cuz now you can You can, for example, buy a piece of modern art. You go, "Well, how the [ __ ] did somebody pay $10 million for that banana taped to a wall?" Right? You see the banana taped to the wall? Okay. In Miami. Yeah, right. So, you go, "Well, how is that possible?" You go, "Okay, well, now you buy that paint You You take that painting, all right? Let's say, I don't know, you buy it for $2 million. Somebody says, "Well, it's worth $10 million." Now you lend it to an institution. Now you have $8 million of, you know, kind of like charitable donation on your books. Nobody really knows what it's worth. You can kind of make it up. It was printed out of thin air. >> It's a immaterial kind of thing. Does it market has no comparable to that? You say it's worth him Is it really? I don't know. But now you have $10 million worth of tax write-off, right? And that's one of the things that people do with art. So, it's used in all of these transactions. The holidays have officially started and that means lots of shopping and get-togethers. And you don't want to be stinking up the aisles after intense decorating. That's why I choose Mando. And if you order using my code, you get 20% off from your pits to your package and everywhere in between. Mando controls body odor for 72 hours, which is perfect for intense shoppers. It's clinical strength, meaning two times better than the standard deodorants. And after just 12 hours, sweat was reduced by 92%. And it doesn't just mask odor, it prevents it. 100% of study participants experienced all-day odor protection. My favorite is their new deodorant plus sweat control solid stick and my go-to flavor is that bourbon leather, baby. It is absolutely pleasant in hot situations. Mando starter pack is perfect for new customers. It comes with a solid stick deodorant, a cream tube deodorant, two free products of your choice like mini body wash and deodorant wipes, and free shipping. And as a special offer for our listeners, new customers get 20% off sitewide with our exclusive code. Use code Danny at shopmando.com for 20% off sitewide plus free shipping. s h o p m a n d o dot com Please support our show and tell them we sent you. Mando's got you covered with deodorant plus sweat control. Say goodbye to sweat stains and hello to long-lasting freshness. Don't let the meat sweats get you this holiday season. Your family and friends will thank you. So, what Stunt do? You know, Stunt took this um fake art and this inflated art, this art that was student follower, whatever, bundled it all up all up into this $300 million thing, thing, lent it to Prince Charles. Now what does he do? Now he goes out to special art lenders, right? So, it's a $350 million uh uh catalog of art. >> Yes. That he loans >> Yeah. to Prince Charles. >> Mhm. And when you say he loans that $350 million worth of art to Prince Charles, >> Mhm. what is he getting in return? The tax write-off? Here's the thing. So, now So, what Here's a tip for uh if you're an evil dude or if you're a, you know, somebody doing funky stuff, pay the people who work for you cuz they know everything. >> Right. So, I located this guy who was the the driver and bodyguard. This is a huge former uh Lith- Lithuanian former bask- professional basketball player who was their bodyguard. And he would hang out downstairs Yeah. >> And Stunt and his guy would be upstairs doing whatever they were doing and they'd send an email down to this guy and they'd say, "Hey, um can you print this document out and then bring it upstairs?" And then email them. So, this guy, who was not paid by Stunt, had a treasure trove of everything. And what it turned out was that, you know, I met the guy and we um uh you know, got to know each other and he sort of opened up about this stuff and gave me these things. But what turn What it turns out happening is that Stunt had this collection. It's now at the royal It's Prince Charles's royal collection, so it's like absolutely above suspicion, right? I mean, there is no better provenance than it is in the royal collection. Right. And all of these experts have said it's good. Right. >> Right, cuz he also made a bunch of fake letters and sold this other stuff. But now he goes out to specialized art lenders in New York because there are people who will lend on your art. You go, "I'm going to lend I'm going to give you my Picasso as collateral. You lend me half the value. If I don't pay you back, you keep the art." >> pawn shop. Yeah. Pretty much. High-class pawn shop with um you know, blue-chip art. Right. >> Nothing more blue-chip than it's in the prince's collection. Prince Charles has it right now. Lend me the money, of course. So, he wanted $161 million. And And the plan all along was I just walk away from it. They keep the collateral. It's not worth anything, you know. So, yeah. >> It's all I did a I did the I did the total sum of what that art was really worth. It was probably worth charitably $2 million. So, you're getting $161 million off of $2 million collateral. It's pretty good deal. You walk away. That's it. Yes. So, that's >> a billionaire. And he's trying to >> Well, you know, his wife was a billionairess. Uh-huh. He was wealthy, but not in that category, but he spent money like, you know, like it was going out of style. >> Was his wife still alive or not? >> Yeah. Yeah, they got divorced. So, when they got divorced, suddenly he's like, uh you know, the gravy train is over, so I got to find access to his money. >> settlement on the divorce, huh? No. And and went through it quick. I mean, the some of the sources were telling me, you know, he'd go out and there'd be drugs and champagne and stuff, you know, 100 grand a night, easy, you know, that's Jesus Christ, man. >> It's pretty You go through money pretty quick at that clip. That's insane. And they also have I forget which movie I was I was watching a movie where they had basically like this offshore vault of people people would keep artwork there. And people would go there, make transactions, and something to do with it being like out of uh like a certain country's territory or jurisdiction. Yeah. Made it a way like a tax loophole or something? Yeah, they're called free ports. Free ports. >> And um yeah, so they're literally basically like extra extra territorial zones at airports, usually. >> At airports, yes. So, the most famous one is in Geneva and that's, you know, that kind of figures in that whole story we're talking about the lost Leonardo, which I have some interesting thoughts on, too. >> Was that in the lost Leonardo documentary, those I believe so. Yeah. So, Yves Bouvier, who was the guy who bought the Leonardo for the Russian, um he made his fortune with that um free port. Okay. >> Yeah. So, there So, a lot of a lot of people who buy import, you know, $50 million pieces of art never have them. They kind of just go to the free port or stay in the free port. They don't pay taxes on them. They don't actually import them into their homes or into their possession. They just leave them there. So, it's really like a I mean, it's like any other financial asset. It's like crypto or whatever. You don't see you don't have it. It's just kind of in this place. >> at this airport. That's so strange, dude. I don't know if you ever saw there was this film and I can't remember the name, but it involves a guy crashing um a big plane into one of these freeports. >> I was thinking about. Yeah. I can't remember the name of that movie though. It was a freaking amazing film. Yeah. So, they have all this state-of-the-art fire suppression like they can evacuate all of the oxygen in like 2 seconds and everything locks and everything is like, you know, biometric. >> Steve, you got to find that movie, bro. Find the movie where they there's a there's a huge firefight in one of these airport freeport vaults where there's like all this like modern art and all this crazy stuff. But yeah, no, that's that's it's such a a wild thing. And the last Leonardo, the um eventually so that that piece, the Salvator Mundi, which was allegedly um they they thought that that was basically drawn by one of Leonardo's students or something like this. >> Mhm. And uh that lady went to go restore it. She stripped a bunch of stuff off it and then basically repainted like 90% of it. And long story short, it ended up in the yacht of uh Muhammad Muhammad bin Salman, Prince of Saudi Arabia. Yeah. For like a half a billion dollars. Yeah. I mean, there there really there's a lot of interesting things about that and you know, everybody has their opinion and I will say I am not an expert at all and I'm just kind of you know, observing um and giving what I sort of think is plausible. But um a lot of people think that that it is actually real. Tony Tetra, the art forger, thinks it's real. Does he really? Yeah. Martin Kemp, who is the foremost um Leonardo expert, I think thinks it's real or think there's very good chance that it's real. >> Martin Kent? Kemp. Kemp. Yeah. Um but you know, I'm not sure and what I what I do find interesting like what you what you say is correct. So, if you take a painting and you restore it to the extent where you've repainted a whole bunch of it. Well, yeah, of course it looks like Leonardo cuz you just painted it to look like Leonardo. >> Yeah. >> I mean, so Right. >> don't know. I'm not saying that's what happened. Her name is Dianne Modestini and um you know, she's very well regarded and I and I don't know anything about this uh from an expert perspective, but I'll just say, you know, you do have to ask the question like if it's been so extensively repainted, I mean, how can what can you really say about the painting? Um you know, somebody like Kemp or Tetra will say that, you know, there are um hallmarks of the work that definitely make it that. But the other thing here is, you know, so it was $450 million. That's a lot of money. That's a lot of money. And what the film gets into, which I thought was really interesting, was a great, you know, great piece of of work was there's a lot of pressure with that kind of money that can be brought to bear when really all you're talking about is opinions. Right? I mean, would $450 million get you to say that Steve's the greatest guy who ever lived? It might make me say that, you know. Tenet, that was the movie. Sorry to interrupt. Uh yeah, this was such a good scene. Play with no audio so you don't get uh copyrighted and make it small. Yeah, this was a Was this a Christopher Nolan movie? I don't remember. >> was, right? Yeah. Yeah, fast forward to like halfway through where they're in that where they're in that vault. Yeah, there it is. Oh, so they can like suck all the oxygen out of it. They they suck the oxygen out and they pump it with So, it Oh, wow. Look at that, dude. Yeah, so they here they are stealing works kind of in the nick of time while all this stuff happens. >> So, you are the real ones? Can they suck the oxygen out of it? Is that real? I wonder. Like if someone's trying to rob it or whatever, they can just like lock the doors and like make you black out. I'm pretty sure, yeah. Yeah, this was wild. This was a wild scene. Yeah. Uh so, the the Leonardo, I mean, when there's that much money at stake there's a lot of pressure that can be brought to bear, right? So, what I thought was really interesting about that film um was that all of these efforts once MBS had bought the painting there was a lot of pressure put by the Saudi government on the French government to make that thing be real. So, if you remember, there was this whole thing about like you know, they're talking about it as the male Mona Lisa. The most famous painting in the world is the Mona Lisa. Yes. >> Well, this thing we're now going to make it be the male Mona Lisa. So, they were trying to get the Louvre to show the piece next to the Mona Lisa, right? And legitimize it. And Who was trying to do this? Muhammad bin Salman. Yeah, because now he owns it. So, he's like, all right, well, now I'm going to make this really valuable. Just having that documented being there would be extremely valuable. >> Yes. Yes. It would be because that's and that's what happens with a lot of pieces like sometimes someone if someone has a questionable painting they might lend it to a museum, you know, under really favorable terms. Why? Because they want it to have that stamp. This was in the you know, this was in MoMA. Right. So, now you've just added value. But anyway, so he's trying to add this value and what they did was they came to the Louvre and the Louvre said, "No." I think they printed they had a book printed up and then they pulled it and they were going to put it in there and then they pulled it cuz they had doubts. So, MBS says to the French government, "Hey, listen, we would consider it a great favor if you maybe suggested to the Louvre that this thing be shown next to the Mona Lisa, right?" And then he said, "And by the way, you know, we are building this huge city in the desert and why wouldn't a French company get that contract, right? You know? >> Right. Let's let's see if we can't do something here." That's kind of what the what the film talks about. And that's how I mean that's the way the whole world works, man. Yeah. And that's what you you know, you think that art is kind of like some some blue blood um kind of specialty pursuit for people with really high sensibilities and it is and it is and they're very genuine and passionate people in art, but there's a whole other part of it. The market is a different animal altogether. I mean, that's really people a lot of people who don't know much or care much about art for art's sake, um you know, use it as a useful as a useful um financial instrument. Right. >> Right. Um yeah, would would art would would this modern art be what it is culturally if it wasn't for the billionaires, the stunt type fellas or the MBS's or the Pope or the Popes for that matter like with the Sistine Chapel, you know? Yeah, I mean, it's a good question. Look, art has all always has to have patrons. I mean, the great art of the past had patrons. Yes. You know, you had Cardinal the Vatican, just every every church in Italy has 12 master paintings, you know, somebody paid for those. Um you know, uh there were great patrons at the turn of the century, you know, industrialists, tycoons and stuff were building museums, you know, Carnegie and all that kind of stuff. They're building museums. So, there's always patrons, but I think it's kind of reached a different level they really aren't that many um ways to transact that are not very traceable or or that are really subjective. Right? I mean, it's it's kind of hard to it's kind of hard you can't carry around $50 million in gold. Can't. It's a huge amount. >> Right. You can roll up a little painting, carry it around across borders, you know, you're fleeing a country or whatever. Hey, you got this thing. So, there's that kind of utility. Um but also, you know, with like know your client uh regulations and money laundering regulations and stuff like that, it's just a lot harder to do funky transactions. Mhm. >> You know, with art, it's so subjective that it's really easy to do. You know, you can make you can make 50 million become 80 million. You can make 20 million become 50 million with the stroke of a pen. Right. And it's all subjective. I mean, there really people talk about comparables and stuff, but I mean, like I said, you know, who's really going to if if somebody pays for it, then that's what it's worth. Yes. >> You know? Right. >> So, you don't know. Right. >> That's one of that's one of the reasons why it's um why it's used so much now. And you know, there's so like I don't know how many people I mean, how many people really experience or um value art in their daily lives like modern art in their daily lives. Not that much for it to have those kind of value. So, a lot of it is about kind of like manufacturing demand, you know, some some guy gets plucked out of obscurity and, you know, a gallery represents him, puts all their money behind it and stuff. So, you have you really do have like a lot of um kind of manufactured value, which then the bottom drops out a lot of times. I was just reading I can't remember who the artist was, but somebody who, you know, 5 6 years ago the paintings are worth 8 10 million dollars. Why? Because, I don't know, Freeze said it was at the time. And now, you know, it's a couple, you know, 50 grand or something like that. So, that that happens a lot more. Right. Seems to me. And then like how rare it is, too, right? Like there's only like if there's one of one of these things of this famous artist that existed in, you know, medieval times, that that obviously for people obviously of of a certain financial class are is going to be super valuable. Um it's kind of like diamonds, right? It's kind of like a weird thing or gold. Like diamonds and gold, it's a weird thing that humans are are obsessed with and the value can go up and down and you can trade on it and it's like you know, and and things like this are they're just like naturally they naturally attract scam artists and con artists and it's the same thing that you've seen with the rise of crypto and NFTs and these NFTs especially, you've seen so many people get caught up in these crazy NFT scams where they like pump up the value in the beginning, give them all out sell them all out to their people and they like pull all the money out and the thing just goes nowhere. And then none of these people even get in trouble. Yeah. No, it's it's it's totally true. I mean, one thing with art and forgers that I find really interesting is that um you know, unlike some other scams where it's just like crypto or whatever and you steal wallets or you have some fake token that isn't worth anything, but you can convince people that it's worth something for a while. The art forger is kind of seen as almost like a kind of like a Robin Hood figure or kind of like an anti-authority figure, right? Because you have this whole world that's created to tell you as a non-expert. The whole world is built up to look like this is really expensive, this is really elite, this is really classy, you don't get it. The experts get it. Here's why it's worth all this money, but you don't get it, right? And the art forger sort of says, "Well, that's [ __ ] and I can prove that it's [ __ ] because I'll make a piece that's fake and you'll talk about how great it is and how, you know, this could only be the great so-and-so because of this and that." And then you go, "Well, no, I made it. So, you know, what you're saying is [ __ ] and you don't know what you're talking about." So, it's really kind of exposing the emperor's clothes. Mhm. And I think people really like that and respond to that, you know? And that's why I think people like it's a little bit of a folk hero, why there's so many films about um art forgers or why it's always an interesting story for people when art forgery happens. Right. >> Cuz it punctures this whole world of [ __ ] >> And it's it's interesting. I like it better than the crypto stuff because the crypto stuff it it's you have just normal everyday folks who are getting scammed. With the art forgers, it's not usually the case, right? Like you're dealing with billionaires and like big institutions and like Yeah, I mean, ultimately lots of lots of people get hurt, but you know, I but really um I mean, yeah, you're absolutely >> with people who are living paycheck to paycheck and like >> absolutely right. I mean, if some rich if some rich guy pays 10 million dollars for a piece that turns out to be fake, I mean, Mhm. is is he going to be out on the street? I doubt it. So, so you're kind of okay with it. Um but yeah. And I mean, and that's like to it's interesting because Tony always says that when he got busted um that uh I I think it was um CNN or somebody did a documentary. And he was in some kind of bar that he hung out with, you know, hung out in and he had the he happened to have the VHS and he was sitting there and um the the um bartender said, "Hey, let's see your VHS." And he's like, "Nah, nobody's going to be interested in this. Nobody's going to be interested in this, you know, no no no." But they put it on, he said, you know, and this was kind of like a blue-collar, you know, beer and sawdust kind of bar and he said that it was just like you could hear a pin drop and everybody kind of loved it, you know, because it is really sort of getting back at these, you know, at rich people and experts and kind of stuff. Mhm. So. Yeah, the snobs. Yeah. Most premium shirts make you choose between looking good or feeling good. True Classic said screw that. Their goal was simple, make gear that fits right, feels great, and doesn't empty your wallet. And that's why I love wearing True Classic. They don't accidentally sell 25 million shirts to more than 5 million customers with over 200,000 five-star reviews. And what I like most isn't just about the clothing, it's about the confidence. You throw one of these things on and it just fits. Tailored where you want it, relaxed where you need it. No weird stiffness, no boxy cuts, and no nonsense. I've been wearing True Classic for a while now. Between recording days, casual days, even going out to dinner, their clothing is the perfect middle ground between going to the gym or going out for a fancy meal. It looks sharp, it feels soft, and it moves with your body. And now they've got lines for women and kids, too. Same comfort, same quality for everyone. So, this holiday season skip the overpriced designer stuff. Give comfort, give confidence, give True Classic. Find them at Amazon, Target, Costco, or for the best deals go to trueclassic.com/danny. That's t r u e c l a s s i c.com/danny. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. What So, um whatever happened to Tony? Did he did he get um charged with anything and go to prison? Yeah, uh you mean well, he got busted in 1989. Oh, wow. >> In 1989, he got busted. Um and he um because somebody wore a wire. Uh on him. One of the one of the guys. So, the interesting thing about Tony is that Tony never really fooled anybody with his paintings. Never fooled anybody. The dealers and Beverly Hills galleries and everywhere else would come to him and say, "Hey, Tony, make me a I need a Picasso. I need some Dali, I need some Miro." And they knew they could get them from him. So, they'd come to him and then they were the ones selling him selling selling the paintings, right? So, one of those guys got busted and wore a wire. Ratted on him. >> Yeah, ratted on him. And Tony, who's this Italian-American guy from kind of a mob town in upstate New York, said, you know, "It is ingrained in the DNA of every Italian kid from Fulton, New York that you never rat. The only time you rat is never." That's what he said. Um but uh so, this guy wore a wire, he ended up pleading and actually got off pretty easily. He he did a year. That's kind of an amazing picture. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, Tony only did a year? He only did a year um because he had gone he had been through like 5 years of trial. Oh, wow. >> the judge kind of had had mercy on him. And, you know, it was it was debatable who was um really at fault on a lot of these things. So, I think they went a little a little easy on him. You know, it's kind of cool, you know, his story is kind of cool. And uh I can imagine his paintings a Tony Tetro Picasso could be worth a lot of money now, you know? I mean, that's what he does now. So, when he got out of jail, he went he went clean cuz he was like, "This time I got off fairly easy." He went legit? Yeah, I don't want to I don't want to be here again. So, he, you know, he would paint That's why he ended up painting these paintings for Stunt. So, you know, before that he had another very wealthy client, uh tech billionaire in Texas, who um you know, had a bunch of mansions and stuff and he I think painted 99 paintings for him. Jesus. So, you know, there's a very good living to be made making plausible forgeries, emulations for people who wanted to have art in their house. You know, some people want to have like maybe they have a piece, maybe it's in the free port, maybe they want to put it on their wall, Right. >> But they don't want to pull the thing out of insurance, they don't want to insure it, they don't want to worry about it. So, they get a Tony Tetro. And whatever happened to Stunt? Stunt um was on trial. I mean, this was a big problem for our documentary. So, our documentary is still not released I know. because Because of him? Yes. Oh my god. Because the reason it's not released is because um when after we released the the the story to the press, COVID hit. So, we couldn't film for a year. That's when I wrote the book uh Con Artist Mhm. um about Tony. Um and when we kind of came back online, Stunt was then on trial for money laundering, the biggest money laundering trial in British history. Really? Yeah. And it was him and four co-defendants. So, while he was on trial, we could not release the film. There are very very very stringent laws in the UK about contempt of court. So, while someone's on trial, we could not >> Even if it's in America? >> Yeah. Well, technically we probably could have shown it in America. Uh-huh. Possibly, but the studio chose not to. Oh, okay. Oh, you're working with the studio. >> Right. So, this trial took forever. Finally, the trial came back. Guilty or innocent, didn't matter to us, right? Cuz we the trial would be over, we could show the film. >> Right. Well, what happened? Trial the jury came back hung. And the Crown Prosecution Service said, "We're going to retry him. And we're going to retry him in 2 years." So, two and a half years later, which was just, you know, a few months ago, the trial finally ended. And where's he at? >> Stunt was acquitted. All of his co-conspir- all of his associates were found guilty. Um the banks who were involved were all fined, had huge hefty fines. And he walked. No. >> Yes. [ __ ] way. >> Correct. And the attempted fraud, the alleged attempted fraud uh with the art was never prosecuted because the um the lenders never consummated the loan. And so they just said, "Ah, forget it. We'll let it go." >> Mhm. So, Stunt's walking around free as a bird. Probably not rolling as hard as he used to be. >> Nope. Nope. >> Is this him on the right? Yeah. He looks kind of young there. That that was a younger photo. >> And the one on the left is as he looks now. >> on the left looks like he's had a little bit too much plastic surgery. Yeah, I think there were some problems with the septum. Oh, the deviated septum. He had to get a new nose. Or find a better way to get the coke in his body. Jeez. >> because he would go, you know, he would go on his social media and say, "Yeah, I look It was I mean, the social media was a unbelievable. I can imagine. >> It's unbelievable. He's you know, you'll see it in the film, but you know, he gets on there and he goes like, "Do I love cocaine? Yeah, I love it. Do I shag prostitutes? Yeah. Do I sleep with royalty? Yes, I do." You know, all this kind of stuff. And you know, he's like sitting there in one shot. He's sitting there and he's smoking a you know, um a foil thing off of a bottle. And he's going like, "I'm just sitting here kicking it, chilling, smoke some crack and listening to some NWA gangster rap, as you do." As one does. >> As one does. >> As a billionaire does. >> Yeah. So, I mean, that's kind of his persona and He's a guy who didn't earn any of the money that he has. No. He he got it all out of the divorce from his super rich wife. Well, yeah yes and no. I mean, his his father It's interesting cuz his father was a self-made man from Brixton, which was, you know, um middle-class working-class part of London. You know, made it big, made his fortune. Um sent James to a fancy school. Which he It's funny. I mean, he's actually a pretty funny guy. Um he said, uh "The students there were like cream, rich and thick." Thick meaning dumb. But you know, so he kind of that's the milieu that he ended up in. And then when he married Yeah, so he was wealthy. But when he married Petra, it was like a completely, you know, completely different um stratosphere. Um yeah, so they had like a I don't know, $15 million wedding at this castle in in Italy. And you know, the Black Eyed Peas helicoptered in to play and Right. Right. >> stuff like that. And then they bought this house, they had all this stuff in London. He used to drive around London in a cavalcade of cars. So, you know, he'd go to Sotheby's or whatever, he'd be in this carbon fiber Lamborghini. He'd have Rolls on both sides, and then all that surrounded by um Land Rovers. And that's how he'd pull up at Sotheby's or where he'd go get a pack of cigarettes or whatever. So So, that's what he used to do. And now that those days those days are over, I think. Wow. There's something There's a There's a connection between just like a an absurd amount of wealth and degeneracy with people. Where like I don't think it's I don't think it's good for people to uh to have that much. You know, like there's like a there's a sweet spot, right? And when you get a little bit too far, depending on your psychology, I mean, I'm sure a lot of people can handle it, right? But a majority of people cannot handle that kind of wealth. I mean, I think it'd be hard. You've You've you know, done your own stuff. I mean, you have achieved things, I've achieved stuff. You know, you got to you know, there's some value to be said for you got to wake up, you got to work hard, you got to be there. This may or may not work. You got to be able to take the risk. You know, you got to work really hard. I >> I mean, that builds a >> some of the best people I know, most interesting, fun people I know spent most of their lives poor. Sure. You know? Yeah. You got to You got to come up, you know. >> But I can you know, the funny interesting thing is I can equal I can say the most [ __ ] up degenerates I've met are also poor, you know? Like but also rich, you know? Like I know some very degenerate rich people. So, the spectrum is broad. You can't just You can't just paint a broad brush over that. But um >> But yeah, I mean, this this guy is a really um he's a really interesting character because I think like, you know, I I think that he genuinely wanted to He He mentions kind of like being cast in this new world. You know, and he was around Petra's friends who were all [Music] wealthy, very wealthy people and people who knew like a lot about art and knew about all these things. And I think he was kind of thrust into that and felt like, "Oh, well, I want to I want to prove myself or I want to show that I know about something." And I think his initial and one of his earliest friends and dealers, art dealers, said that you know, he in the beginning it seemed like he had a genuine kind of like passion for art. You know? Yeah. But then sort of saw the various uses or the various ways that you could, you know, you could do things Mhm. with art that were less than, you know, Right. >> the up and up. And you know, even some somebody like Tony like So, when Tony started out, he he loves He's very passionate about um about art and very passionate in a kind of like artisan's way. Like he wants to know, "How did he do this?" Or "Look at how he did that. How did How did he mix that color and do it in such a light texture?" And all those kinds of things. And you know, he went into the world, he got his girlfriend pregnant at 16 and became a father. Tony? Yes. So, he's like, "Okay, I got to go make a living." He was selling furniture and he was being a milkman and all this [ __ ] He's like, "I can't do this for the rest of my life." So, on the weekends he would do these paintings, you know? He'd go to an art fair or whatever. And people would go like, "Yeah, I'll give you 20 bucks for this Monet or whatever that he'd worked on for 3 months." >> Yeah. And um you know, so then he read this book. One day he's at the supermarket. He's just sitting there bored, you know? And he looks over and he sees this book. It's real colorful and it has a Modigliani on it. He picks it up. It's like it's called Fake. It was about this famous art forger called Elmyr de Hory. And he opens it up and he's just like entranced. And he goes home and he just like basically reads it through the night. It's about this art forger and how he did it. And he just goes, "I could do this. I'm going to do this." So, he just does it, you know? And um it's really interesting because he brings the painting He brings the drawing. It was a Modigliani drawing. And he brings it to this guy. And uh he goes, "Yeah, you know, he's like 20, 22 years old. He brings it to this guy and he says, um "My grandfather's getting rid of all his stuff so it doesn't end up in probate, you know, he's about to die. And I think this thing is worth some money. What do you think?" And the guy goes, uh you know, he has this like European accent. And he's like, "Well, you know, perhaps it's worth You know, I don't know. Maybe I can give you $1,600." You know, and he's like, "Oh, okay." And inside he's like, that's more money than he's ever had. You know, it's like five times his rent. He's like, "Okay." So, he takes it. He's out of there. And he said he was like he was like floating on clouds, you know? And he's like, "It's going to work. Like this is my whole new life." He gets home, the phone's ringing. And this guy founds it found out that it was fake from somebody else, long story. But finds out it's fake. And now he's like, "You [ __ ] You think you're going to sell me a fake easy? You're going to work for me now." And he's like, "The whole European thing was the whole European thing was fake. And he's just this fake guy, you know?" And he's like, "All right, you're going to have to work for me now." And so he makes him he makes him make fakes for him for the next couple of years. And that's how Tony learned to become an art forger was through his apprenticeship with this guy. Who, you know, was just selling these things out at his auction house, you know? And he made him be a shill at his auction. Oh, really? >> Yeah. Yeah, they'd be having an auction or something. Okay, you raise your paddle and you bid bid everything up. Yeah. Wow. >> But that's how he learned to do this, you know? That's so wild. >> So, you see that, you know, there are there are legitimate people in the art world, lots of them. And truly passionate, knowledgeable people. But there are also a lot of people who, you know, it's pretty easy to cut some corners. >> there a specific time period when the majority of these super valuable pieces of artwork created? Because I don't have like a I don't have a a good understanding of like when Picasso, DaVinci, um and some of these others were like Like when Like What was the one that you were saying was the most most valuable? Like Caravaggio? Caravaggio, and then was Rembrandt one of them you were saying you were saying earlier? Yeah. Was that Was this all like enlightenment mid middle uh 1600s, 1700s. >> 16 1700s, and then I think DaVinci was like 14 1500s. >> 1400s, 1500s, yeah. So, you had like Renaissance. Um but there's So, there's a whole there's a whole spectrum. There are important and valuable antiquities, you know, Greek and Roman antiquities and stuff like that. >> Yeah. >> Then you have really um Like how far back do these paintings go? Like how far back do they survive? Yeah, I I mean, you you have you have stuff valuable objects from, you know, uh BC era. Um but in in terms of like real like oil on canvas, oil on wood European painting, you know, the the really the 1300s, 1400s. The Renaissance is the peak, so that's when you have, you know, Michelangelo and DaVinci and you know, um Pa- Pontormo, Parmigianino, all these people. >> Yeah. Right. And then you have Baroque, Caravaggio, you know, you have like the Dutch painters, Rembrandt and all these people. Then you get into, you know, um uh uh Impressionist paintings, which are in the late 1800s. Then you get into modern modern painting in the 1900s. Somebody like Picasso early periods, you know, '10s and '20s, and then, you know, all the way into the '70s. I don't remember exactly when he passed away, but some something like like that. But, so there's a whole spectrum of of valuable painting, you know. We had a guy in here who was a forensic pathologist a couple months ago, and he was um Do you remember the painting, Steve? He He was Basically, he tracked a painting a painting that was done I don't I don't remember the date, but it was done with uh the remains of one of the French kings' hearts. Somebody bought the heart of one of the French kings, um and they took the heart and they ground a part of it up into paint, and they used the shades of red in this painting to paint with this heart. So, this guy did in a forensic analysis of the painting to make sure it was real. And put under the microscope, did all the stuff that forensic pathologists do, and he could find the the muscle fibers of this king's heart in the red pigments of this painting. It was an insane. That's amazing. >> Okay, it was Louis what? Whatever that is. XIV. Louis the 15th's heart to make paint. Just go down to the first paragraph so you can we can just like explain to people. Yeah, the 17th century French monarch was called the Sun King, but his heart ended up in a shadowy setting. According to the most According to the most celebrated forensic scientist in France, fragments of Louis the 15th's heart was ground up by a second-rate artist to make the color called mummy brown for the use in painting now hidden in the basement of a small museum in the Paris region. I love that they call him a second-rate artist. Crazy, man. I mean, it's really interesting because especially with with forgery, so you know, you can you can do forgeries of any of those periods, right? It's harder to do with old paintings just because you have old materials, right? So, you have to get those original materials. Right. Um forgery as Tony used to do it is no longer really possible. It's pretty much impossible because there's so much technology to that you can bring to bear now. Yeah. Okay, so when in the past when they wanted to make a pigment for blue, they would take lapis lazuli, which is a stone, and they would grind it up into fine powder, and they would emulsify it in oil, linseed oil, lilac oil, whatever oils, and that's what your paint is. Basically, powders in oil. Okay, that's what an oil painting is. Well, now they can tell Did that In the past, that lapis lazuli came from one mine in Afghanistan, and it would get traded all the way over to Europe. And so, therefore, it was extremely expensive. It wasn't used that much. But, it came from this one mine. You could identify it. Well, now you have a database of all these materials, so you can look at a painting. Let's say the painting says, "Oh, it's a uh 1420 painting with this blue in it." Well, you can look at the blue and you go, "Well, you know what? That lapis lazuli comes from a mine that's in Peru. So, there's no way that it could have been real, right? It's lapis lazuli, it's good, but it can't be real because it's from a mine that was in Peru before the discovery of the of the New World by Europe, right? So, it couldn't have been That material could not have been in that painting." So, there's all of this stuff that you can do with technology now that makes that kind of art forgery almost impossible. Like I'm working and I'll and I'll tell you about this this Pollock thing that I'm working on now, which ties into this this the CIA um the the CIA operation. Mhm. Um but you know, you can look at a piece of wood and you can tell exactly what date that was. Right. You can tell did that piece of wood come from a forest in Poland, or did it come from a forest as it did a lot like in the Renaissance and stuff? Did it come from a forest in Washington state? Even if it's an ancient piece of wood, there's no way that that could have made it into a painting like that. So, you can just tell a lot more now. Mhm. Um that makes this kind of stuff um impossible. And then there's, you know, um database and just the existence of interconnectingness of the internet, you can just have access to databases and stuff that weren't possible before. Tony says that in the past, he was able to just kind of say like, "Well, where'd you get this painting?" "Oh, it's it's from an Italian family who wishes not to be named." And they go, "Oh, well, there's a dead end, so I guess Right. >> We'll never know." And you get away with it. Yeah. Yeah, totally. You know, this whole there's a whole parallel world that exists to this in ancient texts. I had this Dead Sea Scrolls expert on here, and uh and he was explaining a very similar situation where this guy was buying these Dead Sea Scrolls, and uh and he This guy had to like do some crazy Mission Impossible where he had to go pick them up from this person, and then like and take them across um France or something, wherever they were, to this uh this place where they were going to analyze them and all this stuff, and they ended up This guy paid millions of dollars for these fragments, and they found out that they were fake. And they have like specific ways of figuring I mean, these weren't like any kind of like They weren't using AI or anything like that. They were like very rudimentary ways of detecting it under a microscope, like seeing like if this uh this paper or this animal skin has like inden- indentations or like tears in the actual fiber itself, and the ink goes over that perfectly, you know that it was written on it after the degradation of it versus like, you know, normally, you would look at the text and you would see that like the actual ink had been impacted by that degradation of the actual paper or the animal skin. So, like there's all these interesting ways of detecting it. And another thing that throws a whole 'nother monkey wrench into the ancient text stuff is you have countries and cultures that are incentivized to make sure these are real because it props up their whole religious belief. So, like and then you I mean, that goes along with the billionaires, too, who are like very devout in their religious faith or whatever it is. They want They This needs to be real and from this time period, or else that kind of like kicks a leg out of my whole fundamental belief in God or whatever their belief is. Yeah. Yeah, it's true. And I mean, that that's that kind of um I mean, what would you call I guess like institutional um support for something, you know, exists in the art world, too. You know, there's if you if you put um paintings under uh black light, you can see the new paint. It kind of glows. >> Mhm. Right? So, people say like if you went through if you went through a museum with a black light, I mean, the whole thing would just start start glowing. You know, cuz there's been so much restoration all that kind of stuff, and at a certain point, you kind of go like, "Look, this thing's been in the collection for a couple hundred years. You know, it's an important painting. There's no reason to not believe it or whatever. So, you uh I mean, like >> We'll leave it alone. I've been to the Louvre. If I would When I looked at the Mona Lisa, I would have no clue if I was looking at the real one or the print of it, you know? And I bet you 99.9% of people wouldn't, either. Well, so that's I mean, that's a really interesting topic, too, because you go like, you know, what is the value of art? And there's all this philosophy at the turn of the century when when people started being able to take really good photographs, right? Cuz before, paintings were the only means by which you could make a real likeness of someone. I want to remember this person. I want to commemorate this person. I want to laud them, right? I want a big monumental painting of their likeness. We had to have a painting. You couldn't do a poster. You weren't going to take a photo, right? So the So one of the values of art was how realistically could you reproduce what someone looked like. For hundreds of years, you know, until the impressionists and stuff, that's what mattered. Now you get a photograph and go, "Whatever. I can just take a picture of this person. I don't need your your painting." So you go, "Well, what's the value of this work of art?" And there was this famous thing called the "Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction." And the idea was that, "Okay, well, if there's no like utility, I'm not using this just to show me what a person looked like, what's the value of art?" And one of the things that they say is that it's like a relic. It becomes like a relic, like a piece of the cross or the the robe of a saint. Yeah, exactly. Or Michael Jordan's sneaker, right? That's a relic. And so is that what the artist's worth? And if it's worth that, is it you know, how does that change everything? And and also, you know, how does that incentivize people to really believe that it's real? You know, like you get an autograph. I mean, I don't I'm I'm a soccer guy and I have some autographs from guys, you know, that like gave me their autograph. But You usually take a picture of them while they're signing it. >> Yeah. Is it any different than just anything? I mean, you know, I don't know. What is it? Is they touched it? I mean, what's the value? You got to ask yourself that and think about it in terms of art. It's hard to rationalize it, right? But it's a it's a weird thing that's wired into us. You know, it's like wired into our DNA that these types of like rarities or or the older something gets, the more valuable it is or like the more rare or gold. Like why is gold more valuable than anything else? Like it's so weird. I refused to buy a diamond ring for my wife. I was just like and she doesn't care. She's she's she makes jewelry and stuff and she didn't care either, but it's like, yeah. I mean, this was such a racket. Yes, it is. It was manufactured, you know, there's a lot of history about this how it's manufactured demand, you know, that didn't exist until I mean, some would existed, but not like like today. Mhm. Um and I think similar things happened with art, you know, art as well and the art market. >> this friend who uh collects these ancient Egyptian vases. I don't know if you've ever seen these or heard of these. These were found um underneath a lot most of them were found underneath the step pyramid in Egypt. This is a 3D print uh remake. But um they found these and they're made of granite. And they're like, "Wow, like that's pretty precise. Like they and they were dated to 4,000 BC, so 5,000 years ago. Um and so predynastic granite vases. And they were like, you know, according to all of the Egyptologists and all of the archaeologists and historians, those people in that time, they were using pounding stones and [ __ ] right? So like that's one of the hardest stones on Earth. It looks pretty symmetrical to the naked eye. Let's take it to like a one of these aerospace places and get a light scanner on it and see how accurate it really is. They did that. They got they did CT scans on it. You name it, the whole bit. And they found out that they were perfectly symmetrical from top to bottom within the deviation of less than a human hair. Basically, if you wanted to recreate that out of granite today, you would need to do that on a computer or a CNC machine. Uh it would have to be 3D printed on CAD, right? So like it's there's this huge rift now in like in in historians and and Egyptologists of people like claiming like uh they they're trying to deny this that they're that perfect and let they they put all those files out on the like on the internet for public to look at and scrutinize and no one's debunked it, but like there's a a certain sect of archaeologists and Egyptologists, older ones, who were like just like purposely trying to pretend it doesn't exist because it sort of like destroys the whole timeline of humanity and especially in in Egypt, the whole timeline of Egypt. >> Yeah. Yeah, I mean, there's I think that there's a um there's a resistance in any field when expertise is is questioned. I Look, I am a I am a a uh big stickler for uh evidence that can be repeatable. And, you know, documentary evidence and all that kind of stuff. That said, that said, there is always an orthodoxy that kind of um is resistant. I mean, I think it's incumbent upon every but journalists and everybody alike to you have to do the work and you have to prove stuff and not just kind of like, "Oh, you know, small or what ifs or small inferences." I mean, it doesn't Right. >> You like you got to prove it. You got to prove it. But if you do prove it, there is still a lot of a lot of resistance. So I'm doing this work now as mentioned that Pollock piece. Um I don't know if you want to get into it or >> Oh, hell yeah. >> Okay. All right. So um I uh You think we take a break for a second? >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. >> Take a quick We'll take a We'll be right back. All right. So let's jump back into the show. We're back. Um we were going to talk about Pollock and the CIA. Sure. So you you know a little bit about this topic, it it sounds like, but um some of it is I think overblown and some of it that some people make a little too much out of it. That's my personal opinion. But um so I started looking at this because because of my book Con Artist and because of the James Stunt investigation, uh I have been contacted by some collectors who will say, "Look, I'm thinking about buying this piece or, you know, I've been introduced to this piece. What do you think? You know, use your investigative chops or whatever and see if see what you can find out about this thing. Does it seem real or does it seem uh you know, potentially fake?" So a person brought to me a Pollock purported Pollock not in the catalog. There are a lot of fake Pollocks out there. There are a lot of really bad fakes. There are some pretty good ones. Um but so he brought me this Pollock that had been in Switzerland. And it came out of Switzerland. It had a provenance behind it that it showed up in Switzerland in the early '50s, mid-'50s. It had been in some prominent families in Switzerland. And it had some marks on it from the US consulate and a couple of people. So I started looking at this, you know, what what could this thing be? And, you know, it turns out that um in the post-war period, um the you know, there was a Cold War on and it was really for the hearts and minds of people. Propaganda war. >> Yeah. Exactly. It was a propaganda war and and some of the main propaganda war was being fought for the hearts and minds of intellectuals. So, you know, the Soviet Union was saying like, "Look what Western democracies wrought." You know, so what we need is a world where the artist is working for the greater society and is doing basically like a political act which is for the people. And so what Americans wanted to show was like, "No, really our method is the best whereby we let people be very free. Yes. And you just can do whatever you want. You can be a leftist. You can be on the right. You can do whatever, but our society says it's we get better, richer, smarter, happier when we give people freedom." And so the CIA wanted to counter kind of like, you know, Soviet realism with an art form that would appeal to these people and they looked at abstract impressionism expressionism like, you know, what Jackson Pollock was doing. And they're like, "Well, here's this artist. He's a leftist. He's kind of a cowboy kind of guy, you know, he's from Wyoming. He's a big drinker, masculine guy and he does these paintings that are so free they don't even have to mean anything. They they don't represent anything. They're not impressionist. This are not here's an impressionistic view of a landscape. They're just like pure expression." >> Can you find a photo of Jackson Pollock, Steve? I've never actually looked at a photo of him. >> Yeah. He's he's from Wyoming originally and was, you know, kind of like a cowboy kind of guy before he came to New York. >> Yeah, he was like a he drank too much, but I mean, he died because of it. >> Um but, you know, he was like like a a heavy drinking, masculine, tough guy sort of sort of vibe. And so they thought, "Okay, well, you know, we need to push these paintings." And their initial steps at kind of pushing modernism were really terrible and ham-fisted. And there were all these senators who came out and said like, hey, your taxpayers bought this crap. Your taxpayers bought these crappy paintings and brought them around and stuff. So, the CIA said, hey, if we're going to do this, we're going to have to do this kind of on the on the down low. And what they did was they set up all of these foundations and stuff that were really CIA um fronts to support gallery shows and symposiums and magazines and newspapers and stuff. Like famously the uh Paris Review um was uh a CIA front and founded by these things. And what's what I found So, anyway, I started doing a lot of research about this particular Pollock painting and I went and looked in the archives of MoMA and Crystal Bridges and at the Pollock Foundation out in Long Island and stuff. And you know, you kind of I kind of started looking at all of the communications um between all of these people and I mean, there isn't anything that crazy nefarious in my mind Mhm. here. Um but uh you know, they just kind of they just kind of started pushing this as much as they could um but without really kind of telling anybody that it was the the government that was behind this stuff. And what was really interesting to me was >> Because these people were fundamentally against the government and the wars and everything that was going on. >> Y- yes. So, you could you could kind of show like somebody like J- Jackson Pollock, he's a leftist. He's you know, he's a guy who Anti-CIA probably. >> Yes. Yes. Um and so, you could you could use him. I don't think he was in on this. I don't think there was any big, you know, hey guys, uh okay Jackson, we're calling you in for a meeting and this is what we're going to do. It wasn't like that at all. >> be a useful idiot. Yes. As I am. As we all are. But um what was kind of interesting was if you look at all of the people who founded the Museum of Modern Art and um the foundations that were related to them almost all of them were wartime intelligence operatives. So, you know, they were in in intellectuals. They were not out there, you know, trudging with guns through trenches. They were fighting uh a cultural war during the war and afterwards. And they just kind of kept doing that um uh as as they went forward. So, the Museum of Modern Art formed what was called the International Program. And that International Program sort of took money and funneled it into these different organizations that then put on shows um by Pollock. So, what I end up when I what I ended up finding with um my painting that I was looking at was, you know, there's a pretty plausible case for this being um one of those paintings that ended up going over to Europe and then ended up through Switzerland um through the console. So, they were using governmental agencies like the consoles and stuff to put these thing to put these shows on, to receive the paintings and you know, they're all like um letters where somebody's like, hey, I want to know the price of these paintings that were in this show and they're like, well, why don't you just ask the consulate? So, it was very much kind of like this governmental, you know, like why does the consulate have the prices of these Jackson Pollock paintings that appeared in the show in Paris? Mhm. And it's because they were kind of, you know, using using this soft power um stuff. So, I don't I don't think it's a big um cloak and dagger, you know, Mhm. spy kind of situation, but I think it's just another one of these kind of soft power governmental things. But what I found, I mean, the thing's kind of interesting is there is a very plausible case for this painting. And I, as a person who likes evidence, goes, that's great. I can make up a story about anything. But now let's go take a look at this at at the actual what paint is there. Is this wood from the period? Is this paint real? You know, cuz Jack- the the one thing that's cool about Jackson Pollock is if somebody had the bright idea because he painted on the floor. He had just unstretched canvas, just cloth on the floor and he would drip paint on the floor and use sticks and things to kind of spatter paint and whatever. The studio has all kinds of paint on the floor. Right. >> So, a few years ago somebody went, took samples of all that paint and did what's called >> Oh, his studio is still intact? >> Yes. Wow. >> Yes. So, they went and they took all those paint samples and they did what's called Raman spectroscopy. It's an imaging thing that gives you basically signatures of elements. So, you can go, okay. >> makeup or whatever. Correct. So, you can go, okay, well, this paint in this painting that I'm looking at has the exact same paint as the paint that's on the studio floor. And they also did that analysis on a couple of um known Pollock paintings. So, one of them is called Alchemy 1A. Yeah, there you >> That's wild, dude. >> So, you can you can do that. So, I have been working with a uh a well-known university laboratory that does you know, kind of Nobel um level research not related at all to art because I wanted to go to I wanted to go to a place that did not deal with art because for a lot of reasons. >> Yes. One of them being that, you know, it's my impression that you can in some places buy the result you want. So, I didn't want to have any bias or any, you know, kind of previous knowledge or any, you know, these people don't care about this. It's it's an art thing. It's interesting to them, but it's not what they do. So, they can look at it in a dispassionate way. And at every to my much to my surprise at every step it kind of keeps going forward. Yes, it matches the paint. Does the blue match? Yeah, the blue matches. Does the red match? Yeah, the red matches. It matches the floor and it matches Alchemy 1A or whatever. And so, you keep going forward and then, you know, you do this radiocarbon dating. Yeah. So, and the thing that's interesting about radiocarbon dating is that because there was a lot of um nuclear testing starting in the late '50s into the '60s um there's a very specific signature from that blast of stuff that was, you know, the it's not present in stuff that started that that came earlier. Interesting. >> So, if you find if you do radiocarbon and you're looking for isotope 14, carbon 14, if you're looking for carbon 14 and it's not there, then it probably predates. And then they stopped atmospheric >> Anything? Yeah. Like any anything? >> Mo- most stuff I I think. >> Wow. Again, no expert, but you can do it on paint, you can do it on linen, you can do it on the wood um of the stretcher bars and stuff. But what's also interesting is that you can um because they then stopped testing it kind of died off, right? So, depending on where that level of carbon 14 is, you can sort of say, well, I think that's probably 1962 to 1964. In our case, the painting is, you know, supposedly from um '48, '49. So, if you find evidence of lots of nuclear testing, couldn't have been, right? Because that would have been after. So, it's really interesting that you can do all of these things, you know, whereas before you would just kind of say as an expert, yes or no. Now you can actually do all of these things which are, you know, kind of irrefutable science. So, I went and I did all the stuff that I know about and, you know, yes, this kind of makes sense. Here's all this evidence. Here's notes saying that these paintings were sent from Switzerland from France to Switzerland. They were sent to the consulate and all this kind of stuff. That gets you somewhere there, right? But then when you really look at the paint, all that other stuff, that's, you know, that's kind of where the rubber hits the road. But but and here's art. Here's where art is interesting. A lot of people will tell you like, that's all well and good. That's fine. However, if the experts with connoisseurship their eye don't like it good luck. You know, good Just be yeah, despite having all the evidence. >> how much scientific data you have. >> Good, yeah, good luck. >> You have to have the people connected to the institutions. Yeah, and Give you the the the nod. >> Yeah, and also because I think part of that is um you know, I think it's good to have like all of it. All of it, but I think there's also some reluctance on the part of some institutions to say like, yes, okay, you you did not use us in any part of this or you did not sort of get our okay, so therefore we are withholding it. And then there's a lot of other stuff like famously the uh the Warhol Foundation. Um I don't How how can I say this without getting sued? Um There there are foundations not necessarily the Warhol Foundation, but there are foundations that are charged with verifying and authenticating paintings. So, you'll give them a painting and you sign a paper which says, hey, you give us this painting. You want us to authenticate it. If we don't think it's real, you authorize us to destroy it. And you And you got to sign that. If you don't sign that, they won't even look at it. So, you know, it's a little bit of a risk to take and there is very often, you know, controversy about about this stuff. So, there are foundations where the people who make up the foundation may never have been close to the artist. They may be own a bunch of the work, but they didn't know the artist, they weren't around during the artist time or just at the very end of the artist life and they're um refusing to authenticate stuff by people who were collaborators of the artist or um you know, worked with them or were around and they go, "Yeah, I had this painting was given to me by so-and-so and it's 100% looks real everything real, but they don't like it because well, we own all these pieces and if now there's a whole bunch of work coming from here, it devalues our stuff." So, there's a lot of there's a lot of funny business. >> So, if I pay $100,000 for a Jackson Pollock painting Mhm. and I want to send it to the Jackson Pollock Institute them to verify if it's real or not. I have to sign a piece of paper that says, "If they determine it's not real, they can destroy it." Uh I don't think the Jackson Pollock Well, there is no Jackson Pollock Foundation. >> Well, like this is like a but >> for any artist. Like this is like a hypothetical. >> Chagall for sure. Really? >> send it to yeah, you send it com- Comité Chagall you have to sign a paper that says, "If we feel it's not real um we will destroy it and you have to be okay with that. You >> god, imagine the level of corruption that goes on with that. Well, yeah, I mean um Yeah, I I don't know. I don't know that there is any, but there could be. There might be, you know, there is that potential. Yeah. You know, I don't know that there is, but >> Yeah. You know. >> Somebody was explaining to me how there was a you know, this gets into the whole um the thing about like how you were explaining earlier when there is like extreme utility in doing a photo or a a portrait of somebody cuz you can't take photos. Um the person who can do it the most accurate um that would be the most valuable uh piece of artwork. Um but now like there is no utility in something like that, right? Like it's with especially with AI. And there was a I think it was a Warhol documentary where they literally had an AI narrate the whole documentary as if it was Andy Warhol in his voice. Yes. Yes. That's creepy. >> That's correct. And I mean, there's a whole bunch of there's a whole bunch of other um other AI work that's happening now. So, you can train there two examples that I know about that were pretty interesting. And the first one was there's an artist called Egon Schiele, Austrian artist um in the early uh 1900s. He did these beautiful pencil drawings. Really really amazing artist, but they trained a neural network to look at it wasn't even a very big number of his drawings, but they trained it to look at these drawings and then it could with 99.99% accuracy determine um whether something was drawn by Egon Schiele or not by the pressure on the pencil, the diff- I mean, a million different sort of like inputs. Um so, it could do that. Uh and that's, you know, one of the other reasons why it is so difficult um for somebody like Tony to do what he did now. Would you mean, he says that that's over. Well, it's it's and also in today's day and age, there's also no more who are the Picassos or the Pollocks of now? Right? Like >> Yeah. there that doesn't seem to exist anymore. I mean, there there are definitely contemporary artists um that you and I've never heard of. >> Mhm. Cuz I I >> That in that in 100 years people are going to be like, "Oh my god, like That I mean, that's hard to say, but that >> During this time when AI was ubiquitous, like how much more difficult is that going to be? Yeah, I mean, that's that's hard to say. So, there's a there's a bunch of of of uh attention that's being paid now to what can we do to make sure that the holes and gaps of the past don't exist anymore. So, there are companies that, you know, allow you to put DNA in a in a painting or you know, microchip and catalog paintings from the second they were born to whatever. So, there's all Yeah. for stuff like that. So, um that happens. You know, there are definitely artists that you and I've never heard of who are huge huge names if you, you know, if you are in that world um that we don't know about and they're painting and stuff is worth millions of dollars. >> Mhm. Which of those are going to last? Mhm. Uh you know, beyond their lifetime? I don't know. Beyond two or three lifetimes? Uh I don't know either. But, there's another interesting AI thing that I read about which was amazing and that is um there is an AI that can kind of look at oil painting. Most so, some oil painting like, you know, Dali had very thin uh almost transparent painting style, but you know, some is thick. Uh and they just kind of glob it on and stuff. Um but these AIs can look at like a 3D map of the painting and it's so good that with, you know, certain paint- painters that it has been trained on you can kind of start to tell the difference between brush strokes by the student and brush strokes by the master. So, a lot of in the in the Renaissance and even later in the Baroque period, you would have a studio. So, you'd go to the to the master and you'd say, "Hey, I want a painting of my wife the Duchess of whatever." And he'd say, "Great." And he'd have 10 paintings going at the same time and he'd kind of sketch it out, draw the composition and then the students would paint in the costume and the legs and stuff and the master would do the hands, which are very hard to do, and the face. Mhm. So, this AI can tell the difference between the various strokes, which is, you know, pretty amazing. There's just so much you can do now that it's it's quite quite difficult to um to really tell the difference or or to really, you know, fool Yeah. fool technology, all the chemical analysis, all the, you know, spectroscopic analysis and everything. You just, you know, Yeah, I wonder like why was the Renaissance the period of time when we had the most like insane amount of art coming out. Not just art, like architecture, all these cathedrals that were built. Like it just seems like uh an absorbent amount of creativity was coming out during that time. And like you know, people were creating stuff not I mean, I'm I'm a guessing that people were doing this stuff not just as like a thing for return on investment. They weren't doing this because it was going to make them money. They were creating this stuff because something else was going on in society that was promoting like just a crazy amount of creativity, you know? Like what it was it the climate? I mean, I'm sure the like the climate, the the economy um like the the religious culture that was going on. I'm sure there were so many uh elements that were contributing to that. But, it's just interesting how that period in history was just known Yeah. for so much amazing art. >> Yeah, I mean, the the very short answer is uh the church and the counter-reformation. So, you had uh the church vastly uh wealthy who wanted to um you know, the the the the Reformation said "Hey you can have a personal one-on-one relationship with God through your own reading of the Bible." Mhm. And the Catholic Church said "Well, yeah, that's all good, but you know, there also needs to be a hierarchy and we are the institution on Earth which is, you know, kind of mediating between the two." So, they wanted to, you know, bring these stories to the common person through the church, through painting. They wanted to illustrate it. Here's the story of Saint Matthew. And they were you know, you could make the argument that essentially these were comic books graphic novels of their time for people to look at and there was a tremendous tremendous amount of money available to do this and um you know, in the in our in the book Con Artist Con Artist that I wrote with Tony um you know, he talks a lot about how Caravaggio is his favorite artist, but like when Caravaggio came to Rome it was like Hollywood was in the '50s or whatever. It's like every artist, every person, everybody who wanted to be a director went to LA, went to Hollywood. >> Yeah. Everybody who wanted to be an architect or an artist or a sculptor or whatever went to Rome. You know, because that's where all the commissions were coming from, from the church. You know, they were building building these massive cathedrals, building churches, decorating them, chapels, everything. >> Right. Right. Yeah, and I think um Leonardo da Vinci Mhm. he was also like, if I remember correctly, he was doing all kinds of things like developing things for war, like weapons and stuff for war and stuff like this and like being commissioned to do stuff. Like I mean, I guess a lot of it was just he was just trying to to feed himself. Yeah, I mean, um they like some Da Vinci I'm not as familiar with his life cuz, you know, I want to stress that I'm not a great art expert. >> Right. Um but I do know, you know, a little bit. Um but yes, I mean, he was some people would argue that he was um a a uh an engineer first >> Right. >> and an artist after, you know, so he famously came up with designs for like helicopter Right. screws and, you know, flying machines and um different catapults and instruments of war, like you say. And so, you know, when I talked to Tony Tony always says, you know, that he was just as a boy just fascinated with the notebooks of Da Vinci and was actually more interested in Da Vinci the engineer than Da Vinci the artist cuz he wasn't actually a very um prolific artist. He worked really, really, really slowly. So, it'd take him years to make paintings, you know, months and months and months to make paintings, whereas Caravaggio would make like literally a painting in a day because when he first came to Rome, he was, you know, like any like imagine a 22-year-old person going to Hollywood cuz they want to be a director. Yeah. >> Same kind of thing. And so, he got, you know, he got a job painting essentially like tourist postcards, you know, and he'd have to paint like these heads. Right. >> a day or fruit. His job was to paint fruit, you know. Uh-huh. Still lives. And so, he'd do one in a day and that's how he would, you know, he'd make a a I don't know, a penny or whatever. Wow. >> And he lived he lived with this guy Mhm. Mon- Monsignor Del Monte and he called him um Monsignor Salad because he said that all he ever fed him was salad. Really? >> Yeah, it was just like he was the literal starving artist. But that's what the, you know, that was the climate of the Renaissance. And that points out that kind of points out, you know, that um for everything that we say about, you know, the evils of the art market and, you know, all this stuff, you must have patrons. You must have people who are interested in having art and want to pay for it or feel it's important enough in their lives that it's a priority for them to spend money on. Otherwise, you know, no no art. Yeah. You know. Mhm. I mean, you have the you have the you have to have the person who's commissioning stuff. Right. >> Um you know. Right. Yeah, it is it is really interesting how um it's evolved, you know, especially like what we were talking about with the Cold War and uh and art and and these and the CIA trying to through like second and third-hands people uh fund these artists and prop up this industry of art of modern art and to just basically like show that, "Hey, we're all about liberty and creativity and openness and like we're so much better than the Soviet Union." And like, yeah, there was no like victims or anything. They weren't like kidnapping and torturing people. They were just spending taxpayer dollars on trying to uh drive culture and show how much better we And that was during the whole like McCarthy area, too, right? So, like That I mean, that's why they had that's why they had to use the CIA. Mhm. Cuz they had they had the first couple of shows. I forget what it was called. I think it was called Advancing American Art or something like that. And they bought all of these paintings um from famous artists of the time. Right. And they put them out there and then everybody came out and said like, "This This is like modern art is all communistic. This is all garbage. Look at what Look at And And Harry Truman famously said, 'If that's art, then I'm a Hottentot.'" >> Right, right. Um so, you know, uh but but you know, you think about this like every everything that happens everything that happens um basically starts with an idea. I mean you go like, "Well, books don't matter, you know, and all this kind of stuff." Well, they do because everything starts with ideas and that exchange of ideas is what makes like real-world changes happen or things happen. Um you know, so art of its time and, you know, depending on how you define art, I mean, what's the art of today? I mean, I don't I don't know what what you think, but, you know, is it a painting? Probably not. You know, is it uh a Tik Tok video? Maybe. Is it, you know, music? Probably. Is it a little video? Yeah, probably. You know, is it a meme? Yes. Mhm. You know, that's really the art of today and think about how many ideas and how much our world has changed because of ideas that were, you know, that we're exchanging. So, art doesn't necessarily It doesn't look like it used to in the past. Right. >> so what what is happening now as art is probably not even what we recognize as art. >> how it's how it's today. It seems like it's more of um it's more of like people copying things that other successful people have already done with art, right? Like they'll they'll they'll see a model and say, "I can copy this and do this in maybe a little bit of a different way. It's a successful model. It makes a lot of money. May- maybe it'll make me famous. So, I can do this and put my own spin on it or whatever." It's It's less like unique, new, super creative, right? It's more of like copy and paste nowadays. Yeah, I mean, that that's true because it's possible to do that, you know, but I mean, I think that that kind of I don't know, call it inspiration if you want or call it straight-up copying. I mean Mhm. there are I mean, the great old masters would you know, there's always this this there's always this uh uh I don't know if it's an argument, but discussion who's the greatest painter. Was it oil painter? Was it Caravaggio? Was it Rembrandt? You know, well, maybe it's Rembrandt, but there could have been no Rembrandt without Caravaggio. Right. You know, and there's all kinds of examples of I mean, look at any any period, people happen to be doing stuff that kind of looks very similar. Mhm. It's just the way it is, you know, there are ideas in the air. Oh, I saw him do that. Let me Let me try that, too, or whatever, you know. It's kind of the way it is. It is true now that they'll like I mean, you can sample a hook out of a song, which you weren't able to do in the past, but you sample it and you just stick it in your song and that's what drives your song and then you do some other crap on top of it, but, you know, really what drives your song is that sample or, you know, whatever. That was not possible before. It's not possible to cut and paste. >> this guy, this gentleman on the other day, Mike Benz, who was explaining to us uh he was uh he used to work for the State Department in the cyber division. And um he was explaining to us how the State Department basically like the State Department was the department in the United States that will do all the things that this this too dirty for the CIA to do. Um and he was explaining how they were basically doing the same thing you're explaining um with the modern art movement during the Cold War with music in like the last 10, 20, 30 years. And they were doing this thing called music diplomacy, where they were like funding musicians, funding artists, funding music festivals in different countries to overthrow governments or to like push political agendas all over the world. It's crazy. With jazz, I think one of the original ones was jazz. I think what he was explaining was like maybe this was like even during the Cold War when um I think it was like Stalin was trying to say that like uh America and the West were super racist, right? >> Mhm. So, we came in and we funded this jazz diplomacy, right? To show that, "No, we we're not like we we have all this jazz and all this stuff, all these black musicians all over the place." And it's kind of the same thing. Yeah, I I think so, too. And I mean, it it makes it makes total sense. Um it's, you know, famously in the '50s uh Khrushchev came to America, you know, Soviet ruler Khrushchev came to America and um he was shown around and saw like a Western, you know, the kitchen of the future or whatever. And this is mind-blowing, you know, so if you have all of these things like, "Hey, for young people who are going to affect the most change, anyway, now they're really into rock and roll. How are you going to keep those people interested in, you know, Soviet realism or whatever when you got the Beatles. Mhm. So, whatever whatever that thing is, but I mean, um art has that art has that ability and it has always had that ability. And you know, I think one of the one of the difficult things in dealing with art is that the experience of most art is off-putting. You know, how many people really look forward to going to a museum? You know, how many people really look forward to that? And part of that is just that >> the only one I know. I mean, I was just talking to somebody else and they were like they're a great outdoors person. And they're like, "You know, we went climbing in Italy and they're like, 'The only thing is I don't want to go to I don't want to go to any museums. And I I kind of get that because there's this kind of like um or overwhelming solemnity to a lot of it or just like I don't get it. Um so uh you know, so it's easy to sort of whole aspect to it all. >> Yeah, and and and and it's really easy to look at and go like I don't really see how this applies to my life. Right. You know, I don't see how this applies to my life. When I whereas, you know, when you look at art as kind of like all the music and ideas and and and imagery and stuff that we see every day, um you know, then you you see it as as part of your life. And I think that's kind of one of the things that got I I'm I'm not super interested in the uh like late Warhol when it's just like here's a bunch of you know, here's bunch of pictures of Liz Taylor. Here's 100 images of Liz Taylor or Chairman Mao or whatever. But you know, if you read his early uh notebooks and stuff, I mean, it's super fascinating and what he was saying which nobody understood at the time like well, what does that even mean? Everybody's fame Every In the future everyone will be famous for 15 minutes. Mhm. What does that mean? We know what it means now. I mean, that's social media. Right. >> that was 40 That was 50 years before social media. That's amazing, you know? So um it's it's it's really kind of about like how does how do the ideas, the imagery, the music, the ways that people think kind of influence your life? Um you know, I think that's what art is. It might not look like it used It might not be a piece of canvas on a Right. on a wall. Yeah, it's I think it's cool because it's like taking a time machine back, you know, and seeing like, you know, what what like you said, like what was going through people's minds back then? How were they thinking? What was it like just to be in like that museum surrounded by all this ancient [ __ ] is like it's weird. It gives you a It's like it's not just seeing it. It's this sort of like a feeling you get, you know what I mean? Where it's it's kind of a feeling you don't forget when you get to experience some sort of history like that and a little glimpse into the past. >> Yeah. And I had I had a one of them like this really great art experience in a way that I hadn't in a long time in a museum. I was at the Getty uh center, not the villa. I was at the Getty center. And I was there like I was there. I took somebody for their birthday to this cafe to hang out. It's a nice place to stay. But I said, "Well, let's run up and go look at a couple of paintings." And usually, you know, you sort of walk through and uh I like that or I look at a few things. But I stopped and I looked at this uh Monet haystack. These famous haystack paintings. And I kind of looked at it I started looking at it started looking at it. And it turned into him It sounds goofy, but it turned into you know, like those magic eye paintings. >> Yeah. It kind of had this magic eye effect. Interesting. >> was like, "Wow, so this this was kind of like how using Yeah, using impressionism he had found a way to show how light, you know, a flat surface could become 3D. And not just in not just in kind of like straight line perspective, you know, like Renaissance paintings, but how this impressionistic thing could could make this thing become a 3D real thing. And that's, you know, that's amazing for the time. You know, we we kind of become blind to these things cuz we see it all the time. We have all kinds of imagery and effects and optical illusions and things. But that to me was like truly truly an amazing thing. That is fascinating. I read this thing about Picasso about how he was so good at perveying of like he was really good at displaying depth Mhm. because allegedly he could only see in 2D. Hm. So allegedly like he had I don't know if this is for sure, but allegedly he had like one eye that went really far out and he couldn't see depth very good. So he relied a lot on light and shadows and things to discern depth. And he was really good at translating this into a canvas into turning something that was 2D into something 3D. Picasso What is this? AI? Yes, Picasso's right eye showed signs of strabismus, a condition of misaligned eyes with poor depth perception. So because he had poor depth He couldn't see space. He had to figure out ways to get through the world using light and shadows and shapes to discern depth. And he was like that's a fascinating thing about how he was able to Yeah. make his paintings. And this is also true with um with filmmakers, too. There's this famous documentarian um named Errol Morris who uh has the same issue. And he's the He's incredibly He has this incredible way of doing cinematography. He even invented this thing called the Interrotron during his documentaries where the person's looking straight down the barrel of the camera. So instead of like sitting to the side and having the person look off camera, they look straight on the barrel. He would put this this mirror in front of his face. So they could see his face. They would talk to him. But uh somehow it would like reflect into the lens to where like they're looking straight on the barrel of the camera. So like it's just weird. It's just interesting to hear how like certain people's like disabilities or or shortcomings can translate into like something incredible in art. Yeah, there it is. There's the Interrotron right there. >> Yeah. The Interrotron? I love it. I love it. I mean, you know, you're a documentary guy. You know, it's always like one of these things where if you're doing the interview, you always have to like stand right next to the camera. You have to tell the person like look look in my Mhm. It's never quite there. So I like that. I didn't know about that. Yeah, it's always like It's always interesting to me when when somebody can come along and like innovate a new way of creating something. Like a new a new medium. Not necessarily a new medium, but a new way to like like like an example would be like podcasting. How like Joe Rogan basically was the first one I mean to have the idea to have two people just sit down and talk uninterrupted unedited for hours and put it out there. And who knew it would be like the number one thing that everyone listens to in the world like Incredible. >> Anyone during that time would say, "No, you have to make it more entertaining. You have to start out with like a a hook that grabs people and you know, it has to be shorter. You're going to lose people's attention." But like no, it just blew that out of the water. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, Picasso was uh was interesting, too, cuz um you know, you can always you you can think about how uh the great artists just have kind of a different way of looking. They bring a new way of looking at something. And so I think that, you know, what you described about his eyes and stuff kind of tied into a bigger cultural thing at the time, too, or a bigger um discovery at the time. So, you know, science and philosophy thinking about like um you know, other other dimensions or the fact of looking at something changes something. Um and subatomic particles and all that kind of stuff. So cubism is really like, "Hey, when you're looking at something, you're looking at it from every direction at the same time." Mhm. You know, and so I think that his way of looking probably like allowed him to see that in a way that he might not have um might not have seen Might not have appreciated in in another >> Yeah, and it's an idea that had like greater resonance or whatever. Um but uh yeah. Yeah, man. It's super fascinating. What what um you you did another documentary uh that was on Netflix that was about social media and kids influencer kids. >> Can you explain what that was about? >> Yeah, that was called um Bad Influence. And it was a documentary um that was directed by uh Jenna Rosher and and Keith Davidson. Um and they did a great job. Um I produced it. Um it was this look at a particular uh social media influencer, huge social media influencer called Piper Rockelle. Kind of a kidfluencer. And um what it sort of looked at was, you know, you think that there's this world that's it's for kids. It's harmless. It's just harmless fun. Um but what you really start to see is that this is a world uh that is not kid-friendly. Uh that has a lot of problems inherent in it. I mean, I personally think that social media is a huge huge problem not just for kids, but for everybody today. I think it's completely messed up our uh information environment. And there's the horrible information hygiene because of it. Um but so this this was a bunch of Piper Rockelle had a squad um of kids with her. They all kind of joined together and they would make prank videos and all this kind of stuff. And um their um Piper's mother, Tiffany uh Rockelle was kind of the momager of all these kids. And so it's really a story of um abuse. Uh you know, these kids were made to work all the time. They were kind of pitted against each other. They uh received no schooling. Um and you know, it's just just this kind of like almost cult-like world in which these these children fell. And again, you know, it's one of these situations where you have that kind of money like, you know, 11-year-old kid making you know, couple hundred grand a month. What? I mean, there's there's uh there are a lot of incentives that kind of go awry. So, um I I mean, I do I do think that generally speaking the uh I think generally speaking social media is a terrible thing for uh children. I think that it is uh largely can be largely unhealthy for adults who can't mediate. But for kids, I mean, you know, it's undeniable that it is designed to be addictive. You know, that's just undeniable. >> Yes. Um it is uh unpoliced largely. And while many of the companies claim that they have the safety of children at heart or that they have, you know, dedicated safety teams and all this stuff, the reality is that anytime that safety uh or mental health um butts up against, you know, the need to have viewers and, you know, time spent on site that always wins out. >> shareholders. Yeah. I mean, it always it always wins out. So, for example, um you know, one of the most this is crazy to me. I have an an 11-year-old daughter who does no screen time except for like on the weekend, you know, we'll watch some movies or whatever. >> Wow. Um and it's funny because that is, you know, that's sort of a radical thing. >> Yeah. But then I look at it and go like you know, I mean, really if you understood what's going on, most parents would think like, oh yeah, that that's makes sense. I mean, you wouldn't give your kids cigarettes. You know, not giving your kids cigarettes is not a radical thing. I think not giving your kids social media is similar. So, anyway, there's this very popular uh game called Roblox. >> Oh, yeah. Have you seen the Roblox? Um Roblox is, for those who don't know, um is essentially, you know, a uh user-generated content. Everybody makes like little environments that you can run around and in your avatar and you buy merch and whatever. Um kids as young as, I think, I don't remember this exactly, but I think it's 13-ish. And you you know, anybody who wants to get in can get in pretty easily. You know, you have 9 10-year-old kids in some of these environments. One of the most popular environments is public restroom. So, you know, imagine what happens in a public restroom and a club or whatever, you know, that's all the kind of stuff that um takes place in these um in these places. And there are I mean many many many I mean uh I don't know if it's 100, but dozens dozens of cases of grooming you know, where some where it's it's been described as a profile paradise. And everybody every time I mention this to a, you know, fellow parent, they go, yeah, like kids on Roblox and go, oh, really? And they go, yeah, actually my kid, you know, somebody was trying to groom my kid on it. Like it's so rife, it's unbelievable. And there are, you know, dozens of cases where somebody, you know, sets up like Jeffrey Epstein Island. There There were, I think they've kind of specifically taken those out, but Jeffrey Epstein Island where kids are running around in this Roblox thing and they're, you know, getting kids to compromise themselves some way or, you know, they're kind of meeting through this and then take them off line, you know, to or take them off site to another private messaging thing. And then they'll want to come meet him and all this stuff. This like many many examples of this happening. Yeah. And if you ask the company, the company's like, oh, no, we take safety very seriously. And the question is like, I'm not sure that's true. Mhm. And you know, I think um that is just repeated over and over and over again, you know, like uh one of the main ways that kids um buy drugs now is just on social media. That's like the number one way to buy drugs. Mhm. Yeah. Yeah, so that that Roblox um example there is repeated many many many times. There are many cases that are being um adjudicated right now. This I I believe there's a class action lawsuit that's being formed. Mhm. Um and you know, it's it's kind of the same thing with with all of the social media sites where um you know, they they kind of have a almost like a blanket immunity. Yeah, yeah, section 240 or 230. Yeah, so I I helped start an early uh internet travel company that then became part of TripAdvisor. So, we're one of the first ones. And I remember at the time, you know, we were kind of grappling with well, how do you deal with user-generated content? Right? Who's responsible for it? What if somebody uses a picture that's copyrighted? What do you do? And what ended up happening was that the law basically just said, you are a utility. Mhm. You can do more or less what you want. It's the onus is on someone to report. Right? And then you have to deal with it. So, for example, if somebody used um copyrighted imagery, okay? The photographer has to come in and go through a really onerous pro pro uh project to get your to get you to remove that information. And let's say somebody took 500 photos. Well, I'm a photographer. Can I really spend all that time to go through this whole process of filling out 500 separate forms you know, to show you that these things have been copyright, you know, have violated my copyright. Now, repeat that 500 times, right? How are you going to How are you going to deal with that? >> Mhm. So, you know, um what I used to do is I'd say if somebody showed me that, I just nuke the account. I just be like, good, you you did a copyright violation, you're out of here. You know, I wouldn't make the person go through all those uh all those hoops. Um and similarly with social media because it's treated like a utility despite the fact that somebody like Twitter you know, very um openly shapes the content. I mean, the algorithm is pushing stuff to you. Right. >> That these are the top stories. You should look at this. You should look at this. If you're interested in this, you're going to be interested in that. Let me push this to you. Let me push that to you. Um they still have no real liability Mhm. for any of the stuff that they uh that they're showing. So, you know, you have this information environment where unsafe stuff or, you know, like really radicalizing stuff is out there and there's no repercussions cuz these guys are shielded. Right. So, personally, I think it would be fairly easy to deal with that. You know, why you know, regardless of how you feel about this, but why is Fox no longer reporting that Dominion voting machines were compromised in previous election? Cuz they got sued for a billion dollars. Right. Right? Right. That stuff is all over social media. And you know, there are trends and they push it and, you know, they're making money off of that content. You know, and lots of it. Um but there's really no repercussion against that because their claim is, oh well, it's not me who's publishing it. It's individuals. >> It's individuals. However, you are now shaping this. You're pushing it. You know, The thing is you have to right. The The the thing is you have to prove that they are specifically institutionally pushing specific narratives or specific specific stories because the ultimate way for that to work is you would have all of the people who exist on these social media platforms, dependent on how many followers they have, would have equal uh equal exposure to their content and to their stories they push out. The problem with in my view, this so this section 230 blanket um blanket immunity to uh lawsuits is that um they can put their finger on the scale and nobody knows about it. Yeah. Um you know, and the argument against it is like, why, you know, why should social media companies get li- uh get off the hook for any sort of liability when, you know, if I make playground equipment, you're not off the hook for any kind of liability. Why do they Why do they deserve I get it. And um the other side of the coin is if they didn't have this, they would probably go out of business. >> Yeah. Yeah, which, you know, personally, I I think it would probably be fine. I mean, as it currently exists, I think it would be fine. And I think there's a really interesting there's a really interesting um kind of legal uh framework that's being developed. There's a lot of kind of youth groups and stuff. There's one called Design It For Us, you know, whose whose theory is, "Look, this is just um product This is just a product liability case." In the same way that if you make a car that explodes, if you make cigarettes that are marketed at children, you know, you can't do that. Um this is very specifically marketed to addict us. This is very specifically marketed negligence There there is a a negligence in the way that it allows uh inappropriate interactions to happen and stuff like that. So, for example, you know, I'm not sure what the current status of every one of the social media, but you know, default that you're, you know, that your messaging is open, you know, things like that. So So, most most social media, the default is anybody can contact you, let's say, right? Um whereas it should be like nobody can contact you unless, you know, parental intervention happens. >> Right. You know. Right. So, um Or Or another argument that people make is that uh there shouldn't be any anonymity on social media. Like it should be you, your name connected to your social security number, whatever it is, so that if you do do anything out of line, you are punished for it. Yeah, I mean Yeah, I mean, that that seems a little too far for me. And I kind of feel like Well, everybody's like, "Well, that'll change everything." Or this is Well, are you going to be out there screaming obscenities at people and and being, you know, a complete [ __ ] to everybody online if everybody knows who you are? >> Yeah. Yeah. I Yeah, I mean, um Yeah. It But the thing is, you know, this kind of already exists. This is not like some crazy notion. The crazy notion is the opposite whereby, "Hey, you get a blanket immunity." Like Yeah. Wait a minute, how did that happen? Because you could make the You know, it already works for media. I know when I make a documentary, I make a spreadsheet with every claim. Every claim I make, I make a spreadsheet, and I go, "Here's source one, here's source two, and here's source three." And then, claim number two. I mean, that spreadsheet's long. And that's a hard process to do. But that's kind of the hoop that I have to jump through, you know, to show to to really kind of like shore up all my claims. And if I can't defend my claim, I'm not going to make it. You know. So, that's kind of what I have to go through. And similarly, you know, media, if New York Times publishes something, you go, "Well, it's a columnist." Well, sorry, that's your columnist. You published it in your platform. You are liable. In the same way that, you know, you I'm sure you could have a a method by which you could say, like, for example, the um Dominion story. Mhm. All right. X, you are pushing this to people. We've We've shown that this has no merit. Yet you're pushing this to people in your algorithm. Okay? So, either stop pushing it in the algorithm, right? Remove it from whatever, Right. >> or face some of the liability. Right. But do we know that there Is it Is it a fact? Do we know that um X or Twitter is giving that Dominion story more favorable push in the algorithm? Are they pushing it any more than other stuff? And shouldn't people be allowed to talk about [ __ ] whether that's whether it's fake, real, a lie, propaganda? Shouldn't all speech on these things have equal push or equal availability to see, right? Instead of like, "Can you prove that they're pushing that more than the alternate story?" Because I agree with you that that's wrong. But like conversely, it should be a place where bad ideas should have just as much reach as good ideas should have. Uh uh Yes and no. In In my opinion, I mean, this is all just our opinion. >> Right. Right. Um In my opinion, uh you Of course, you should be able to have your idea. I should be able to talk to you about, you know, lawful ideas. I shouldn't be able to say like, "Hey, you and I are going to murder Steve." >> Right. Right. >> But um although you may want to sometimes. Um uh But, you know, yeah, you can you can have that conversation. You know, of course, you can. Um but the difference is, you know, should you amplify that? Can you amplify that? You know, that's that's my uh that's my way of looking at it. And it's it's fairly practical, right? If there's three guys with no followers talking about it, okay, it's not a problem. Don't worry about it. Right? Well, the thing is, isn't that a slippery slope when you have the platform deciding what should be squashed or what should be amplified? When you're giving them that power. But I don't think I don't think the platform the The platform, first of all, the plat- platforms are private companies. >> Mhm. They're private companies, okay? So, like when we had our our website, um which was a huge community, right? Of user-generated content, I could remove you anytime I wanted to. Just because you were a jerk, you were unkind, you were using copyrighted imagery, you used copyrighted uh text. I could do that. So, they can do that. Um and that's, you know, that's the prerogative of a private company. Okay? Um Should they do it or how do they do it? I think is kind of like s- To me, to my mind, slightly more difficult than dealing with the media. I mean, we already have I mean, we have liable lawsuits, right? All the time. We know what that means. We know what that looks like. We know how that's adjudicated. You know, it's not some great giant unknown. We already know how to do it. Just kind of do that, you know? Because I think the downside is so much worse. I mean, I really think that we're in a terrible situation where it's very difficult to deal with any problems because of the fact that we are so unable to find a non-radicalized middle ground on anything. So, there's a there's That's the biggest problem right there. You just nailed You just nailed that. The The The ideas that get the most attention on social media are the most extreme ones. >> And that's algorithmic. >> Yeah. That is algorithmic. That is That is purely pushed by an algorithm, which is based upon creating dopamine hits and um uh and views. Mhm. Yeah, you're not going to grow your followers by having a nuanced middle-of-the-road opinion. Exactly. Exactly. So, there is I don't know if you've ever heard of the uh the Doomsday Clock. Mhm. The Doomsday Clock was created in the '80s by the um I I an organization of atomic scientists. And it was a metaphor for talking about how um how much in danger were we of nuclear apocalypse. Oh, yes. So, they go, "It's 11:59 and 58 seconds." And they would occasionally sort of Yeah, so there you go. So, it's very close. And right now, it's it's like basically any moment we're going to have a nuclear apocalypse. Um but they have also started to >> Wait. So, right now, in 2025, they think it's a a high probability that we're going to have a nuclear >> 89 seconds to midnight. Again, it's a metaphor. It's a metaphor. >> Okay. For saying like, you know, midnight is nuclear apocalypse. So, they're saying we are very close to >> They're not necessarily saying like thermonuclear bombs. >> No, no, no. Right. They're saying it's a it's a metaphor for the danger we have of nuclear apocalypse happening. So, it's not going to happen in 89 seconds, but in this metaphor, we're very close and we have a very high level of danger. So, I talked to one of the chief scientists there, and they've they've expanded to some other areas like um uh climate change, um you know, political instability and stuff. And one of the things that they talk about is information hygiene, or information environment, you know, how bad is the information that we get now. You know, when every single sort of like um Can you turn that off? I'm freezing my ass off, dude. That thing is [ __ ] That thing is freezing me. Or just turn it down a little bit. Uh when when every single piece of information is disagreed upon in the most radical terms, you cannot solve any of these problems. >> Right. So, we talked to them, and they they just basically said, "Unless we solve And you know, they were very specific specifically talking about X, cuz that was just part of the conversation. But But when when you can't have the discussion or there is no viable objective fact anywhere, you can't solve any of this. >> Right. And so, therefore, to me, it seems to me that the greatest problem that we face today and the greatest opportunity for positive change is to kind of just like pull back from that, you know? And and, you know, it's not like be- before social media, we still had freedom of expression. We still had the ability to get ideas out. You know, we did not have giant um sci-ops operations from foreign governments in every single person's brain at all times, which is happening today. >> Well, maybe we did. I mean >> Well, we had four major news outlets, Yeah. right? >> Yep. And we know for a fact that there was CIA operations to manipulate the media. And everyone was getting their information from four mainstream outlets. So, it was so much easier to propagandize people and sow discourse and narrative. >> True. True. Which which I'm not saying to your point for a stable society, maybe that's the better way to do it. Yeah. I like But I'm not even saying return to that. What I'm saying is let let a thousand flowers bloom. Let them all bloom, but just have them sort of uh operate under the same terms of um you know, you can't just say anything about anybody anytime you want with total impunity. Mhm. >> You know, you can't say that you are uh a vampire um you know, eating children in the basement of a pizza establishment, you know, without facing some controversy. And you can't you can't boost that, you know, as the number one topic of your thing without facing some, you know, can you prove it? Great. Mhm. Report away. I mean, that's reporting. Mhm. Report away. Mhm. You know. [Music] Yeah. And the question also goes to like what can they suppress? Like what kind of information can we suppress? And look, that was one of the biggest controversies, which I think was the catalyst to this stuff starting to go downhill at an exponential rate was during COVID. Yeah. Because we had social media companies censoring all kinds of things on COVID. People doctors getting kicked off social media, losing their livelihood for saying, "Hey, that's not This is not the same thing I'm seeing in my practice." >> Mhm. Um you know, like people questioning getting kicked off for questioning vaccines. Like Like that's Can you see how that could go the wrong way very, very quickly when you have the people and the people who are funding these companies and I mean, even mainstream media companies um like incentivized to take people off that aren't going with the financial incentive that might not be the right thing for the people. Yeah. You know, and there's there's there's this great account on X. I wish I remember what the guy's name was, but I'm sure you've seen these videos. There's videos where they've stitched together newscasts from all these local news sites during the COVID area era and after. All these local uh news stations, I'm sorry. Where they're literally saying the same lines verbatim. Yeah. Like you want to talk about pushing a narrative? Like what like is this just a coincidence that these people are using the exact same words like eight words in a row talking about certain things? Like that's that's insane. Yeah. So, um I don't know if this is it, Steve. Um No, there was something on X that was it was uh they were talking about on all different topics. Like on topics regarding war, regarding COVID, uh regarding elections and all this stuff. Yeah, there's definitely there's definitely danger of you know, group think. There's definitely dangers of um you know, narratives being pushed if you have a a small number of outlets. So again, I mean, I'm saying have as many as you want. >> Yeah. >> Just have them also be liable uh you know, for the same uh standards. Yeah. You know, because we're pre- we're pretending that this is just a guy saying some stuff. But it's not. It's not a guy saying some stuff. This is now um the main source of news. It's algorithmically manipulated. >> Mhm. It's uh you know, it's Is this it? Here, so you can hear it. Give it some volume. [Music] They were going to get to it? No. All right, this isn't the video. Yeah. No, I see what you're saying. Actually, and and this this gentleman that we had on the other day, too, was also laying out all of these companies that um they were funded by the State Department AI companies creating this spider web, this algorithmic spider web of keywords. And they had like literally like there was like video conferences of people that were a part of these think tanks, these government think tanks talking about how we need to censor these narratives. Anyone who discusses 19, discusses Pfizer or Moderna or anything like this. Like take these people down, suppress their accounts, and they had these like and and it covered all kinds of topics, this crazy spider web. And this was funded by the State Department, CIA, DOD to literally clamp down on speech on the internet. And like this isn't the type of stuff that's like protect your kids or like ch- the stop the crazy person from breaking into your house or burning down your house or whatever. This is where this is the type of topic where the only purpose of it is to protect institutions, right? And to protect the profits of of large companies. >> Yeah. I mean, again, I think yes, you're you're right um that there is you know, there is potential to push narratives or suppress narratives, right? Mhm. So, my thing is we're just in a place where we can't have we can't have problem solving. It's basically impossible. Mhm. Uh just, you know, like those scientists were saying, you know, we can't really solve anything because all we do is like it's 100% this way and it's 100% this way. There's no in between. We can't meet anywhere. So, I mean, I think there's already there's already a um a structure that works. You know, the the news media already works. You can report on anything you want so long as you have some support for it or you kind of face you know, you face repercussions in a court of law. Mhm. I mean, that's that just works. You You're going to say this? Okay. I mean, I can't say that you're I can't go I can't go uh and publish to the world that you are a file. Mhm. I I can, but then I am liable for repercussions. Of course. So, in the same in the same way >> You are, not the platform. Correct. >> Right. >> Correct. But on a platform, you know, I could have a million AI bots put it out there. I could push that. Yeah. And >> as countries do. Yeah. And I'm not liable in any way. Mhm. You know, whereas if you said like, "Hey, just so you know, I'm going to sue you for this because it's untrue. You must remove it or face repercussions." >> Right. >> that just seems like a natural and normal Mhm. process that happens in the real world today. There is a process on YouTube where this is very easy to do. Mhm. And I've been a part of it. >> Yeah. And where if somebody does do this, steals your material or posts abusive content or things that you believe are untrue, there's a a button right there on the YouTube video where you can report it to YouTube. It sends direct YouTube stays out of it. It's directly between you and the create that creator. Where you type up a little paragraph on what you think happened. That gets sent directly to the person who published it and they have something like 20 days to either remove the content or uh and if they don't do it, then you basically have to like file a lawsuit against them and get and that the stuff gets taken down. And then when the courts determine the outcome, they notify YouTube and then YouTube will make a determination on that. >> Yeah, I mean, it's it's really it's really a case of the stakes, right? So, in this case, YouTube has stake. Your person probably has zero stake as well, right? Because they've got 20 days. For 20 days, this material could go viral. Mhm. And then, "Okay, I'll take it down." >> It goes down for that 20 That 20-day period it's down. >> Okay. So, yeah, I mean, I feel Look, I think that there are um probably there are probably structures I think demonstrably they're, you know, incredibly in in ineffective >> Mhm. right now. I mean, I think we can kind of assume that. >> Mhm. Um but uh to me, it's it's the biggest challenge that we are facing. And the >> Agreed. the documentary that we did um you know, bad influence was kind of one one view into you know, what one part of that world kind of looks like. And you know, there was this really interesting thing. Like so, these are This was a girl who at the beginning was, I want to say, 10 years old when she started. You know, and now, I mean, this is like you can see the algorithm pushing the behavior and the content. So, as she got a little bit older, everything became more sexual because it gets more So, at 16, you know, she is now on you she was kind of demonetized by YouTube. >> Mhm. Um but then she's on a thing called Brand Army. Was on a thing called Brand Army. And Brand Army was unbelievable to me because in order to be a creator on Brand Army, you could be 13. Okay? So, you can be 13 and be a creator. You must be 18 to be a consumer. So, de facto, you have adults consuming yes consuming minor content. Right? And this minor content took the form of uh in the case of Piper, you know, private uh subscriber only hot tub shoots, you know, this is a like a 16-year-old girl. Uh you know, all kinds of bikini shoots, all this kind of stuff. You could DM this person, all this stuff. And I go, "How is this possible? You know, how is this okay?" And some you know, somehow >> still their policy? Um I think that they I you know, when I talked when I talked to the um to the founder and the CEO, he sort of said, "Yeah, it's just it's such a big pain for us. We're going to stop accepting this, but really it was kind of like it just felt like uh really it was just more hassle than it was worth was kind of what he was telling me. It's more hassle than he was worth. But I mean, that's the kind that's the kind of thing where you sort of go like, "How how is this okay? How is this not um better known How is this not better known? How is this sort of, you know, just sliding by?" >> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah, that's crazy. That that should absolutely never be allowed. >> And I think that that's pretty much how for kids anyway, I mean, let's leave adults aside for now, but for kids that is the world that um you know, is social media. >> And it's crazy, too, just the culture we live in cuz you have the most children today, young kids, say when you ask them what they want to do when they grow up, they want to be a YouTuber or a Tik Toker or something like this. Yeah, I mean, and I tell parents the thing is that parents don't even well-intentioned parents, you know, don't realize it. They go, "Well, that's a kids Oh, that's kids, right? That's YouTube kids or that's whatever. That's a kids game." And, you know, um but anything that has messaging, I go, "Here's what you just did. You gave your kid a phone. You published their private phone number on the internet. And you allowed anybody anywhere in the world who wants to to have private conversations with them. Would you be okay with that? I doubt it." >> No. I mean, I doubt it. >> Yeah. So, that's that's kind of what you've allowed, you know? And um it's very difficult thing. It's a very difficult thing is you got kids, you know? It's a very difficult thing to say to your kid, you know, "Everybody in my class has a phone. Sorry, you're not going to get a phone." Right. You can have a you know, there's this thing called Tin Can. I don't know if you've seen it, but >> Uh-huh. it's basically um a Wi-Fi version of a landline. So, Huh. you can't text, you can't surf the internet, you can't do anything other than make phone calls. So, you want to talk to your friends? Awesome. Be my guest. Call your friend, chat, whatever you want. >> Mhm. That's it. That's what I did when I was growing up. That's what you did when you were growing up. Right. Yeah, I would I would be lucky to have a pager when I was growing up. So, >> It's a crazy scary world that we're living in and it's moving at an exponential speed. It seems like it's just the the the the speed of the technological advancement is just at a is just going faster and faster and faster every year. I feel like I just learned about these LLMs a year ago and now it's just like they've taken over. They're taking over industries. They're taking over movies. Yeah. I mean, people ask ask me all the time, "Well, what do you think what's AI going to do to, you know, documentaries or um film in general?" And I you know, I don't know what you think, but to me it seems like um we're going to be in a world not in the very distant future where instead of going like, "Oh, I want to watch a film." you're going to say, "Okay, it's Tuesday night. I got I I want to watch a, you know, 63-minute film. Um In 5 minutes. >> Well, no, I want to watch I want to watch a 63-minute film. It's going to have Scarlett Johansson in it. Um it's going to be a romantic comedy. It takes place in Portland. It's going to be about it's going to involve a dog. And there's going to be some, you know, uh misunderstanding about identity. >> Yeah. Go. You know, you know? Oh my god. >> That's what I Mhm. So, you and me, man, we're uh It's crazy. Have you seen the music stuff? Uh the the covers of different bands where they turn them into soul music? No. You haven't seen this? Oh my god. Steve, pull up the uh Pull up the Soul Cover Band that covers like metal bands. There's a There's a Metallica one. There's like a Limp Bizkit one. Uh they basically they cover like all the you could plug in this guy There's these people on YouTube who are plugging in specific like modern songs and then turning them into like soul jazz covers. And they are fantastic. Like if I had never heard that song before, I would have thought like this would have been like a a top hit done by like real people. It's indistinguishable from from reality. >> Yeah, I mean, I I personally think that I mean, not exactly, but the uh Matrix-like version of a future is is not you know, it's not science fiction. It's feasible and pretty plausible. Yeah. I hope so, man. Well, listen, man. Thank you for coming and doing this stuff and and talking and explaining all this stuff to me. That the art stuff is fantastic. Oh, yeah, here Here's the uh Let's play play Master of Puppets. Oh my god. Oh my god. There's no views on this. There's a lot of these uh soul cover bands. [Music] Go like halfway into the song. [Music] Go farther in. [Music] It's not bad. It's pretty incredible, isn't it? It's unbelievable. And you're right, it is I mean, I would never know that that was AI. >> Came out of nowhere. It's wild. >> Yeah. Tell people where they can find more of your work, um get your books, your listen watch your documentaries, all that stuff. >> Sure, the book is called Con/Artist, Con Artist. And it's uh it's published by Hachette. Find it pretty much anywhere. And um if you look up my name, giampiero.com, g i a m p i e r o.com, you'll see more of the stuff that I'm working on. Uh Bad Influence was out on Netflix. Uh The Royal Stunt documentary should be out uh sometime soon. >> I'm looking forward to it, man. We'll link it all below. Thanks again for your time. >> Thank you. Thank you. All right. Good night, everybody.