The general gonna experience you know the Jeffrey Epstein things are weird comparison because Eric Weinstein says Jeffrey Epstein wasn't smooth at all. I Know that's what Eric says much Far smarter than the average human being far smarter to the point where he's not buying anybody's bullshit and He met with Epstein and he said right away. He's like, well, this is a construct. He's like he's an actor This is a construct. This guy doesn't know what he's talking about. He thought it was a hundred percent bullshit. I love Eric But and he is indeed brilliant Probably way smarter than me, but he's also flawed now like all humans are what and I Disagree with him on that one. I well listen. Did you meet Jeffrey Epstein? No, but I'm not allowed you did How do you meet the madam? Well, just the MIT so all the scientists so all like everybody met him. This is the dark thing all the scientists met him Let me help you out here. Yeah, here's the difference. Here's one of the differences first of all Eric has gotten laid Happened before yes, probably got laid a lot when he was younger just to clarify people smooth talk I have also gotten laid Affirmative I'm not talking about you. I'm talking about a lot of the scientists. Oh a lot of these scientists That is their Kryptonite. It's not a coincidence that this guy Allegedly, it's not a coincidence this guy allegedly involved a huge part of the scientific community in This crazy thing where he's got a fucking island and he ships off these brilliant minds over there Allegedly and introduces them to a lot of these ladies allegedly. Okay. I mean listen That is the kryptonite. I meant allegedly referring to the kryptonite of sex being a kryptonite for scientists for dorks Dorks, yes, you know, who's this a grandness, but you're there's agree There's no disagreeing. I don't think that we can put all scientists in the group of dorks, but yes, there's a lot of doors That's why I saw through the bullshit I don't know That's a little bit you're saying that conspiratorial. I think because to say there's many elements I think I think what Eric says which is like he was just a tool of something bigger is That's a problem to me because it removes their Responsibility of evil from an individual and saying that there's some other evil beside in the darkness It's it's possible. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, he's saying that he's a part of the intelligence community And that's that's actually been reported on Do you know that when he was arrested the initial arrest and when they he was given a very lenient sentence? One of the guys who was involved in that case said it was above my pay grade and that I was told He was a part of the intelligence community Now the word had always been that he was either a massage agent or someone along those lines now If you have some of the most brilliant minds in the world and you want to compromise them and you want to and somehow Another get them entangled in your world. There's two great steps. I think you need some more That was I was gonna say you want to be I thought you could see yourself a man you're drinking We're talking about not sufficient. I already drank it. I know I finished my before you pushing. We should have another one What I was saying is if you wanted to Compromise cheers sir, cheers Good to see you man get this gentleman. Really really good to see you here As I try to talk you know moving in Texas There's two ways you would compromise the scientific community one of them being money Right so he gives a money funding that helps them millions of dollars right donated millions of dollars to various projects various things are working on two women Bring all these scientists together Bring these brilliant guys together with the promise of money for all their projects that are working on and then You bring them to an island and they say hey everything's fine here. Don't worry about it You know I got a fucking temple that's painted like the Jewish flag. I use really flag I have faith that scientists have more integrity than that But but it's not a matter of integrity like everything was above board if they don't know what he's doing and they're innocent Right then they haven't done anything wrong and he's giving them money and taking pictures with them just simply by taking pictures with him They're they're oh they're compromising. Yeah. Yeah. I see okay I think you meant like like say there's a beautiful young lady here and then she was tasked with Exquoting me around to show how wonderful textiles are doing is have photographs with you and Yes, now I do not know what happened obviously because I wasn't there But I would imagine that if he was really a part of the intelligence community There was probably a directive there was probably something that they were working on to try to get these people to go along with What are the fuck who's doing? But say to me that those are both different flavors of evil? Both of them are not good, but okay, so but the intelligence community has always done that They have always compromised people with sex and they've always compromised people with money is that this is standard You know I've directly talked to people who were in the CIA who would describe methods that they would use to Compromise individual wait, so is this could the scientists have done something to avoid it? It's hard because if they don't know right? They're they're promised funding and then you have other scientists that are also going to be there. Hey This guy's going to be there. Hey, you got that guy this guy won, you know This prize and he's going to be there and this guy's remember t he's going to be there and you're like well that'd be a fun party Yeah, you know, let's go why I bring my wife If Epstein is that Like why also there was I guess actually Eric makes this argument is like the whole thing that Jeffrey Epstein was a pedophile was actually a negative in that sense for the if he is a part of like the intelligent community You know what I think he that the fact that he is a criminal sorry. Yeah, no I interrupted you I think it is a negative, but I think when you're involved in that much depravity I Think you can get compromised. I think it's like a DEA agent. It becomes a drug dealer You know, I think when you're around darkness all the time I mean that happens a lot where undercover cops become drug dealers Just happens they they live in that world for too long and it just gets in their veins Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify Including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience