Go Roman find him! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! Dr. Zor's one. You know what's up to you to decide. What's up to you? I'll talk to you forever. I have so many questions. I'm very excited to meet you. Seeing. I've seen you in documentaries for decades. So many documentaries. I've watched so many things about Egypt. I'm completely fascinated by it. You know, I would tell you something. Do you know this guy used to do it already? You show late evening art bell? The best. Can I be the best? I need to save this on air. I need to save this story on air. OK. Now, are we in air now? Yeah, we're on air. Art bill used everything to attack me. Did you? Yes. How? There, how I say, how the Egyptian can move stones. That's the true. The Egyptian cannot do that. Papa, Papa. Then I was teaching at UCLA. And he called me for an interview. I said, no, I'm not going to give you an interview. I'm telling you, come to visit me in Egypt. And he said, OK, he came with his wife. I took him to aquari that will architect stones to construct the strings. Then I brought a stone. It turns weight. And I brought a man on the edge of 70. And I told this man, cut this stone. The old man stood above the stone. You know, stones has weak parts like us. With a pencil, he drove a line from the beginning to the end. In the middle, he bought a piece of iron. Pum, pum, he cut it for twice. I said, art, the Egyptian doesn't use muscles. They use their brain. Because their pyramid was the national project of the whole nation. If you go today, if I take you today with me, and I always still people this, I give lectures, maybe three, four times a week for American groups. And I tell them the following. If you stood in front of the great pyramid and you look at it, you will never believe that this pyramid built by human being. Why? Because you don't know. And number two, if you try to do it today, you will never be able to do it. Are you going to hire today, tin sas and workman, to work for tin, for 20, 80 years, for nothing? That was the national project of the whole nation. I think art bells, real concern, was how would someone possibly move those stones 4,500 years ago? OK, a lot of questions, right? Yes. But can I answer you now? Yes, please. Two examples I will tell you. The first example happened few years ago. I discovered a tomb in a site called Abos here. In the top of the tomb, there was a huge granite sarcophagus, 20 tons weight. OK. If you come to Egypt, have you any Egypt? No, I haven't. You have to. If you talk about Egypt, you have to come. I know. You have to tell me before you come. I will tell you. Now, I promise. I brought only tinned people, because I called the minister of culture, and I told them, we found an intact tomb. And the minister said, wait. I will bring the reporter, the breast, and we'll do it live. I said, OK. But I hate to do anything live. Then I came to the site. I brought my workman. Tinned were coming only, moved the 20 tons only, by wooded slitches. We found underneath another sarcophagus. Tinned, tinned, tinned, tons weight of granite. We took the third one, and we found underneath another a third one, five tons weight. We took the five tons out, and we found underneath a coffin with the mummy. And I told the workman, but everything back. And I called the minister, as you can bring the breast will over it live. I never told them that they cheated him. But only in a site that I'm excavating right now, we do discover 60 feet, and then the ground will discover sealed sarcophagus. The lid is about tinned, tons weight. Two were coming only, opened the lid for me. We have a machine called the diville. I don't know why they called it the diville. The diville. Why? I don't know. I asked them, they sit our grandfathers, called it like that. Then they brush it in the ancient machine. It is an ancient machine. Jamie could probably pull it up. They'll probably online. They put this machine under, under the lid. And they come, do you like this? And they are in a solid little bit. Who in the lid, the lid is laced, they put a piece of wood. Another piece of wood. And until there is a half a feet, they can put my face inside with the flesh light to see what's inside the cover. That's what we, because the people today are the descendants of the ancient Egyptian. There is a village located north of Loxor. And this village, all the people, work it and take this. And they know, if you look at their faces exactly like the ancient Egyptian people and all the people work it with me. I'm excited right now in Giza, we're going to do good news inside the great pyramid that we found. And also in Sakara and Loxor. And this is why in my lecture tour now, I'm making major important announcements that we'll talk about with you today. OK, well, what did you find? Now, you know, can I call you Zhou? Please do. And you call me Zahay. OK. Now, you know, I do receive fan emails. You receive emails? Fan, fan emails. About 50 a week. Some of them bad ones. Some people think that I discovered evidence to prove that pyramids built by aliens or lost civilization. And I hide them. I never answered this question. But do you, I tell you, how do I? How can I hide anything? I'm not working alone. I'm working with people. You cannot hide anything. Because people will see you. And I will tell you, a joke. It happened. But it's a joke. A reporter came to see me from California. To my office, I'm here. Office was located next to the great pyramid of Gufo. And he said to me, people say, at 12 in a row, you're in your office and you go to the bathroom. And you open a tunnel from your bathroom. So what he said? And you go from that tunnel to the great pyramid. And you hide things and you come back. I said, OK, what do you need from me now? He should have owned the sheer bathroom. It's really happened. He went to my bathroom. Did you check all the panels? And he came back. Has he seen any tunnels in my bathroom? He said, no. I said, what are we going to do now? He said that we'll publish your bathroom in the internet. And therefore, if you don't see my bathroom, like W, W, W, that's how it's bathroom.com. Is that much of an issue that people really believe it? They do. They do. They do believe in this. And some of them attack me badly. Well, that's part of the problem, right? Is the Egyptian pyramids and just Egypt in general is so spectacular. The accomplishments of the ancient Egyptians were so monumental and so above anything that anybody had ever achieved. And since, you know, what they've done thousands and thousands of years ago still to this day puzzles people when they try to figure out how it was built. I will kill you. You will tell me how it was built? Of course. OK. I, how do you know? How do you know? We have to know. Well, I found all the evidence of building the pyramid. I will, we published a book. One, seven pages. This book is a Bible of the pyramids of Gizablato. OK. Tell me how they did it. Now, what we found out, the major problem that people think about pyramids, because most of the information that they're written on pyramids are wrong. Most of it? Most of it. In archeology? In archeology books. Really? Except me and Mark Leener. Where is the only ones that have it, right? Because I'm had been working in Gizablato for the last 57 years of my life. I excavated every piece of sand. OK. Well, what are the archeologists have wrong in these archeologists books? For example, number one. They say that the work command, who built the pyramids, work it only four months a year. When the flood covered the whole country, the king hired the work command to work in this pyramid. This is wrong. And I will tell you what's correct. Number two, that the stones used in building the great pyramid came from Torah. And Torah is at 25 miles to the east from Giza. And number three, that Kufurul for 23 years. And number four, that the stones of the great pyramid are 2 million and 300 soldiers blocks. How many blocks are there? Now, let's talk about number one, the work command. The work one. I found the tombs of the pyramid builders. Only one mile south of the sinks. I made your important discovery that can tell everyone. Number one, that pyramids built by Egyptians because of the names that we found inside the cemetery. And there were no slaves. Because you're phone. That's what I have to do. I have to kill that thing. Kill it. You're right. I always, good. I do also have interviews. I always close it. Oh, I get accepted today. No worries. Nobody knows how to shut these things off anymore. Then now, this is coming. So explain. So you found the pyramids. Excuse me. You found the workers pyramids, graves a mile away. Away one mile south of the pyramids. And by their names. Then I then I found names of the wickman. I found the lower cemetery. The lower cemetery were for the burial of the wickman who moved the stones. And the upper cemetery was for the technicians. Brian, how do you know this? I will tell you. Now, the tombs down there are very primitive tombs built from mud brick coast nothing. Underneath is a skeleton. And if a skeleton is for a man, his holding a bargear, he wants to drink beer in the afterlife. If the skeleton is for a woman, she has a perfume visils. She wants to have perfume in the afterlife. Inside the upper cemetery, I found to win the one-titles in hieroglyphic, for example, the overseer in hieroglyphic of the site of the pyramid. Oh, says that the overseer on the side of the pyramid. Imira Gis Merritt in hieroglyphic. The overseer of the west side of the pyramid. Draftsmen, craftsmen, the one who stand in front of the harbor. All these titles had to do with building the pyramid. Inside the tombs, we found the tools that the Egyptian used to cut the stones. What tool? Do you write an affluent tools, because in the Alkingdom, there was no iron. Are these photos of these tools available online? Can we look at them? No, I can send it to you. And in my book, Gis and the pyramids, I don't know if it's some lime shirts online. I don't know. So these tools were flint and do right? What is do right? Do you write DIO RITE? Do you write this more sharp stone than iron? And it came from Aquari south of Aswan. So you feel like they used this very hard stone to cut into the stones. And I will come back to this cutting stones. But let me continue about the Werkman. To the east of the tombs, we found an area for sorting soothed fish. We found an area for the Bekri, making bread. We found the Werkman Barax. For the Werkman, who was the stones to live? We found the whole city for the technicians, for the artisans. And we discovered thousands of animal bones. Because people always say that the Werkman who built the pyramid, they ate only garlic and a bread and the ring beer. And I thought if they do that, they will die. But now we discovered that they slaughtered, 11 cows and 33 goats every day. And this can feed themselves the Werkman at day. Then we believe now and I published that the Werkman who built the pyramids were thin-sauce that were thin and they were working every day. And they took one day off every thin days. Joe, I want to tell you, the pyramid was the national project. The three millions who lived in Egypt had to build the pyramid for the king to be a god. And therefore, the house holds in the south and the north of Egypt, but sabbated in building the pyramid by sending workforce and food to help with the king. Now we come to the second point, the stones. We discovered that all the stones of the three pyramids at Giza, the stones came from Guaras in the site itself. Even the king's chamber? No, except the granite in the king of chamber. And where that come from? From us, what? And that's 500 miles away, right? Yes, by the flood. The flood. And those were 50 to 80 tons? It doesn't matter. It doesn't. Yes. If that was working there, I'm going to tell you. I showed you. I showed you, not only 50 tons. It's 20 tons. Now, what we found out first, how the Egyptian build the pyramid? They make on the ground as square base. OK? OK. And after that, they cut in the solid rock in the four sides. You know, I'm going to tell you one thing. OK. If you tell me that pyramids built by giants, OK? I'm saying, OK, come to the excavation, all the skeletons that you discover are five to six feet high. Nothing about giants. I'm going to say in there, built by giants. Some people say that. OK. The second. I've heard aliens. OK, the second aliens. If aliens build the pyramids, do they leave any? Do they shit sometimes? They're not going to go in the shit. Maybe aliens don't shit. Even they don't shit. Are they going to leave something on the ground? On the contrary, I give you the evidence. Every evidence that they will tell you today. Oh, actual work. Of actual workers. And what's happening? Now, we come about building the pyramid. All the stones I told you came from Giza Blatow. We found out what happened first. They cut in the solid rock. OK. And they made the base of the pyramid to between T8 feet on the solid rock. No stones. Do you get this? Yes. We have it, Egypt, 120 pyramids. We don't have only a couple of pyramids that everyone is talking about. You have 120 pyramids. This is one of them. But there is one that this pyramid is so accurate and strong. Because Giza Blatow is the only site in Egypt of the pyramids, it's a part of the vocato information. It has three levels. Living one and two are very, very stones. But living three is the top quality of the stones. The Egyptian uses stone to build the pyramid. Then after they make the base of the pyramid to between T8 feet of stone, we found out 1,000 feet away we found out the quarry location. All the stones. They only had to bring the stones 1,000 feet. Only, only the stones. The stones that came from outside are the case in stones. And I will talk about this later. They came from Torah. And the granite came from a swan. And the casing stones were the outside smooth surface. Exactly. Like it came from Torah. Then now, who will we discover the quarry location and the base of the pyramid? We thought how they established the ramp. You know the ramp? To move the stones. We found out if the Egyptian will make the ramp from the quarry to the base, it will never happen. Because when you raise the base, you need to extend the ramp. We found out, listen to this carefully. The only way to have a pyramid ramp is to come to the south-west corner of the main pyramid. They built the ramp like this. And I excavated. And this are photos in my book, Giza and the pyramids. I excavated from here to here. When the Egyptian could extract a ramp, when they finished building the pyramid, they demolished the ramp. They cannot demolish all of it. They have to leave something in the ground. OK. Do you get this? Yes. I excavated from here to here. I found in situ remains of the ramp. Are there photos of this? Of course. In my book. OK, let's find the photos of the equipment first. Can't find anything? It's in my book. What did you find? Well, nothing. Nothing? The book. How does that not online? That doesn't make any sense. It's in my book, Giza and the pyramids. Maybe this are the two. The joke. This are the tombs of the pyramid buildings. Right there. This is the excavation. This episode is brought to you by the farmer's dog. Dogs take a lot of care and responsibility, but every minute is worth it. They add so much to our lives. I would do anything for my dog. And I'm sure you would, too. You're probably only one of the best for your pets, but figuring out what that is could be a real headache. There's a lot of misinformation out there, especially around dog food. Take Kibble, for example. Nearly everyone is probably fed their dog Kibble at some point. But if you do a little digging, you'll find out Kibble is an ultra processed food. You'll notice that it comes in these bags with buzzwords, like premium with pictures of juicy meat and fresh vegetables. But inside, it's dried pellets. And the vague serving suggestions make it really hard to get the portions right. And luckily, there's a simpler, better option. The farmer's dog is healthy food from people who care about what goes into your dog's body. They make dog food that's actually real food. It's meat and vegetables, lightly cooked, and it's developed by board certified nutritionist to be complete and balanced and made to the same safety standards as our food. Unlike Kibble, it's pre-portioned just for your dog's needs. That makes it easy to get your dog to the right weight and keep them there, which is one of the biggest predictors of a longer, healthier life. I mean, it's the same for us, too. When you eat right, when your body gets all the vitamins and nutrients it needs, you just feel better. Look, no one, dog or human should be eating highly processed foods for every meal. And it doesn't matter how old your dog is. It's always a great time to start investing in their health and happiness. So try the farmer's dog today. It can help your dogs be healthier, happier, and more energetic. You can get 50% off your first box of fresh, healthy food at thefarmersdog.com slash Rogan. Plus, you get free shipping. Just go to thefarmersdog.com slash Rogan. Tap the banner or visit this episode's page to learn more. Offer applicable for new customers only. And this old one I discovered, this is my discovery of everything. Every piece of sand here tells us about the buildup of the pyramid. But please continue this. I will come to you. Then now, let us, let us, if you go to my book, you will find out that I found here that you're right and the Flint tools. Listen, now I will come the stones for building the pyramid came from the plateau. The casing came from Torah. Now we come to how many years go for ruled. So there is one big discovery happened for years ago. Are these the tools? No, no. This is tools for artists. The tools in my, in our book, which is big, do you like tools? And big Flint tools, big ones. And why is this on online? Whatever, but to them in line, it's on my book. Right. But I mean, wouldn't that be everywhere? I mean, that's such a huge archaeological discovery. It's not. It's because it's everywhere. It's not only the work of an only. It's in every site. You have these tools in many sites. But why are these tools online? That's all I'm asking. Ask the people online, but they're in remains in my book. Are they in a museum somewhere? There is some of the Academy's EMBS. So there should be a photograph of them in the museum. OK. What would Jamie look for? But I don't know. I'm just like asking them. Now I want to come to a museum with a half. Academy's EMBS. The Cairo Museum would have those tools? Yes. OK. Now, few years ago, a major discovery happened for the first time. It is the first time that you have written evidence about building the pyramid of Kufu. What did this happen? Three years ago. Really? It's called the Wadi El Jarf Papayre. Do you want to know what's in this papayre? I do. This papayre was found in Sinai in a port belongs to Kufu. And inside this port, there was caves. And inside the caves, found remains of both and this big papayre. It's huge. There it is. Exactly. OK. And what does this say? Now, first of all, how old is that? 4,600 years ago. You're not amazing. And listen, find writing in this. 606. So Papayre was made with animal skin, correct? No. The virus was of papayre from the papayre. Right. What is it? The Bible is just like leaves. OK. Now, but listen to the papayre. It is adhayari of an overseer of the work command. His name is Merr. M-E-R-E-R. OK? Merr is saying, I am sage in hieroglyphic. Means in a specter. Under me, working 40 work commands. I was hired by Kufu to work in his pyramid. This is in hieroglyphic. And he said, my big, my immediate boss, his name is Diddy. Like P-Diddy? Diddy? Yes. Now, two and years ago, in my excavation, west of the Great Pyramid, of Kufu, I discovered 20 tunes. These are the tunes? No. No. No, this is the tunes. No, no. The tunes are really sharp, type of big tools. We found some of them. What is that? Jamie's looking at. What are these, these, this could be, the tunes in the left is like them. In the left here. But those tools are... No, no, no, no, no. More. No, no, no. Where? You know, here there is two, there is more to the left. To the left. To the left. To the left. No. What? What? This two tools. You mean up? Down. We talked, that's the second one. After this one, that's it. Up. That's it. And this one. Oh, those. Those. Yeah. But don't those look exactly like the other photograph we just had? Those up there. That looks like the heads of the two. This one's just small. I'm talking about big ones. So that's, this are tools for making statues and things like, but not cutting the stones. Oh, I see. So these are the same kind of tools though, the same kind of materials. But let me talk about the mabbiari. I think. Because this many people doesn't know about this. Then Meller said, my boss is the, then is the day. Two and years ago, I excavated west of the Great Pyramid of Guifou. I found 20 tombs, beautiful ones. I published all of them, except one is small tomb. I see it is not important. Three years ago, I found this is the tomb of Diddy, the person that he was the boss of Meller. And I published this tomb. You can find this tomb online now. It's called Diddy's tomb by Zaha Hao West, which is the Great Pyramid of Guifou. Now, listen, Joel, what Meller said, I took my work command, this is an hieroglyphic. We went to Torah to cut the white fine limestone. This sentence means that the pyramid was finished and Mary went to bring the stones for the casing. And he said, I'm not alone. There is many other gangs, our category stones. And Torah is in North and South. And he said, I divided my gangs to three gangs, one gang to cut the stones. And one gang is smoothing the stones. And it's smoothing the stones with the right tools to face the stones for the casing. And after that he said, and the third group moving the stones in within its ridges to us is on the paparae. In the paparae, to a cargo boat, what happened in the Alkingdom? We have evidence that the river Nile, the Egyptian cut to the west of this river Nile, another Nile, to be near the pyramid. From this Nile, they cut a canal. At the end of the canal, there is a harbor in front of every pyramid. I discovered, in my excavation, in front of Kufu pyramid, there is a village called Nazlet Saman. In this village, the people were building houses. Underneath the houses, we found basalt walls. I stopped the construction of the houses. And excavated the whole area. I found this is the harbor of Kufu. And I published this in an article. And I excavated in front of the swing temple. And I found the harbor of Kufu. And it's published. Now, the reason for the canal and the harbor to bring non-local stones, granite from us one, alabaster from Middle Egypt, do you write from, do you write from Nubia, basalt from phayum, white, lime stone from Torah? The Egyptian had everything. So they essentially cut a second canal. They cut a canal just so they can move the stones to where they wanted them. And they discovered all of this. And this is published. If you write Zaha, how wet. And so this was all the casing stones. Exactly. Is it possible that the casing stones were put on later? No, after the finished building the pyramid, there is two important things when they finished building the pyramid. I discovered in a site called Abosir. I discovered two scenes. One scene, where command de reggae capstone? Above the capstone is a hieroglyphic word called jim. So where is this? What is this? This is in hieroglyphs? The bgragging the capstone? Yes, we see this. Find out. I don't know if it's the internet. I'm not doing that. Jimmy, Abu Jamie, look for Zaha, how wet this cavity in Abosir. How much do you think was lost during the burning of the library of Alexandria? A lot, of course, everything, everything. And this is why what I'm telling you, based I have been excavating in Giza-Jo for the last 57 years. I know every piece of sand in the site. And I want to tell you one thing also. I am the only ish of toluges, who have an open mind that I always look at what the public say. And I will tell you about this later. I will tell you what I found in the pyramid. But I can't but let me finish this story. And after that, I will come back to tell you how I look at what people say and I try to investigate this. Okay, now, matter's it, I bought the stones on a cargo boat. Okay. And we came in the boat to Giza Plateau. The work command took the stones up to the pyramid. We slipped overnight to Giza. I go to up early in the morning, it was my work command. Wanted to Torah. He made many times talking about that. Then he said, I wanted to sign I to bring cover and turquoise. But he said in Sinai, our big boss, his name is Ankaaf. We know from text that the architect who designed the great pyramid who was Gufus Kazen, his name was him, you know. Then actually, it seems now that him, you know, theite and Ankaaf completed the great pyramid and built the second pyramid of his son, Kevin. Then he said, I'm working in year two in two in the day seven of Gufus reign. He mentioned that Guf was alive in year 27. How long do you think he rained for? 28 years, I published an article. I published an article about you can find this article. Why? Why was the age 23, 23 years? Why was that attributed to them? No, this is a good question. This episode is brought to you by BetterHelp. It's important that you take care of yourself, physically and mentally. Because if you refuse to get help, you're not just hurting yourself. You're hurting the people around you. It can impact your family, friends, even your colleagues. And you know, mental health has come a long way. Despite all our progress though, there's still a stigma. And a recent survey, 26% say they avoided seeking mental health support due to fear of judgment. This mental health awareness month, let's change that. I'm encouraging everyone to take care of their well-being and you should too. Therapy is an excellent tool that everyone can benefit from. It teaches valuable skills from how to be more self-aware, to healthier ways you can express emotions and more. If you want to be a better version of yourself, therapy is where it starts. And BetterHelp is a great way to get the therapy that you need. They have over 10 years of experience matching people with the right therapist. Everything is also entirely online. So it's more affordable and convenient. And if that's still not enough to convince you, maybe this will over five million people worldwide use BetterHelp. So you're not alone when it comes to seeking support. We're all better with help. Visit BetterHelp.com slash JRE to get 10% off your first month. That's BetterHelp H-E-L-P dot com slash J-R-E. If you notice it has a problem, who they count, the name of the king. Because when the interest is an account to the cattle, they counted the ring of the king. Sometimes they account the cattle every year. Sometimes they account to the cattle every two years. Then we make mistakes. But now we have year 27 of COVID rain. And we have on the second boat pit that the Japanese are restoring now, we know, when the king died, his son bury him. Then COVID son, his name is JRE-FRA, who did not respect his father. And I will tell you why. He buried his father in year 28th. Then we know now for sure that COVID rolled for 28 years. Now, Merritt said something that made me very happy. Because 25 years ago, I wrote an article to say that Memphis was not the capital of Egypt. I said that the king rolled Egypt from the pyramid. If the pyramid is upper wash, the king grew Egypt from upper wash. If the pyramid is in Giza, Giza, Abu Seir, Sakara, then Merritt said something many people don't believe me when I wrote this article. But Merritt said, Kufu lived in his palace at Giza. If he lived in a palace at Giza, means, with the royal family, the public and the government. And he said that the area that Kufu lived in it, in the pyramid called Ankufu in Arabic, means the Kufu lives. This is the name of the city, the Kufu lived in it. And Merritt said, we came to Giza in an area in a river called Rā-Shei. An Rā-Shei means literally mouth of the lake. This could be the entrance of Giza Plateau. But what's really strange? He said, it took me almost one day for me and my workman to come to the pyramid. Why? Because Giza entrance was busy. Every stone coming in has to be counted. Every workman has to sign the first letter of his name. And this is why if you go today to the port of New York, it will take you five hours to enter because it's busy. And this is what happened at Giza Plateau. This papa area, in my opinion, is really one of the most important discovery that tells us for the first time about building the pyramid. And now we come to the reign of Kufu to 28 years. And now the stones of the great pyramid. I looked everywhere to find out how they counted the stones. That people said it's 2 million and 300 sausor blocks. I found no evidence. It's only when the Arabs came. You know all the theories that the U.H. people say now it came from the Arabs. When the Arabs came and they entered the pyramid, they said all this nonsense stories about the pyramid. Then I never found any place to tell me how they cut the stones. But now we have evidence that the base of the pyramid is to empty feet high of solo-drok, no stones. In 2010, I brought a team scientist from every field and we recounted the stones based on the new evidence and we found out that the stones of the pyramid are only normal more than 1 million. And the average height of the Limestone is half a ton to turn half tons. So the base of the pyramid is 20 feet high carved into solid stone. Yes. And then the other rocks were placed on top of it. No, I went to come to, when you told me about this capistone because you didn't look completely the capistone. Right, but let's start off with this though. The base is 20 feet high and then the estimation is 2,300,000 but you think it's far less than that because of the new discovery that we found that the base is made of the solo-drok. So before they thought the base was individual stones. Yes. So now that you know the base is solid rock that removes 1,300,000 stones that were necessary. Yes. Got it. So they carved this base knowing they were going to put a pyramid on top of it. And what about the subterranean chambers? Every king in Egypt is buried underneath the pyramid. Everything except Kufu and his father is in Ephra. The only two kings, they are not buried underneath is Kufu and his father. If you look at the one chamber underneath, it was cut and built. If you go down, it's lift unfinished. They've done finished in what way. It was bland to cut it. But if you don't complete it, you can see when you go down, that the burial chamber is not finished. Why? Why? Because I found out in our research, everything is hoarse on earth. When the king die, he becomes the sun guard. Okay? Okay. Kufu in year five, he said, I am the sun guard. And he abundant the construction of the first burial chamber. And he built his chamber with the pyramid. Because he's the god. And that's the queen's chamber, correct? No, the first one. Man, I'm going to come to this chamber later. Okay. And the second evidence that he called his pyramid, Akkukhofu, means the horizon of Kufu. And the only one in the horizon is the sun guard. And the third evidence is something that only occurred at Giza, the Sphinx and the Stimbal. I found that the Sphinx represent Kefrin, the sun of Kufu, giving offering, which is too pose to his father. Okay. The sun guard Kufu, horizon sits in this temple, the first sun temple. And this why Kufu's pyramid is unique, among the 120 pyramids. And I will tell you what I discovered. Inside the pyramid now. Okay. Now, before I tell you about what they discovered, I have to complete the scene that I told you that I found where to come in, dragging a capstone. You remember, you asked me that, you stopped all that. Above the capstone, there is a hieroglyphic word called jime. And jime means white and yellow gold. A second scene I found, ladies dancing. And they called them the henner. And the henner are the dance troupe of the king. My interpretation of these two scenes, who in the pyramid was finished, the king asked the word command to both the capstone in the top of the pyramid. Who in the above the capstone, in the top of the pyramid, case to his gold, the whole country dance and sing, because the king became a guard. That's what I call the national project of the whole nation. The three millions who lived in Egypt in the time of the Al-Kynum, all of them participated in building the pyramid to make the king as a guard. This is your theory. Not a theory. No? It's fact. It is a fact. The pyramid was the national project. Well, no. Show us what I mean. I mean, it's your theory that the capstone was put on. And it's not a theory. It's based on evidence. I found the scenes. The paparie. No, the paparie is something else. What a dang word. The king. It's blocks. Limestone blocks. One scene, where command to the capstone, was the word jime? This is written in Limestone boxes, are you saying? No, it's show. The word command to the dragon goes to. Show us where. In the stone, that they're discovered. So it's carved into the stone. Exactly. And the word jime in a republic above that. Where's that at? It's an apple here. I found it. Are there photographs online? Yes, in my book. I don't know. I don't go online. Why have to go online? I go to my book. I know I understand, but for everybody else, that doesn't have the media access to your book. You really did you find them online? It's called the apple-serred blocks. Apple-serred. A, B as in boy. How do you think they got the stones from the king's chamber? 500 miles away and put them 120 feet up and up in the ceiling? It's, I told you, if you come today and see how the word command move, to empty times of granite, you will understand. Workers today. Yes, today, like last or day, the same word command. Okay. Right. Not jot, jot, listen, listen, listen, if they're doing it today, if you don't have access to water machine. If you don't, no, they don't. No, it's, everything based on the idea of the national project. They want to make this for the king. I understand the national project. Now, jot, no, if the physics involved, if you don't need tons of blocks, 500 miles through the mountains. If you don't believe on this, I know that I don't believe it. I just want to know inside this block, inside. Hold on. It's not that I don't believe. I want you to explain to me how you think they did it. I explained to you from 500 miles away, from 50 to 80 tons of blocks. This comes through the Nile. You can bring all the stones. Right. We have worries. We have mountains, right? What is their granite quads in us one? And we have cutting of the obliskus and cutting of the stones and cutting everything in the site. And they brought in, when the flood comes in July, they bring boats through the flood. They bring us all the stones to keep that. They plan things for the floods and then they would figure out some sort of a raft system to get them on and then move them that way. Now, if we now don't believe that this cannot be moved by human being, okay? But on the other side, what I can tell you, inside, above this blocks, written the names of the gangs who built the parent, above the King of Chumber. One of the names, Friends of Hofo, I did a 3D a few months ago. And we recorded in the five chambers that has this huge blocks. We found two more names of the gangs. One name called those who are connected with the good is Wajant. And written year 13 of Gofu's reign on the 3rd of the chamber, I took Mr. Beast with me two months ago. I took him and I showed him how this blocks, they were written by the workman before they moved the stones. And in the fourth room, we have the good gut. Another name was year 13 of Gofu's reign. This is when they moved the stones. So I understand what you're saying. So you're saying that they took these stones, they waited for the flood season, they got these stones on rafts, they moved them down the river, they got them to the site. How did they get them 120 feet in the air? You know, again, this is the most important thing, this is the national project. Oh, I understand. And the boats, the boats, the boats, the boats, the boats. The boat's, the technology was used. No, the technology. Well, technology is tools. Technology is leverage. Okay, the technology that everything had at the time was there. The huge, the huge wooden, it's the just. Huge wooden sludge. This is the only way that today we move huge stones. This how my workman moved 20 times sarcophagus in a tomb. How far did they move it? They moved it just a few feet away. But we have scenes of how we're coming, move 60 times a statue. How they move with the stitches. Right. And they draw it. Yeah, I've seen those scenes. Yeah, then we have all this type of seed that they're shifting. Show that. Again, this is the national project. Do you think they wet the ground? Like, what do you think that they did something like that to make the ground more slick so they can do it? Yes. Yeah. And then do they, are they using sleds? Like, how do they get it? Slidges. Wood in a slidges. Yeah. And then they just, we have this in slowly but surely pulled it into position. We have this in the tombs. That's wood in a slidges. Yeah. But let me take you now to what I began to reveal the second of Gufrapenaman. Okay. As I told you again, I always listen to what people say. And I tried to prove them if they're right or not. I was interested in the great pyramid most of my life because I was an inspector of the pyramid, director of, I spent most of my life there. Then I closed this pyramid for a year to stop humidity, to stop humidity because every person all the breathing and exactly enter and set the pyramid gives about to integram of water. And this water becomes salt. Then mechanically I removed the salt. They're clean the walls. Exactly. And after that I thought, how can I make a ventilation system of the pyramid? In the kinky chamber and the quinich chamber, you have this tunnel, to empty their 20 centimeter only. Small tunnel. Right. Then I thought, I should clean this tunnel, then I can make a ventilation system. I had no idea of what I'm going to find out. Which find out? Did I hire a German robot? And we took the German robot to the kinky chamber. We are sitting in the kinky chamber with a TV screen and the robot entered in the shaft. We found out that the interior of the pyramid, the stones were inter-blind. And this why when the Arabs came to Egypt and they hid manfierce time and time for its pyramids, then we found out that this shaft went outside. Then we put a fan here and the fan suck the air and push it in the tunnel and we made a ventilation system in the pyramid. So then the discovery of these stones, what was unusual about the way they were placed? What did you say the interlocked? Inter-blocked? Inter-blocked? Yes. Anybody like fingers? OK. So there's different levels and they all slid in together? They how they put the stones with each other. But now the most important that I took the robot to the second chamber. Now we know that the tunnel in the finished chamber are all but outside. Open outside. But I teach why we have these tunnels in the second chamber. They call it the kune chamber. Then we took the robot to the north and the tunnel of the kune chamber. After 60 feet, the robot stopped because the tunnel was bending to the left and the German robot could not bend. Then we took the robot to the south tunnel, the robot went for 200 feet, stopped in front of a door with two cover handles. That was the first discovery. Now I began to think, how can I find out what's behind this door? In 2002, I was chosen by the National Geographic as explorer and residence, where nine explorers with them, was asked was Bill Bellard, who found Titanic. Each explorer had a dream. I told them I need you to design a robot for me. I want to find out what's behind this door. And they did make a robot and they called it pyramid rover. We took the pyramid rover and the robot went in the south tunnel and the robot had a drilling on his hand. The robot opened one hole, one centimeter and one millimeter and sent an optic camera through this hole. We found after 21 centimeter of this door, a second one. And the second one has an egg-shaped light that as if it's hiding something. Then after that, we went to the north-fern tunnel that was bending. We found out it's bending north and south for 24 feet. And the reason for the bending was to avoid the gun gallery. At 200 feet, the robot stopped in front of a third door, with two cabar handles in the same distance of this one. And these doors are very small, right? Very small, 20 bit, 20 centimeter. Now, I spent most of my life from 2002 until 2024 last year. I found a team from England. And we worked it last year for three seasons. Number one, I found out, above the King of Chimp, the King of Chimp, a big void. The gun, I'm sorry, above the gun gallery. This void, the size of two tracks. Now, the second void behind the north-fern tunnel, another small void. Inside this void, we can see hieroglyphic descriptions. Really? So those are the only hieroglyphics on the pyramid, right? And I can show you the photos. In my, if you have the footage here, if you can come to my lecture in Houston. What about right here? Right now. I can send it to you. Where do you have it? Do you have it on you? In my computer. Where's your computer? In Las Vegas. Oh, fuck. But I can send it to you before you. Yeah, but I want to show it on the show. Chrotting the show. I can send it to you tomorrow. OK. You can send it tomorrow? Yes. OK. We'll spice it in, folks. Then tomorrow, I will send it to you. Please do. OK. Now, give me my email. Now, give me Jamie's email. Yeah, give me, but you should come in. Can you come in and introduce me here in Houston? Excuse me? Can I introduce you in Houston? No, I cannot lie, because I'm very busy. OK. If I had known in advance, I could. Oh, fine. Yeah. Fine. Fine. Unfortunately, I don't have any free time, Zoe. Zahi, Zahi, Zahi, Zahi, Zahi. No, Zahi, Zahi. Then now, Mr. Horwaz. Then now, what do I going to do? So this is the only pyramid can I ask you, though? This hieroglyphics inside this chamber that you've discovered, these are the only hieroglyphics in the Great Pyramid. Is that correct? No, there is in the five chambers I told you. On the other chambers, they told you in the five chambers. Now we have five names of the gangies who read the pyramids. And we have these. These are all recent discoveries. Yes. We're within how long. Are we certain? The, this, white as last year, 2024, the hieroglyphic discovery or three months ago. So all this is very, isn't that fascinating? You've been studying the pyramids much so long and they're still finding that this is to me what I'm going to do. What are you going to do? You're there as a friend of mine. His name is Leslie Grive. Leslie is from Hollywood. He did with me many life TV shows. And he did with the chasing mummies. And Leslie now is working to find a network. To come, we need to do this program live. OK. I want to show the whole world what I discovered inside the pyramid. That's why I don't know if hiding anything. I want to show them the hieroglyphic. Why, why do you always feel like you're in battle with people? Because, because they attack me. Go, go, go, go, go, go. Go, go, go, go. I'm not going to be with people. That, in the back there was me. I understand that, I understand that. But I'm giving you an opportunity to just lay things out. You don't have to argue with people that aren't here. I'm not, I fuck those people. I'm not arguing. I'm not saying. Tilling the people. I'm just fascinated by the discovery itself. OK. Then what does it look like? These hieroglyphic? I know you can read that story. Is that science? You can read that story. But we can, the science are not clear. It's not clear? No. We need to do more investigation in September. Is it a difficulty in seeing inside there? Because you know because there's one, the Egyptian, right, inside the five chambers, for example, they don't write hieroglyphic. They write a cursive hieroglyphic. It's called the hieratic. And this hieratic, it's very difficult to read from outside. What does that look like? It's cursive of the hieroglyphic. Let me see what that looks like, Jim. That's fascinating. No, this is hieroglyphic. This is hieroglyphic. That's hieroglyphic. We need to talk about hieroglyphic. On the right hand side. It's a hieroglyphic. Look at the one, and then write this hieratic. OK. Then it's very difficult. It's so beautiful. Yeah. What a beautiful language. Like the way it's written. It looks like art. Then go. What you are going to do? Before the end of this year, we are going to show what's inside the voice life. Can you keep that up, Jimi? These symbols that look like, make that larger, please. These symbols to the far left that where repolo James cursor right there, like what are those supposed to be? They are science. But what does it mean? Look, it looks like a device. The one down means Sich for a determinant of a scribe. What is the one that is cursive? This is a scribe. It's for a scribe. A scribe. Yeah. What does it mean? Scribe. It means a scribe. Sich. OK. I understand. So, and then the other one on the hieratic, that's the cursive version of the text. I don't. I'm not that expert in hieratic. OK. Because hieratic is very cursive. I understand, but I think this is the way. But we are showing that. I know. But we, if you look at the science in the five chambers that I will send it to you tomorrow, it's very difficult to read. But you can see they are hieratic cursive science. Got it. But the most important that we are going to show this life. Oh, wow. OK. So people don't even know. And you're going to show all this stuff live. We will do it live. But the other thing, we have another team called Scanperamitch Team. They are scientists from Japan, France, and Egypt. I am the scientific director. Who really, if they discover something, they come to me. I have to discuss it with them. And they found, you know, the pyramid. You have the entrance that the people use now is the entrance that the Arabs open. That's in the North face, correct? Exactly. Above that is the main chamber. OK. The team are using a various sophisticated techniques like Eltera Sound, Infrared. With these techniques, you do not need any more to drill. You can really see what's behind the door. And this is really what I'm using right now. Then they came to me and they said, behind the main entrance of the pyramid, there is a corridor. And they showed to me this corridor clear in the five techniques that they're using. But they're gone wide. I have to see it. Let's go up there. We went up there and they sent an optic camera through the stones. And they found I could look at the corridor 30 feet long, eight feet wide, topped with shivering shape. I think you can see that in the internet, the corridor behind the main entrance of the pyramid. Can you get it? It's in the internet, I'm sure. This void above the grand gallery, the size of two tracks. What do you think that is? I have no idea. I'm just telling you what I found. And this was a great pyramid. I did more work on the third pyramid, which is the same techniques and the second pyramid. This is the void. OK, that's incredible. And I think, and bring, the other big void above the grand gallery. I think you'll see it also. So find the void above the grand gallery, Jamie. So this is two trucks, the size of two semi-trucks. And do you have any idea like what the answer is? I would tell you, I would tell you about my theory. Please do. I think that it's here. That's the void. Yeah. Now, and it's that shape. You know that direction? So it's at a slope. It's about the grand gallery. That's it. Yeah, this can pyramid project. Now, I tell you my theory. Please do. We have a story written in hieroglyphic, but not at the time of kufu. It's after kufu. The story it's written in a papa area, it's called kufu and the magician. It's said that kufu was staying in his palace. And he was very upset. He was not happy. And his son came to him, your majesty, why are you unhappy? He said, I'm searching for the sake of the gatoth, the gativuism. Then I can design my barrier chamber in the pyramid. Then his son told him, I know I'm a gition. His name is jiddy. He knows how to cut the head of a man off and put it back. And he knows the sake of the gatoth, the gativuism. He knows how to cut the head of a man off and put it back, but is the guy still alive? Is that what he's saying? No, this is one of the sun. It's telling his father. I understand that. The jiddy can do that. A lot of people can cut it guys head off. But listen to the story. This is the story. When the king told his son, bring this to me, they describe him, he's 100 years old, and he drink on something beer, blah, blah, blah, blah. Jiddy came in front of the king. And Kufa told him, I hear it, that you can cut the head of a man off. He said, yes, your majesty. He said, do it. He said, jiddy, sit, I cannot do it to the human being. He said, OK, I will bring you a prisoner. Jiddy said, a prisoner is a human being. Then he told, he brought him a goose. He took the head of the goose up in front of everyone. And the head came back, and the goose was running in front of everyone. That's written in the story. Then the king, I come back towards believe that now. And the king told him, I won't turn the secular to the gatos to design my barrier chamber. He told them that this secular will not be in your hand. It would be in the hand of another people who wrote Egypt. Kufa was very upset. So he wouldn't give him the secret because that secret won't just be in your hands. It'll get in other people's hands. Then the king, the king was unhappy. He told them, don't turn your majesty, because your rule and your sons and your grandson. Now, about magic. Yeah. Do you believe in religion or not? Yeah. OK. Do you know about Judaism? Sure. One god told Moses, who Moses, mid-gut, and got told them to go to Egypt, to mid-the Pharaoh. And God told them, remember, the Pharaohs are highly in magic. They will beat you. Then God told Moses how to be more in magic than the Pharaoh. And you remember, when he heard the stick, and the stick became a snake, I think. And Moses brought more to Swalyn, what the Pharaoh did. Then we know from books, from Judaism, from the beginning, that the ancient Egyptian were really highly in magic. Then we can believe. Do you think that that magic might have had something to do with how they constructed the pyramids? No? No. But if you believe that they had enough magic to take a goose's head and put it back on, it's still alive. That's magic. Yeah. Wouldn't they use that magic for other things? But we have. But if you believe in magic, I do. Of course you do. You do believe in magic. So you believe that someone could take someone's head off, put it back on. It's written. OK. Then it must be true. Yeah. All right. Yeah. What is this? Someone's going to kill a dove? It's a magic trick. Can you decapitate birds and stuff? Oh. I'll put it back together. I was just reading it. Apparently on the trick, he put the head on the other side of the room and made them come back together. He did it to a calf and a different animal also. But now what do you want to tell you now? Well, that person's magic too. Now, what can make us appear? What I want to show you, that I'm not a person. What do you think magic is? Magic is magic. What do you mean? Well, how does it work? I have no idea. What do you mean by how it works? Well, I mean, how does someone do something like that? I have no idea. We have to go back. Basically, and we have to go back. And we have to go back and you to five, four or six hundred years ago. And do you think a lot of this information is what was lost in the burning of the Library of Alexandria? Of course. This is some of it, but still unbelievably detailed. But also, you know, because I will tell you, why would not have any evidence about kufu, timbills and things like that? Because what happened? The ancient Egyptian belief that afero should be a male. Afero cannot be a female. Anyone who changed the religious belief, they hit him. Hachifut, when she became afero, they hit the term. And they destroyed their monuments. Kufu, when he changed his cult to be a sungat, in the first intermediate period, they destroyed his monuments, the timbills, the statues, the only statute of that king was found in upper Egypt, not a geezer. Even in the timber of his sons, there were 23 statues. They smashed the statues. A smashing was a sign of revenge. Now, do you have any question about kufu pyramid before I switch to the things? Well, I'm fascinated by a lot of aspects of kufu pyramid. Well, one of the big ones that's come up very recently that I'm sure you're aware of is these satellite radar was it called tomography. What is it called tomographic? Where they think that there's these pillars underneath the structure. OK. I investigated this. First of all, these two scholars from Italy, they have never been in Egypt. They have never worked in the pyramids before. Right. And they're using satellite information. Number two, they published their article in a journal. This journal do not send their article to the freeze. You pay a fee to bubble the article in your responsibility. OK. Number three, I am not a scientist. I took this techniques that they used and they give it to expertise. And they said, this techniques cannot show underneath a solar drop of almost 600 feet down. No way. Why can't they? They said this degree cannot show that. But these scientists are saying they can. Do you know about the Osiris shaft? How they've got to understand. I've heard it. You're dead, right? But do you know that they used this tomographic? No! I am the one who founded this book. I know I understand you found it. But they also discovered it. They showed that it exists using the same technique. No! No! This is drunk. This is not true at all. I can do how I found it. How can I find it? I'm not saying that you didn't find it. It's under the paper, signature aperture radar, Doppler tomography by Philipo Bondi. And if you scroll down, Jamie, you'll see an image. And this image is of the Osiris shaft. What shows that they got an accurate depiction of that from space? That's the term salad. It's not true. So what are you saying that they're lying? They're lying here. They're completely lying. But if they're showing, using these techniques, things that we know that you discovered that absolutely exists. Now, this techniques, as I told you, scientists said that this techniques cannot show 600 feet under the pyramid. The Osiris shaft that they found was only 50 feet under the showing at least for 50 feet that this is accurate. What makes you believe those scientists rather than these guys from Italy? Because the scientists are scientists. So these are scientists as well. They are not showing their techniques carefully. They have not. What do you mean they're not showing their techniques? Take the techniques that they set. And show it to any scientist. No one can tell you this is accurate. I ask every person who knows about radar, ultrasound, all the people work with me. The scan pyramid project, they see this is bullshit. It cannot happen at all. Now, tell me. So you're telling me that these scientists that are proclaiming the capabilities of these satellite tomography devices that are saying that they can see kilometers into the ground with this stuff. That's the true idea you sure. I did understand the technology. No, I looked at me. But I asked other people. Scientists who are in this field. Have you talked to these scientists that are seeing that they are going to be looking at these discoveries? I sent. I made the press release. But did you talk to me? I did not. Why not? Because they did not talk to me. How can I find them? I made it. Which would you be willing to talk to the scientists? Of course I am. Yes. Go connect you to them. I'm just interested if new technology becomes available and they figure out a way to look into the ground and you discover things, especially if they discover the Osiris shaft and it turns to actually. They did not discover the Osiris shaft again. You discovered it. But they used their technology to show an accurate depiction of the interior of the Osiris shaft. That was that. That was that is that is that is that is that is that true? No, it's not. The those that is that we show that was that is that is shaft is known to everyone. Right. It can be seen by when they turned their equipment on the Osiris shaft. It shows the actual interior. Maybe I don't know this is 50 feet. Look at it again. And there took over 600 feet. I understand. But if it can go 50 feet, why can't it go 60. Now I am at again. You know again, I'm not a scientist. Right. So why you say it though? I gave what they bought this to a scientist and they see this just not true. But this is what they did all the time. Five, five, five, one's that are biased. Then what I did? I made a breeze release. Okay. Explaining my point. Yes. My work of the second pyramid that the base of the pyramid is to win the eighth feet of Soulstroke. Right. And there is no way that anything can be happened in the Soulstroke. And I explained. I think what the thing is this underneath the solid rock. Right. Let me finish. And I said your techniques that you published in this magazine is not referred by scientists. You just published it. And number three, the team that working in Giza was all this new techniques. They said this is wrong. And they know. The team that's working in Giza with all these techniques, what do you mean? We have the scan pyramid team. Right. They're working. But you understand this is different technology. I understand, but they know about this technology. But have they used this technology? They said this technology cannot work, cannot show 600 feet under the pyramid at all. That's what they said. And that's why if the Italians were confident, they could contact me. And the pyramid expert that anyone should, well, we'll make sure that happens. But listen, if the stone is 20 feet thick, the solid stone the base, that's correct. And you said O'Sire shaft is 50 feet. That means it can see past 20 feet. But how can they see through the stone? And see what they're showing. But that was that sheet that was that is that is that is that is that is shot is open is not covered to see. I understand. You can go and you see that was that is shot down. Everyone can see it. But the interior is not open. And the interior is not open. But you can see the interior. But you can't see it to the exact dimensions, the way these tomographic images show it. If they're using this technology to go 50 feet in the ground, getting accurate pictures. I am not a scientist. I understand. This is a good question. Why would you dismiss it if you haven't looked under there? I told you. It is not me. Who can dismiss this? What does it say, Jim? This is the link to the art original article, I believe. There's their names. It's a very first sentence as that. The problem with penetrating action of electromagnetic waves inside solid bodies, you can't build it. It's sort of distributed targets. It's precluded. And then they had to come up with an experimental, this is experimental results are estimated by processing the SAR images into something else. So I think that's the disconnect. Yeah. I don't understand the technology. But my question is, we know how spectacular the pyramids are. We know how spectacular. Just the base of it, the fact that it's carved into solid rock. Why would you not think that maybe other spectacular things exist? I am not. I told you. I am not this type. No, it's about this science. I consulted the team, the top in the world. From Japan, France, and Egypt. Who are these people? They are. The Scampolium team. What? OK. The Scampolium. Yeah. And the ones that found the chamber above. And they are working with me. And we found many other things in the second pyramid. And the third pyramid. And we published this. I was just published an article. I understand. Last week using different. Then what I am saying, if this techniques that these two Italians are correct, the only people who really can tell you it's correct or not are the scanned pyramid people. Not me. But the scanned pyramid people aren't they using different technology? But they know about technology. They are the top scientists in the world. I have to believe them. Look to Italians. And if the Italians are really correct, they could come to talk to us, not me, to talk to me, and others. I will definitely try to connect you with those people, because I know that Graham Hancock and Brian Murray Rescue have been in contact with those people. And they're open-minded about it. They don't know what's going on down there. But these images are repeated over and over and over again. Hi. But fascinating. Either way. OK. The whole, one of the fascinating things about Egypt to me is the fact that it's not just so much more advanced in terms of construction than anywhere else in the world. But that it's still to this day. Nothing even close has ever been even attempted to this day. What do you think was going on back then, as far as their capabilities and their understanding, that led them to do something so spectacular that other people were 4,500 years ago. Again, the belief of the afterlife built Egypt. Right. But they also had to have a few kind of thing of engineering and construction and design. To do this belief of the afterlife, the built-up pyramid, as I told you, this was the national project of the end. No, I understand the national project. But they have to know. You can talk about this pyramid. If it exists alone, when you come to Egypt and you go through time, you will see that everything gradually, there is no gap that you can would you remember that. There is no gap for anyone to think something different than the belief of the Egyptians. Why? Oh, yeah. Well, maybe some people are. I mean, some people do. But I mean, it's all the Egyptians. Obviously, it was in Egypt. I mean, it's the Egyptians that made it. Yes, it's pretty obvious. Okay. That just seems obvious. Then if you believe it, without a happy, I'm happy to hear this. Yeah. Well, I just think whenever people say it's aliens, they're like, where's the proof of that? Exactly. Also, they built a lot of spectacular things. Like, no if ands or buts. Just the statues, just the faces of the pharaohs with incredible symmetry. Just why I ordered, really, I won't, since you are interested in Egypt, we would like to invite you to come to Egypt. I want to come. I just, it's for me to be very busy. It's for me to be very busy. We are willing to invite you. I will. Let's go. Tell me when. Okay. I would arrange everything for you. We'll hook it up. But now I want to come to the Sphinx also. Okay. Can we talk about the Sphinx please? Now, you know, who when I was young, I was met by the Edgar Casey, son, the psychic. He only kissed. Yeah. And he only kissed who was the son of Edgar Casey. I was young. I really don't know what's this case he had. When they came to Egypt and talked about his father. You know about Edgar Casey. Yeah. Okay. Then it's a vision that there was a chamber underneath the Sphinx and the myth that I pull of the Sphinx. Where is the chamber? And he envisioned that, correct? Yes. And this why I'm going to Virginia Beach to give a talk. One of the cities in my tour now is Virginia Beach. Why? Because when people began to tell me there is something inside the Sphinx. I really, as I told you, I have an open mind. And I did search. I found inside the Sphinx for tunnels. When behind the stealer, they call it the Dremestila. Between the two balls of the Sphinx. And the second one behind the head in the top. Right. There's actually a door on the top of the head now. No, no, no. It's just the tunnel. A tunnel. Twin-defying. Isn't it closed off though? No. Yeah, it's closed. Yeah. It's like a door on the top. It's not the door. No, it's a tunnel. Go to the door. But it's closed off. You can go up to the Sphinx. This is why we have to cover the guards. It will take rubbish and garbage. That's the top. That's what I'm talking about. Isn't that the top of it? Is this the Sphinx? Yes, it is. OK, that's a lid, right? Yeah, we covered it. OK. Yeah. But we covered it? Got it. To protect it from the sand. But it's not the door. OK. It's a lid. The third tunnel that they found in the back. Now Edgar Casey, he had this vision that there was some hall of information. I know, but I'm going to come to this now. But I'm talking to you about the tunnels. Now, and the third one is in the tail. The force when was opened in 1927 by a French-Yslimishuberez. And I do have photos of workable inside the Sphinx. We found this four tunnels are published. An article, scientific article. I found in situ in all the four tunnels of buttery, in situ to brew that these tunnels were opened on Dynasty 25, 500 BC, as in the late period. When the Egyptians saw the Sphinx, they thought there is something hidden underneath. And they dug and they found nothing. Now, we come to the Edgar Casey and what people believe, because we had Jean Antenois. And we had many new-age people who believed there is something hidden underneath the Sphinx. And they used to tell me, we need your permission. To what? To drill. It's now, can I let someone who's not an archaeologist, who's not a scientist, to drill? No way. But recently, I found out the rise of the water table in front of the Sphinx. And I was really afraid that the water could damage the Sphinx. Then I brought a team from Keir University. And we did drill 30 to 35 feet underneath the Sphinx everywhere. And I do have photos of everywhere under the Sphinx. The Sphinx is a solar rock or a leaving rock. And there is nothing underneath. Those tunnels? No tunnels. This is exactly. OK. I told you what is it. What do you think about Robert Shock in his theory about the temple and the erosion outside of the Sphinx, the water erosion? When Chuck said that, OK, we brought through the American Research Center, a scientist from Louisville University. I don't remember his name now. And we gave him what Robert the shock. You know what Robert Shock said? It's a theory of a new age guy who talked about this before. And John Anthony was brought. So I don't remember. Then we gave this guy from Louisville University. He was an Indian American. Who really studied, he came to the Sphinx and he worked with us for a season. And he came and we published many articles that the erosion that you see outside and inside the Sphinx is from wind and not from water. Now, what Shock want to say that this is dated back 15 so the years ago? I agree. OK. If I came here and I dug the Sphinx, I will leave something. Then what I did with Doug and area, north east of the Sphinx, I found Louisville, Alkingham, Midrkingham, New Kingdom, Roman, nothing underneath. Then this new age people say that the head of the Sphinx is very small comparing to the body. Yes. Why? Why? If you take all the casey stones away from the Sphinx, you'll find exactly here the Sphinx. And now this and another part like this. In between, there is a hollow. Remember, I told you that Giza Plateau is divided to three levels. Level one and two is very bad stones. Can be seen to the shift of the Sphinx. Level three, they carve with the head from level three. The one, the assumption, carve with the head to represent the King Kifrin with the Copra, the Royal Head premise, they began to make a, a, a, a, alloying body. Then what they did, they filled this hollow between the two Sphinx pieces with the stones. And they covered the whole body of the Sphinx with the stones. And they did the modeling of the alloying body on the covering stones. And this is why the head is very small comparing to the body. So you think the head was made first and then the body was made later. Exactly. If that's the case, why is the body so much more eroded than the head? I told you the body, it is a part of the bad souls. Bad stones. The more, the more stones. Exactly. So what's the different density to the stones? That's why the stone and the, the, the Sphinx's head is intact. Because it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's level three. So it's a different kind of stone. Exactly. Of the body. Because there's layers to it all. They ship some of the layers or more damage. The ships have wanted to make alloying body. They couldn't. The only way is to cover the body of the stones and do the modeling of the alloying body on the covering stones. Can we take two minutes rest? Yeah, sure. Want to take a break? Yes. Okay. Okay. Go to the bathroom. You know what it is? Yes. Just go outside, take a left. We're back. This Sphinx. So you were saying that these other experts that looked at it didn't agree that it was water erosion and said that they think that it was wind. So what, what, John Anthony West and what Graham Hancock and what Robert Chalk and all these different people are trying to allude to is that perhaps there was even older stuff that was in Egypt and that the things that you're seeing that are 2005 on any BC, those are even more recent than the older stuff. Tell me about Zep Tappy. What's this? What's this? You never heard about, have you heard about the, like you know about the Kings list, right? The old Kings list that goes back 30,000 whatever years? Who said that? You never seen it in, it's not in hieroglyphs? This is not true. Is that true? No. No. This is, it's speculation from people who knows nothing about history. There is nothing King list dated back 30,000 years ago at all. So why did you keep saying that? Because they don't know. It's speculation. Give me one evidence of that. The only, the first King list dated back to that is the five. Only I was reading that people were saying that it was myth, that the Kings list, even though there is like some hieroglyphics of ancient kings that these are just mythical tales. Not true. There is no at all. A name that you told me, I never heard of this name. I am an Egyptologist working in Egypt for the last 57 years. I never heard of this King list at all. Never? Never even heard of it. Why I have to hear about it because not true. I don't want to miss the same time in things like this. I am a person. Give me a fact. So in what is this? Egyptian zep-tepi refers to the first time or the first occasion. Who said this? This is an AI. It refers to a mythical golden age of Egypt where gods lived on earth and civilization was in its infancy. This period is often associated with the beginning of creation and the establishment of societal structures. Have you never heard of that before? No. This is not true. What do you mean it's not true? I'm getting this often. No, it never happened at all. Okay. I'm not saying it happened. I'm saying this is something that's referred to. It's never be I never heard about it. It is not true. It is not existed at all. Even if it doesn't exist, the myth of it exists. I don't listen, Joel. Why do I have to go to a myth of people to the stories? If you go to Wikipedia. I don't care about Wikipedia. I understand. I care about what I see in my eyes as an archaeologist or a biologist. And all of the myth of the world was said to emerge from an infinite lifeless sea when the sun rose for the first time in a distant period known as zep-tepi, the first occasion, different myths attributed to the creation of different gods, the set of eight primordial deities called agdod, the contemplative deity, pata, and the mysterious transcendent god, while describing these different cosmonogies, completed, or competed to some extent in other ways they were complementary in different aspects of Egyptian understanding of creation. It's an Egyptian creation. Fine. You've never heard of that before? No, but I heard of that before. That's some strange that you didn't hear about that before. This is a distance. I've heard of it before. Fine, you can hear about it. I mean, I just found that I'm a human. It's a new age. It's new age. Yes. Listen to me. I know. And any is a ptolezist. Who study is a ptolezist in the States here. You have universities in UCLA and you have Berkeley and you have John Hopkins and you have everyone. There is no, every ish up to the east here, study languages and archaeology. No one can answer what you're talking about. This is whole destination. I'm sorry. This is not true. It's a speculation from people, but never in Egypt. We know the prehistory of Egypt. We know the pre-dianistic of Egypt. We know the beginning of civilization. We know every, there is no gap in anything that can let some things like that. And this why I never heard of it. And I don't want to hear about it. You don't want to hear about it? No, why? Because there is no evidence. I am a scientist. I believe on what's written in front of me. And I believe over seen that I can see. But I don't believe on theories like this. Tell me where this found and where it is and who published it? What is a scientist who published it? What is a psychologist who talked about it? I'd like to know. That's why I'm asking you. I've never heard of it. Well, I'm shocked that you haven't at least heard of it and dismissed it. I was like, that's how I did it. Because it's just a, I think it's a part of the creation myth. I know, but it's not true. I received many theories every day. My mind, Joe now is really cannot stand all this theories. All of it is too much for me. It's too much for me. Got it. I see if you find anything on that, Jamie. Where that myth came from. How about where it was now? Yeah. Is it a devolve thing? What I just found is that it came from a... Who is Beaufort? Beaufort is not a scientist. No, I'm just... Yeah, I know. Those people, Jani, won't someone came to you with a theory. He has to have a, a ship to the ship background. He has to write an art as a difficult article. We write all what we discover. We write articles about them for people to read and kill its size and give us opinion. What I can go to theories like this, that has no basis. What do you base the dates on? Do you base it on carbon? No, we don't. We based dating on the evidence that we discover. Right. Like Zionis based on carbon, right? No, I don't believe in carbon debt for Tina at all. You don't? Carbon debt for Tina never give an accurate dating. And that's why I believe, you know, when you discover something, if you discover a symmetry, there is two types of dating. One called absolute dating means that in this symmetry, you have a name of a king and a date. This is absolute. But if you discover another symmetry and has no dates, then the best thing that we do is to find the artifacts in this symmetry and try to compare it with other dated symmetry. And you give a date to for this, but you don't believe in carbon debt for Tina at all. And it's not working in Egypt until today. I have been excavating also in the well of the kings where I discovered major important things that you can talk about. So if you're going back, I used radar in all my excavation. And I never had a result by radar and carbon debt for Tina, we people use it when there is no date. But wait a minute, you use radar to date things? No, I use radar to discover things. Right. But what do you use to date them? Data that I told you, two methods of dating. Most of the dating that for me now in New Oxford is based on evidence. I discovered the Golden City. It's a major big large, a large, large settlement, a city. And you know, the city was chosen the most important discovery in the world of year 2021 because this is the first time that we have a big, large city to tell us about the people who made this civilization. So how do you know how old the city is? In the city, we discovered the names everywhere of King, I mean, out of the third, who was the father of a connection. Inside the city, we found many statutes of a screen, green tea. We found an description about dried beet stored to celebrate the third set festival of I mean, out of the third. We found nine Royal workshops in the city. Then the city tells us about the golden age of that king. It is dated by puttery by a significant description by many things. But I'm curious as to why you're skeptical about carbon dating because I think carbon and I generally accepted as I think it's been a certain framework. But I never used it. Many people very rare used it in Egypt because in Egypt, mainly we have absolute chronology, we have absolute dating based on in descriptions. Well, but I thought it was used in Egypt like to measure wood that was in mortar to date the Great Pyramid 2005. So that was that was an experiment to date the pyramid. I think was about 2009 and it is not, it's not working. But I didn't see the result. Do you have a result on carbon testing of the mortar of the Great Pyramid? No, but the mortar, you can't. One thing, the mortar between the stones. This mortar, like if you take a base of stone from the pyramid and you try to take the curb for a team, this base of stone could be thousands years in the quarry. It can look data pyramid. How can you date? Hold on, you don't date stone. I'm saying if you date mortar, how can you say accurately that this mortar is dated to the same time of building the pyramid? Well, you can actually, that's the argument is that there is probably repairs done. Right? Of the pyramid? Yes. Of the pyramid, there is no awareness of any of the relations, no restoration, nothing. But any accurate evidence that the pyramid was restored dry, but there are any period of the Egyptian history. There is restoration that goes on even now though on this Sphinx, correct? I did make 10 years of restoration for the Sphinx. It's me. Hold it in the restoration of the Sphinx for 10 years. Why did you decide to do that? Because the Sphinx, when I left, I was studying in the States, I came to take my doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania from 1980. From 80 to 87, some architect and archaeologists were really stupid. They began to restore the Sphinx and they took all the casing stones of the Sphinx out. And they put modern stones and they used cement. You cannot use cement in the restoration. You can use cement in building a house. Yeah, that's not even restoration. Then a new creation. When I came, I stopped this restoration. And because this restoration damaged completely the proportions of the Sphinx, it brings to you another Sphinx. Right. Alglee. A few months later, there was a stone that was restored in the shoulder of the Sphinx. It was built down in February. It was raining. And all those people use the Sphinx for politics. The Sphinx? The Sphinx? Yeah. I tell you, it happened the first time in the photonic period. You know, the area beside the Sphinx was called the valley of Gazelle. And the princess of the new kingdom used to come to hunt wild animals in the valley and come towards the Sphinx. And this story of the Antonio is written in a granite stila, it's called the dreamy stila, located now between the two paws of the Sphinx. In the stila, it's safe that Toth was the fourth was a prince. And he came to have an app beside the Sphinx. And the Sphinx came to him in the dream and told him my son, if you remove the scent away, I will make you the king of Egypt. Then he removed the scent and he came to a temple. He found a door. What year was this? This is one, three thousand years ago, exactly. So the Sphinx was constructed long before the volcano. And then it had been covered in sand. Yes. Completely. This is why Herodotus, the father of the history, when he came to Egypt in the middle of the fifth century BC, he never talked about the Sphinx, because completely under the scent. Then what took both the force came, he took the scent away. And he found that the all kingdom, Casey Brooks, are falling down. He bought them back. And he went to the Sphinx, nearby, he took this granite stila as a door and he wrote this story in it. But we found that there is something politics in that story. He killed his elder brother, who was supposed to be the king of Egypt. And he wrote this story to till the Egyptian that the god Hora Emahat, Horace of the horizon, it shows me to be the king of Egypt. And they would forgive the crime that hit it. Well, that stone, it filled down in 1988. A big fight happened between the head of Antichrist and the members of culture ended by firing the head of Antichrist. It's politics. But I stayed 10 years, whom we were asking about the best thing that I did in my life, I say two things. Number one, that I restored the Sphinx. I brought the proportion of the Sphinx back. And I restored the oldest pyramid in Egypt, the steppe pyramid. It was falling down. In 14 years, I made major important conservation and restoration. And I did people, why do I have to fight all the time about the age of the pyramid? We have to fight. We have to cooperate all of us to restore these monuments. And the most important thing is for me always is conservation. And I dedicate most of my life not only to the excavation, but to conservation. What do you think the arguments are that predate, that try to push the date back of the construction of the pyramids? I know, I don't hear of this. You've never heard of this before. No, it's only new, it's a theory from the new age. But I know I saw it debate with you. I saw it debate with you and Graham Hancock who is another real just. was, hold on, the other archaeologist was saying, if you're saying that something happened 10,000 years ago, where's the evidence of any civilization from 10,000 years ago? Exactly. But then you found go backly, go backly, tapi was buried over 11,000 years ago. That's not true. I never heard about this. Do you mean it's not true? It's not true what they're talking about. What is not true? It's never happened. It's never discovered this. That's all. Wait a minute, go backly, tapi's in Turkey. Okay. Oh, and pick it. It's very complex, stone structures. Fine. Fine. But this was the evidence. Hold on. This is the evidence in the argument. The argument was there was no evidence of an ancient civilization from 10,000 plus years ago. This is before the discovery of go backly, tapi. Go backly, tapi gets discovered known to be more than 11,000 years ago. That changes everything. Because now we know, yes it does. That's the same. Because now we know there was an advanced civilization capable of a spectacular construction 11,000 plus years ago. This is what this is. Look at the archaeologists in Turkey or in its realization. They never talk about ultimateization. That's not true. Go backly, tapi is universally accepted as being more than 11,000 years ago. I am talking now about Egypt. I understand. But the argument was that there was never any ancient civilization capable of spectacular construction 10,000 years ago. Now that they showed go backly, tapi is more than 11,000 years old, they know for sure that's not true. Okay. But now I'm talking about the pyramids of Egypt. I have the evidence that it didn't. We found everything about that. We know the dating. And I give you. I think that it's of evidence that this pyramid built by Gopher or Gopher. No, I'm not saying it wasn't. I'm not saying it wasn't. And what I'm saying is any civilization older than we know older we have known in the same spot. We have we have no evidence. So how does ancient Egypt emerge? In British we have how does it emerge and go from zero to pyramids? We have. Do you have. Can you listen to me? Yeah. We have. But he historic. Is right. And we have the oldest stone age. Maybe the stone age. New music. And the Egyptian began to know about agriculture. And they began to live together in communities. Then after that we came to the pre-darnastic. When a king called Narmer in dynasty zero, he began to make unification of the upper and flour issue until one king called the meaner or hora who united completely. And what year was this? This is what was three stars of BC five thousand years ago. In a place called the abiris they built huge mud break tombs who are huge for mud break no stones. And these tombs are created in a site called abiris. You know what's really fascinating about this is that five hundred years he think about that. How different just modern civilization was five hundred years ago. Five hundred years ago we had almost none of the inventions we have today. We had no internal combustion engine, you know, no hardened steel, none of the things that we have. And now look what we have with electronics. Now imagine what the Egyptians were able to do in five hundred years on a different in a different way. And construction with stone. Their advancements weren't like our advancements but their advancements were equally spectacular just in a different way. Okay. Now I come back to the mud break structure. This is in dynasty one and two. On dynasty three came a king called Zoser. He had a genius architect. His name is Imhotep. I am searching. Did you hear about Imhotep? Yes. I am searching for his two. Only two weeks ago before I came I made a major important discovery in Egypt. I found a tomb of a son of a king inside in curable statues of Zoser and his father and his queens and his children. Where is his tomb? In the shadow of the steeper and the shadow of Zoser. And this really made me because I have been searching for the tomb of Imhotep most of my life. But the area that I found this tomb, it was under houses. Modern houses. Oh wow. The Werkerman who worked in the site one hundred years ago, they built houses in the site. But they never excavated what's under me houses. Wow. So modern houses and everything is next to them. Six months ago we gave houses to these people in another area and we demolished this houses. We found underneath. Major discoveries. This discovery will be in today's show this week. Now I am sure now that Imhotep's tomb is in this area. Wow. Now I can't wait. What technology can you use to discover like these underground caverns and chambers and all what I do is digging. That's it. That's it. I think you guys are onto something and you can find more stuff. I hope you can come to see what I do and what they discover. I want to. I want to tell you this to tell you. And what I discovered I can show to you. Please do. Jamie is that happy to find anything about that? About where the origins of that. Maybe a book from 1960 and I couldn't figure out how he got there. Probably a long sludge through information and try to get to the root of it. But can we continue with how it happened until you have the pyramids? Sure. Then Imhotep came and he built the same mustaba. Mustaba in Arabic means a bench. He built the construction in my brick of stone for the first time and he added more section to the first one and he bought above that five mustaba. It's called the the stistap pyramid. In the pyramid text. That's the first one. In the pyramid text they say that the stip pyramid is a stirs. The king is buried underneath to go to heaven. And this one was how many years before the great pyramid. It's almost 700 years. So obviously it's not nearly sophisticated as the great pyramid. So in 700 years they just got way better. Listen. Now on that is the three. There is another pyramid was found. And only I found recently that I did not excavated completely. I found a pyramid which is the end of the last three of a king called Hone. Then now we came to the center. This name is Hone. Hone. Hone. Hone. Hone. It's you and I. Then we come to the honesty for Cinephro. Cinephro had a genius architect. His name was nepharimat. Then he started. Sounds a good name for genius. Yeah. He built a step pyramid like this in a site called the maydum. But for reason we do not know, he lifted unfinished. And he went to a place called the shur. He built the pyramid with a huge angle and it changed the angle. It became bent. And he built another pyramid. If you look at the other pyramid of the father of Kofu, it exactly is human. To the great pyramid. This is the first true pyramid, but people never go to the shur to look at this pyramid. People always look at Kofu. Then you have in dynasty four, the pyramids were huge because of the quality of the stones. In dynasty five and six, there is no good quality of stones in the Egyptian made decrees on the volume of the stones. And it increases in the volume of the war reliefs. Timbills began to be decorated with scenes for the first time. In the medics kingdom, another trend. Mad break pyramid, but underneath, maize corridors of stones. That if you go down, you lose your way. And then you kingdom, they built, they came in the top of the valley of the kings, a shape of the pyramid and they buried all the kings like King Tatan Azeras underneath the pyramid, shape. So that's the story. That's the story. All right. Well, listen, man, it's been fascinating talking to you and I definitely am going to take you up in your offer. I'm definitely going to go to Egypt. No, we're now we'll talk. Now we'll talk to you. And you got to send that video so we can spice it in. Of the hieroglyphs that are on the wall. We'll send that right now. I will send it tomorrow. OK. But give the image to Gregor and Mustafa now. We will do that. And they are the people that will talk to them now to arrange for your trip. OK. And I would invite you for a good, many days you think I should go. Ten days at least. Jamie, you got to come. You want to do a podcast for that? Just do it with me. Let us do one inside the gate pyramid. Yeah, definitely. 100%. OK. Oh, here's another problem with the idea that these Italians are proposing. Isn't there a water table under the pyramid that's like a million years old? No. There's not water underneath there? No. This is the zirish shaft that was full of water. So is that what Mr. Beast was swimming in? Exactly. But where's that water coming from? It's a water table. There is a water table. This shaft, this shaft, I came. by a water company and we did suck all the water out until he found underneath as a carficous and four pillars. Oh, wow. And this is the symbolic barrier of the gate of the zirish. Because Gizaplato was called the denukingdom per user neprastau, the house, the ziris, Lord of rastau. Rastau means symmetry. But literally means the underground tunnels. That ziris is ruling. When he came, he talked about this water under the pyramid. It is in the shaft. And this one beast entered inside and swabbing. Okay. You know, I met him because I wanted to convince the young people that better me to build by aliens. This why I took him to three meters. Yeah, I don't understand the alien thing. I think super advanced culture, super advanced. But you know, but you know, the library of Alexandria burning is probably one of the many, many people in America believe that you believe in aliens. When I took to them that I'm coming to see you that I believe in aliens. They do. Well, I'm not opposed to the idea of aliens existing. There's hundreds of billions of galaxies in the known universe, each with hundreds of billions of stars, the idea that we're uniquely alone. You don't think there's anything out there? Nothing. I believe in ancient civilizations capable of advanced construction. Joe, don't believe in aliens. Joe, I am a scientist. I am a scientist. If you believe in something, write an article that I can read, but don't give me a theory. But the theory of the planet's containing intelligent life is... That's not true. I have been debating Grand Hancock, a rubber ball file. And John Anthony was that I told them from the beginning, your theory will go with the theory. But we're not talking about that theory. We're talking about aliens being possible. No way! No, just us. This is the universe. That's not the whole universe. If you're believing in God, if you're believing in God, you'll do better. That's the option. Believe the love to life. And they made this great civilization. I'm not saying aliens made it. I'm saying it's very possible. There's something else out there in the world. Thank you. All right. Thank you, everybody. Enjoy it. I enjoyed it too. And I'll see you in the next one. Bye, everybody.