Joe Roman Feynman. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. Oh, so good to see you. What's happening? How you been? Doing great. Got big news. I'll talk big. Big. Big. OK. Drops. The book. Suicidal empathy. Suicidal empathy. We use all the time. It's right. Yeah, it is a good quote. And it is a very accurate quote for the times, I like this for their care and the sign, free the wolves. The lamb is caring. Well, I wanted the cover to be as evocative as the concept, right? Dying to be kind. There you go. And they are just in the last two days, there have been so many new cases of suicidal empathy that I regret that I couldn't include them in the book. But like which ones? So did you hear about the one where the guy who tried to assassinate President Trump? Oh yeah. The judge then went and said, I am so sorry that you're not being treated nicely. You have a room without a window. This is just, it's mean. Oh, see, I don't think that that suicidal empathy at all. I think that's signaling. I think that signaling that he wishes that that man was successful and that he supports his endeavor. Fair enough. This second example, actually today, they've proven, shared it with me. It was the one where a felon of color who had just been released ended up pushing, right? And the previous person that he had been entangled with didn't want to whatever press charges because she didn't want another black man to be in prison. Oh boy. So boy, boy, boy, boy. So we can, so I hope to get into the book in a second. But the other big news is that this past year, I've been a visiting scholar at Old Miss University of Mississippi. I've taken a two year leave from my school at Montreal, starting this summer, we are moving permanently to Oxford. So the Lebanese Jews, Canadians are going down to Oxford, Mississippi, and we're very excited. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you're going to be there for two years. So as I worked, three years. Three years. You're doing a green card or a visa? Yeah. So the previous two years that I did, it was a leave of absence. So I only had to get a TN visa. But now that we're moving, we're, I applied for an EB1A visa, which gets you a green card. It's one, they're called extraordinary visas. You have to pass certain criteria to them. You are extraordinary, aren't you? And rather easy on the eyes. And so, and so that went through, thank God. And so, yeah. So we're very, congratulations. Yeah. Yeah. So, and hopefully this will be a fast track to my inner spirit as American, but maybe we can legalize it and turn, turn the sides into Americans. Wow. And you're enjoying, you're going to join the team. All right. If you'll have me. Ah, we'll have you. Come on. Welcome aboard. We need more people that are thinking straight. So that's the big news. That's awesome, man. Congratulations. Thank you. That's a fantastic thing. That's beautiful. Do you want to get into the book and then we talk about other stuff? Sure. I thought maybe I'd give you because I know that you know the personic mind really well. Yes. And so I wanted to kind of contextualize this book in relation to that book. So we are thinking in a feeling animal, both our cognitive system is important and our affective system is important. For example, advertisers recognize that if I'm trying to sell you a mutual fund, I need to engage your cognitive system. Here are the seven reasons why you should buy my mutual fund. If I'm trying to sell you perfume, I don't tell you this is what Harvard physiologist think about the science of a faction. Right? I need to engage your affective system. So in that case, I will show you a pretty girl on a horse with beautiful hair and the brand name will be MISTE. Right? I'm just engaging your emotional system. Well, the parasitic mind was the story of what I need to do to hijack your cognitive system, your ability to think rationally. And hence, they were all these parasitic ideas that destroyed your capacity to think. But for me to completely zombify you and hijack you, I also need to zombify your affective system. That's where source out empathy comes in. So if I can hijack both your cognitive and emotional systems, you become a wood cricket, which we could talk about what that reference is, if you want. What's a wood cricket? So the wood cricket is an insect that abhors water. It wants nothing to do with water. But when it is parasitized by a neuro parasite called the brain hairworm. Well, I've seen this. Right? The hairworm needs the wood cricket to happily and merrily commit suicide by jumping into the water, because that's the only way that the hairworm can complete its reproductive cycle. So once the hairworm hijacks the wood cricket's ability to think and to invoke its survival instinct, it erases its survival instinct, then it is owned by the hairworm. And so I use that principle to explain suicide empathy. Yeah, we've actually shown videos of that. It's very strange. It's amazing. Cricket really commits suicide. Jump in the water, drowns, and the worm wiggles out of its body. Exactly. And that's how it's born. Exactly. And so many, there's so many cases of that in nature. Indeed. Yeah. And so the way that I had originally had the epiphany to use the parasitological framework. So parasitology is just a study of host parasite interactions. So a tape worm is a parasite, but that parasitizes my intestinal track. But a subfield of parasitology is neuro parasitology. Those are the parasites that need to go into your brain, altering your circuitry to suit their interests, including ideas. And that's how I came up with the parasitic ideas in the parasitic mind. But in order to fully tell the story, I then had to say, but a lot of the mechanisms by which people seem to be completely hijacked in terms of their ability to think critically is really coming from an affective place. And so how can I explain that? And so what I argue in the book, and then we can drill down to endless examples if you want. I'm not saying that empathy is a bad thing. Because even though the book is just dropping, there's already been maybe 10 articles that have been hit pieces against the book, which of course, people, it means people haven't read it yet. Where they say, you know, here comes the dark Jew who is trying to promulgate the idea that empathy is a bad thing. He's a neo-con right wing guy, an e-long guy, a strong, strong, strong guy. I'm not saying that empathy is actually a very important virtue to have. In order for you and I to have a meaningful conversation, I need to put myself in your mind and vice versa. That's called cognitive empathy. Right? Theory of mind is something that typically autistic children fail on very early in life. That's how you diagnose them as being autistic. So there's nothing wrong with well-modulated empathy. The problem with empathy, like most things in life, is if there's too little or too much of it. Aristotle explained this to us thousands of years ago, via his golden mean. If a soldier is not courageous enough, he's cowardly, it's not good. If he's too courageous, he becomes a reckless martyr, that's not good. There's a sweet spot in the middle. I argue empathy follows exactly that rule. Too little of it, you're a psychopath. Too much of it. If it's hyperactive, if it is invoked in the wrong situations, toward the wrong targets, you end up with suicidal empathy. Yeah, I don't even necessarily know if it's empathy at that point. It completely becomes a logical and ideological. You just subscribe to whatever the ideology says, and you ignore the reality. Like this man that pushed that guy in front of the train. Like this is a violent criminal, and he had been arrested numerous times. I think more than a dozen. And it was very clear that there's something very wrong with this person. He probably shouldn't be just running free, victimizing people. There was another one where someone pushed this old guy down a flight of stairs into the subway and killed him. Same situation. Same kind of person, person that had been in and out of jail. Every one of these people starts off as a child. Every one of these people starts off as a baby. And I can only imagine what kind of household they developed in. I can only imagine what kind of abuse they suffered. I can only imagine what happened to them. And that's horrible. But once they reach adulthood and they start victimizing other people, we've got to do something as a society. Exactly. No, I don't know what the tools are to rehabilitate a person like that. But I know that they're not being employed. There's not a whole lot of evidence of there's any successful program where they're taking a person like that and doing something with them that completely changes their personality and the way they interact with humans and releases them out in the world and become a much better person than they used to be. So I call them, in the book, I call them blank slate felons. Because if you remember the term blank slate, so in the parasitic mind, I talk about social constructivism. Everything is social construction. It's the tabula rasa premise. We're born with empty minds with no individual differences in our potentiality. And it's only our unique life trajectories and our unique patterns of social socialization that end up making us who we become. Which in a small sense, that's true. My life experience in yours is an indelible part of who we are as individuals. But there are individual differences. The people are born with different proclivities, eventually, of committing crimes or of being and be a players or being the next Einstein. It's a very hopeful message, though, to start with the blank slate panelists. Exactly. Because if you and I are both parents, I would love to subscribe to the idea that if only I knew the exact schedule of reinforcement of my how to ensure that my child becomes the next leanel messy or the next Albert Einstein, he too can become that. That's a lot more hopeful than thinking, you know what? I don't think my son has the more logical features that are ever going to make him to be the next NBA star. He's too short. He doesn't have the right athletic tools. And so it's easy to understand why people can be parasitized by these ideas. This person of color was born into a white supremacist society. So he's already been victimized by society. And for you to now punish him by having him in the penal system, you're doubly punishing him. So shouldn't you give him a second chance? And by second chance, we mean 186 chance. That's part of suicidal empathy. But suicidal empathy doesn't even apply to only that. The victims of rape are themselves are so decidedly empathetic towards their rapists. Can I share some of those incredible stories? Sure. So I start off in the book with an example from a Norwegian man who had been sodomized by a Somali migrant. Because the Norwegians are very kind and empathetic, they don't believe in long sentences. He served maybe I don't know three years or four. Like a pretty short sentence for a rape of another man. When he was being released, he was going to be deported. The victim of that rape had this huge existential angst and guilt. Because now that Ahmed was going to be released back to Mogadishu, he wouldn't end up being able to maximally flourish that like he should be. Well, our emotional system did not evolve to be empathetic toward our rape as that would be an example of someone who's being suicidal empathetic. Another great example. What happened in that case? In terms of whether he was deported or not? I think I don't want to misspeak, but I think he was deported to the screams and lamentations of the... Of the physical victim. There is a woman who was raped in Germany. And when the authorities were trying to find out more about who the perpetrators were, she lied to them and said that they were speaking in German, even though they were speaking in Arabic and Farsi. Because if she had truly said what their language was, then those communities would have been marginalized. So there's just an endless number of like a litany of these examples. And therefore, suicidal empathy is really pervasive once you recognize the mechanism. But when you look at the root of that, how's it so common? Like what happens? So I think that's a great question. I think again, it goes back to the one two punch of parasitic violence who's out of empathy. In order for the fertile grounds to be available for suicidal empathy to barge in, I first have to have certain ideas that are implanted in your brain. So let me give you a concrete example. Cultural relativism is a parasitic idea that I discussed in the parasitic mind. It basically says, who are you to judge the beliefs and the practices of another culture? Shut up, racist, right? So they are honor killings. Shut up. There are child brides. Shut up. There are female genital mutilations. Shut up. Don't judge other cultures. Well, if you internalize that parasitic idea that it is not appropriate to ever judge the cultural practices of another culture, then that renders you impotent when you're making judgments about who should be led into your country, about whether you want an increase of people who hold those views or not. Therefore, that leads to the suicidal empathetic position that all immigrants are equally likely to assimilate within the American ethos or the Western ethos. So we started off with internalizing a parasitic idea called cultural relativism. And that lays the foundation for then the suicidal empathy of open borders. Well, there's no pressure at all to assimilate. You're more than welcome. That's one of the weird things. Well, then welcome to establish a Somali community in Minnesota where no one speaks English. Exactly. It's very odd. It's very odd that people want to come here, but when they come here, they want to essentially turn it into a smaller version, at least their neighborhood of where they came from. Right. And a lot of, I mean, if it were only that you don't speak English, I mean, to me, that's bad enough and that you're not going to be part of the fabric of the greater society. But fair enough, that's not an existential threat. But if you're then going to be advocating for many of the cultural beliefs that are perfectly antithetical to the whole society, then we have a problem. Yeah. And a lot of the cultural beliefs that are logical, they have to be based on something else. And generally, that's religion. Indeed. And you and I have talked very often about Islam and so on. Some people, I think, I wonder what you think about this. Do you think more Americans are willing to have a honest and open conversation about this issue or are most still sort of the proverbial ostrich? And they think it's goes to talk about religion. Well, I think it's really divided in party lines. People on the right are more than willing to talk about it. There's very few people on the right who are empathetic about some of the differences that these religions have and hold and some of the rules that they would like to apply like Sharia law, whereas there's a lot of people on the left that are terrified of being called racist, terrified of being called Islamophobic or, you know, filling whatever phobia, transphobic, whatever it is. They're just terrified. They're terrified of being labeled. And it's interesting because that side of the political spectrum, the people on the left are the quickest to pull the trigger and accuse someone of being something, being racist, sexist, homophobic, whatever it is. They're the quickest and the most vicious when it comes to attacking people based on them not going along with whatever narrative that's been established, which is interesting because they're the ones that also like to call people fascists. But that is a form of fascism. It's not like if you look at fascism, it's essentially most people think of it as right-wing authoritarianism. But it is also, if you look at the definition of it, it's also a complete adherence to whatever narrative is being promoted. And you don't think about that when it's left-wing progressive, like left-wing progressive fascism sounds like an oxymoron. But it's a mindset. And the problem is you're hiding this mindset in an ideology that you think is righteous. You can say the same thing about religion because this is also what people do with religion because it is the right thing to do. So throw the gay off the roof. It's really kind of fascinating. Like when you see like queers for Palestine, you're like, hold on. Like it is a wonderful thing to empathize for the Palestinian people and to think that they shouldn't be bombed into oblivion and I'm with you 100%. But when you start supporting Hamas and saying, you know, we're queers for Hamas. Like, and I've seen that as he trans people for Hamas. And it's like, good Lord, what are you saying? So I've got a whole verbatim transcript between a street interviewer. You know, these guys are just, take someone off the street and they tape it. I think his name is. Yeah. So we just had a little technical glitch. So you were talking about one of those guys that interviews people in the street. So he goes and intercepts this woman who's at a, I guess like a, you know, free-free Palestine, you know, rally. And he says, oh, you're for Palestine. She goes, yes. And she goes, well, what do you think about their positions on, you know, queer people? She goes, well, I'm queer. He goes, oh, you're queer. So what do you, what do you think about what they would do to you? She goes, well, they would kill me. She goes, but then you still support them. She goes, yes. He goes, but it doesn't bother you that you're supporting a group that would kill you for the way that you are. She goes, no. The fact that they would kill me doesn't mean that they don't deserve my support. Well, that's the wood cricket, right? I mean, there is no evolutionary mechanism that says, I'm going to build an affiliation with a group that I know would kill me. But she is so kind. She's so empathetic. She's so transcends the earthly survival instincts that she has ascended to a higher plane of suicidal empathy. So it literally is straight out of what you said. Uber eats makes last minute gifting easy. Mother's Day, father's day, graduation, you blink and they're here. Just because it's snuck up on you doesn't mean your gift has to feel like it. The Uber eats gift hub has something for everyone. Flowers, perfume, champagne, even their favorite takeout order. And it can show up in as little as 25 minutes, even if you just remembered five minutes ago, the best part, you can add a video message and a personal note. So it actually feels like you planted all along. Order on Uber eats today must be 21 or older to purchase alcohol, product availability, varies per region, see app for details. Right. But in that situation, what they're doing is they're being motivated by what they see as a complete destruction of Gaza. Right. So it's a different situation because if there was no attacks on Gaza and Gaza was its own autonomous or completely separate state and it wasn't controlled by Israel and there was no conflict. I doubt they would have the same mindset. Like the mindset is coming out of watching the destruction of Gaza. And so then instead of saying, hey, we shouldn't just be bombing this city into oblivion and supporting this. Instead, they go all the way and support the ideology of the authoritarian rulers of this area, which is kind of cookie. Yeah. But it's like, it's, but it's much like a religion that's a, you can abandon all logic as long as you adhere to the end. You have to in fact, if you want to be accepted. And this is one of the things about the left is like there's never someone left enough. And when you think you're left enough, they move the border. They move the boundary lines. The goal posts are like a mile further to the left. You're like, Oh God, I got to support drag queens teaching kids now by themselves. No torrential supervision. That's not working. It's like it just keeps getting nutty or nutty or to where any protest of it is heresy. And that's where it gets very strange and it behaves in completely like a religion. Other examples of suicidal empathy. So I talk in the book about something I introduced as cultural theory of mind. Right. So theory of mind is, as I discussed earlier, it's at the individual level for you and I to have a meaningful conversation. I need to be in your mind and vice versa. Cultural theory of mind is the same principle, but it operates at the cultural level. So if culture A has a set of values that it adheres to. And if it presumes that those values are processed in exactly the same way by the other culture. And that's that's a wrong presumption. I argue that that culture then lacks cultural theory of mind. Because it is assuming that its values transcend in exactly the same way to other cultures. Now why is that related to suicidal empathy? So if you take, for example, the values that we hold dear in the West, magnanimity, generosity, kindness, empathy, they're interpreted in other societies as weakness, weakness, weakness and weakness. And this is why I don't remember if I mentioned this to you before on the show or not. In Arabic, when people would speak to me, I mean, many years ago before, I mean, now they're recognizing me. So they're they're not going to be as forthright their positions. But 25 years ago, they would all tell me the West as a woman to be mounted. Well, the reason why they're saying they were all to either. I mean, not all, but it was very common. But it was it was a saying that is often, you know, intimated was this when you were living in Lebanon? No, no, no, in Montreal, Montreal. We should tell people just my background. Yeah, because it's, you know, it's very pertinent. Sure. So I was born in 1964 in Lebanon. My family were part of the last remaining miniscule community of Lebanese Jews. Historically, there was always a small, but, you know, pretty vibrant Jewish community. Most of the Jews had left prior to the start of the Civil War, which happened in 1975. I was 11 because they had already read the writing on the wall. So most of my extended family might answer my uncles, my grandparents had left to various places. Most of them to Israel, but some of them to Montreal, Canada. That's why we ended up going to Montreal ourselves. But my parents had refused to leave because they were very well entrenched within Lebanese society. They had nice business and so on. My older siblings, I have three other siblings. One is 14 years older. One is 12 years older and one is 10 years older. The one who's 10 years older is the Olympian Judo. That played in the, that competed in the Montreal Olympics in 1976. So they already had left Lebanon prior to the start of the Civil War because they had started facing some Jew hatred difficulties and even in tolerant progressive Lebanon. Unfortunately for me, being the last 10 years younger than everybody else, I was still a kid. We got caught up once the Civil War broke out. Some really bad things happened during that first year, but then we were able thank God to escape to Montreal. But then my parents kept returning to Lebanon because they still had business interest. So they would go back to Lebanon from 1975 to 1980 on one of their return trips to Lebanon. They were kidnapped by Abu Nidals group, a father and some really, you know, bad things happened during their captivity. Very much like the stuff that you hear about October 7th, but luckily they weren't killed. They were able to, you know, be freed. I mean, they weren't freed through a commando operation. They were freed through the connections that my parents had. My mother's best friend was a Syrian woman, Syrian Muslim woman, who was the personal dresser of half of the Assad, the father of Bashir, the one who was recently deposed. And so through him, my siblings reached out to this woman. Her name was Hassan. I think she's passed away now. She got the father involved. He reached out to Yasir Arafat, who was the head of the Pia low back then. As I understand the story, yes, Arafat said, well, I don't even know whether they're with one of our groups. Let me do, you know, make some calls. But at the time there was sort of a battle between Yasir Arafat and Abu Nidal. And he said, if it's the Abu Nidal gang that took him, you know, good luck. And it was the Abu Nidal group. But I'm guessing there was some money that was exchanged. My parents were freed. When my father returned, he had a temporary facial paralysis akin to when you have a really severe stroke and your face is completely disfigured and asymmetric. Guilmbar. Is that what it's called? Yeah. But it was, it got resolved. And so far about, I don't know how long it was, maybe a month or two. His face was completely asymmetric, probably due to stress or things that happened to him. And actually, I mean, some of the stuff I may have previously mentioned on this show, but here's a part that I'm almost certain I didn't mention. At one point, the militia group was trying to get my parents to sign a confession letter that they are Israeli spies, which if you met my parents, you would know that that's not a very likely reality because it turns out that if they signed that, then they could legally execute them. And the guy who had started this whole thing was the owner of the building where my dad owned the store. And if they could now get rid of them, the store would. So it wasn't even like a religious thing. It was for one of the seven deadly sins of greed, at least the sign of the standard. And anyways, and so at one point, they had separated my parents and they were trying to put a lot of pressure on each of them to sign this thing. And they go to my mother and say, you know, admit that you're a spy, whatever, Israeli agent. And she's like, are you crazy? I mean, just go ask my husband, you know? And they kind of mockingly say, oh, well, your husband has gone to join his God, meaning that they've already killed him. So then my mother is in her little cell and they're doing bad things to them. And she hears my dad late at night in some other part of wherever they were keeping him. He had a very whooping kind of cough like a like a cough. As if like, actually, I have a similar cough. I used to be as mad. And so I have this very deep and loud cough. And so she was hearing that cough. But she wasn't sure if she's just hallucinating this in her thoughts or whether it was real. Well, it turned out that it, they hadn't killed them, but they were just trying to lean in on her. And so that's the background that I come from. Yeah. So you are very tuned in to what could possibly go wrong. Unfortunately, yes. Yeah. And this is why I mean many times when I've come on the show, you know, I've talked about some of those difficulties that, you know, all religions are not in this thing, which will pull from each other. All religions, I mean, religions have certain features that might be transferable from one religion to the other. But there are many elements that are very specific to a given religion. Sure. If you're an extremist Jane, then you really take your using this, the sweeping thing. When you, you know, when they walk, they use a broom so that they inadvertently don't step on an ant and kill it. So an extremist, extremist in quotes, Jane, someone who really takes his religion seriously is someone who's going to be extremist in. kill it. So an extremist, extremist in quotes, Jane, someone who really takes his religion seriously is someone who's going to be extremist in his pacifism. Right. Now that religion has very, very different edicts about how to conduct yourself, even when you're walking on a sidewalk, then maybe will an Abrahamic faith, whether it be Judaism or Christianity or Islam. So the idea that ultimately all religions are simply preaching the same in this distinguishable thing and slightly different ways is simply not true. But it feels good to think that. Right. It's empathetic for us to think that. We should never speak amongst mixed company about politics and religion. So therefore, if I start saying something that might be pejorative of another religion, that feels icky, that feels gosh. Right. And that's why by the way, earlier you mentioned that when we're talking about this, when I asked you, are Americans more likely now to talk openly about Islam, you said, well, the Democrats are more terrified to do so than the Republicans. But even the Republicans are, to some extent, suicidal empathetic because if you watch, even the ones who very forcefully criticize Islam as being in congruent with, you know, American values, they'll always use linguistic coverage to protect Islam. So it's Islamism. Yes. It's radical Islam. It's radical. No. No. Not at all. So a political Islam and Islamism is a indelible, inherent feature of Islam. Much of Islam is Islamism. So if you do a content analysis of all of the canonical texts of Islam, which are the Quran, the haddies, the deeds and the sayings of Muhammad and the Sarah, which is the biography of Muhammad, you could do a quantitative analysis of how often is it preaching brotherly love? How often is it really concerned about the infidels? How? And so Islam in its nature is political. Why? There are many reasons why, but let me just give you one. And then if you drill down, we can do so. Islam is a fully proselytizing language, religion, meaning that it is incumbent in an ideal world to turn the entire world into the one true faith. It is a peaceful religion. If by peaceful, it means the following, eventually the entire globe, every millimeter of the globe will be united under the unifying flag of Allah. Now let's take, for example, Judaism and it's not because I'm Jewish, but it's just to compare Judaism is precisely the opposites. Is it is an anti proselytizing language? You're not allowed to proselytize. As a matter of fact, if you proselytize, let's say I try to convince you, Joe, you know, why don't you join the tribe? And you say, I think I'd like to grind. It's a grind. Exactly. You've got to hold it. Well, there you go. Thank you. So that it is literally in the canons of Judaism to try to dissuade the prospective convert to coming into the fold because the idea is to have a costly signal of your commitment, your religious piety, to want to join the group. So it is a grind. It's very hard. In Islam, you just have to say the one proclamation, the Shahada, one sentence, and you're in. Now try to get out. There are a apostasy laws against you're getting out. So the circuitry of Islam is one that is expansionist. That's why you have two billion Muslims. One out of every four human beings is Muslim, and it only took 1,400 years for that. So from a marketing perspective, as someone who studies consumer behavior, Islam is a brilliant marketing religion. It has found a way to get a lot of customers and adherence. Judaism sucks at marketing because the entire circuitry of Judaism is meant to keep it very, very small. And so which one is likely to lead to greater problems? The one that is meant to ensure that all of us become Muslim or the one that says even if your uncle wants to become Jewish, we're going to put the barriers so high that nobody will ever become Jewish. So we still have only 15 million Jews roughly in the world, almost the same as we had before the Holocaust. So Judaism sucks as a marketing religion. Islam incredibly successful. In this country, the concern with Judaism is the support of the Israeli military. That's the concern. The concern is the amount of influence that it has on the United States government, how we got into the Iran war, why we give them so much influence over our military, over our decision making, over our politicians. I mean, APAC famously promotes and supports a tremendous amount of politicians in the United States. That's the big fear. Is that this, there's an inordinate amount of influence that Israel has over foreign policy, our decisions, and even our political structure in the country. Right. Several ways to tackle this. Say the Iran war. Take Israel out of it. Do you think there are multiple countries that would share in the recognition that probably Iranian regime that has an eschatology that basically says the end of times requires that there is sort of death to everybody before the final, you know, Imam comes back. Would it be a good idea for the Brits or the Romanians or the French or some of the other, the Gulf countries, would they be happy if Iran had a nuclear weapon? So to frame the issue of the US is attacking or is involved in the attack on the Iranians as, you know, the United States doesn't have personal agency. They're all wood crickets that are being puppeteered by this incredibly powerful lobby called Israel. That simply doesn't pass the smell test. Of course, Israel has shared interests with the United States as most allies would where they both agree that probably an Iranian regime that has no clear weapons should would not be a good thing for world peace. And so because these two countries have maybe greater testicular fortitude than the NATO countries, it seems as though the the Israelis are puppeteering the Americans. But do you really think that Donald Trump is sitting and saying, you know, had I not been such a weak guy with no personal agency, I wouldn't have fallen sway to the incredibly influential Zionist lobby? Well, it's not just incredibly influential. It's the amount of financial support they gave his candidacy. And again, all the different politicians that are beholden to Israel. That's the concern that a lot of people on the right and on the left have here in America. So most people in America do not support this war. It's the the large percentage of people think it was a bad idea. What are your thoughts? I don't think it's a good idea. Why? But I well because first of all, it doesn't seem to have a clear resolution, right? It's like we went over there because we were told that they were very close to developing a nuclear weapon. But if you pay attention to Netanyahu has said over the last few decades, it's always been they're a year away. They're two months away. They're whatever it is. I mean, he's been doing it this forever. Ever since he spoke of the UN and had that giant cartoon bomb, remember that like fucking Looney Tunes bomb? Yeah, you're when he spoke the percentage of enrichment of uranium. He's wanted this for a long time. There's also a deep concern that he is only in office because of the war. And he has corruption charges in Israel in that in order for him to stay in power. And for him to avoid going to trial, he has to continue war. Can I comment on that? Sure. Yeah. Let's suppose you go to see your physician and your physician says, Hey Joe, God forbid, it looks like your blood sugar is very high and I'm going to classify you as now. Never mind pre diabetic. I think you're diabetic. And if we don't manage your sugar levels, there will come a day where I can tell you exactly what's going to happen. We're going to have to amputate your extremities. You're probably going to lose your eyesight. You're probably going to have sexual dysfunction and you're probably going to have some cardiovascular incident. That doesn't happen on day two of you having been diagnosed with diabetes. Like there's a trajectory. And at some point, there'll be a tipping point where until then, none of the diabetes complications happened. Now, why am I saying all this? Because I can't comment as to whether he's been lying all the times when he said, it's there's two more years left or one more year or six more months. But surely we can grant the American government enough leeway to presume that if they thought that at this point, it's the right time and it is now intolerable for them to go another day with the current reality that they probably had some intelligence that suggests that they are close. So I can't comment whether Matanjaha was pulling our eyes. But surely it can't be that the Israelis are so manipulative and they're puppeteering that they've pulled the wool over the American eyes. And really, there's no danger that the Iranians were posing and we've convinced the Americans to go to the world. Do you think that it is that? Well, I wouldn't say there's no danger, right? So here's here's one thing that we do know. They had said that their missiles could only reach a certain distance that proved to not be true. Right. Because of the Diego Garcia missile war, right? So they have missiles that are capable of reaching Europe. And that was not something they had said before. We know that they haven't reached their uranium beyond what they need for nuclear power. And that they're within striking distance of developing a nuclear weapon. But wasn't it true that they had put, see, this is hard to know as me as a person sitting on podcast studio in Texas, exactly what their ruling had been. But that they had only done this in order to avoid the possibility of them being attacked, that they would get close to a nuclear weapon. So at least it would deter some potential attacks on them and that they were doing this out of self interest. There's a large group of American politicians that did not want this war, that did not think it was warranted to attack Iran at this point. Can I? Yeah. Okay. So I think I've mentioned on the show before this, this, this distinction between the entological ethics, absolute statements, it is never okay to lie versus consequentialist ethics. It's okay to lie if it is meant to spare someone's hurt feelings. Right. So if your wife's right, do I look fat in those genes, you put on your consequentialist hat and you say, you've never looked more beautiful because maybe she's put on a bit of weight, but you don't want to hurt her feelings. So you lie to and for most of us, we go through life on most instances, putting on a consequentialist hat. Okay. Okay. I'm going to link it now to our discussion. To have, for example, a de-intological principle that says that I am always an isolationist. Do you understand what I mean by here? De-intological, meaning that it doesn't matter what the environment is out there. I as America will never interfere in wars over there. That can't be an optimal strategy. Right. Because so, for example, if you were a de-intological pacifist, you say under no circumstances, do I believe that violence is the solution? Well, what would usually happen to a society if it adhere to the ontological pacifism? No, it would be a dirt. It would be eradicated. Right. So it can't be that for some of these geopolitical issues, there is a rule that in its nature is de-intological. So many of the Americans that are anti-diswar are very, very staunchly steeped and sort of a libertarian slash de-intological isolationist perspective. Now, in many cases, I would completely agree with that position in that it's not the Americans' position to have to go and be the policeman of everywhere in the world. But let's contrast, let's say, when World War II was about to happen, the appeasement strategy of Chamberlain, right? This guy with the little mustache has don't worry about it. I absolutely have no design to do anything about it. You swear, Adolf, it's all good. Yeah, you don't really promise. You really don't, even though you're moving all of your stuff, you're a good guy, right? I can trust you. Yeah, of course you can. So, appeasement only works if the other person is someone that can be fully trustworthy. It is almost incontestable that if the Iranian regime in its current form could ever cause great damage to everybody, not only Israel, right? I mean, the Gulf countries are not exactly putting up barriers against the sware because they're also are the enemies of the Iranians. So, it's undoubtedly that, of course, the Americans have the Israelis in their ear pushing for their self-interest. But that's also called the reality of every nation on earth. Every entity fights for its own interests. But that doesn't mean that the Americans are so lacking in personal agency, are so gullible, are so easy to puppeteer that there must be the sinus lobby that otherwise is pushing us into an unnecessary war. Maybe another three years, maybe another five years, maybe another 10 years, it would have resulted in a disaster. So, if you are a universalist and you want the Iranian people to maximally flourish, forget about Israel, don't even mention the word Israel. Do you not want these 90 million people called Iranians who have a deeply rich historical heritage to flourish? I've had many graduate students who are Iranians in my classes there's some of the most modern secular outward looking Westerners that have been choked for 47 years by a really nasty regime. So, maybe we could celebrate that if all this goes well, 90 million people are going to be freed. And I could say that statement without ever invoking Israel. What do you think of that? Well, I think the reason why they're in a situation there in in the first place is because of the United States. It's because the United States and the British Petroleum Company. It's because they were trying to nationalize oil. That's what happened in the first Islamic Revolution. Yes, this is how it started in the first place. They realized that the British Petroleum Company was making a ton of money and they wanted to nationalize oil and we got rid of them. And they installed this Islamic regime. And look, there's a lot of consequences for that down the road. Obviously, the worst side of it was what happened to the Iranian people. When you look at the photos and the videos of Tehran from like the 1950s and 1960s, I mean, my god, it looks like a Western society. Women wearing skirts and everyone looks very moderate in Western and then it became this fundamentalist religious country that it is right now, this Islamic country that it is right now. They're under a regime that murders protesters. They famously murdered some high-level wrestlers. There was an Olympic gold medalist of the United States. The UFC tried to get involved and try to keep him from getting murdered. Yeah, they do horrible things. There's no doubt about it. It's a terrible regime. But there's a really good argument that that terrible regime is in place because of the CIA and because of the United States government, because the British Petroleum Company, because we intervened and we've done that in the past. We did that with Libya. This is the reason why Mo-Mark Gaddafi was out. We had Russell Crowe, who's a brilliant guy on the podcast was explaining the history of Libya and how great it was for Libyan people when Mo-Mark Gaddafi was in power that if anybody wanted to get an education anywhere, they had some certain skills or talent, some certain error. They would fully pay for their education overseas. They gave everyone a house. Everyone who lived there had a home. People were educated. And he was trying to set up something akin to the United States, but the United States of Africa. And you know, and they were like, we can't have any of that. And so they got rid of him and Libya became a failed state. Like we have munkied in other countries for our own interest for a long time and with horrible consequences for the people in those countries. And I think Iran is an excellent example of that. So how much of the Islamic regime coming into power in 1975, if you have 100 points that you want to allocate to either it's the US that causes it versus there's an Islamic regime with its theology that is really nasty, how would you allocate the points in terms of the cause of that rehob. That's a good question. That's a question that would be answered by historians rather than me. But I think there's no doubt that we played a major factor in that. Don't you agree with that? I mean, yes and also, let me explain why I say yes and all. When you have a complicated geopolitical system, you can always look, remember the old butterfly effect, there's butterfly flaps its wings in the Amazon and how that reverberates into a cyclone somewhere else. It's a simple shit though. No, but I mean, the principle of cause. It's great if you don't understand how the weather works. Fair enough. But the idea that there are causal networks is such that in this complicated web of causal networks, you can always find a particular entity that you can try to link back all of the causes to that entity. But the overthrow of a foreign government and supporting an Ayatollah to take their place. It's a pretty big factor. But so that's why I asked you to allocate the 100 points. I would be the guy to answer that. I'm going to answer off the top of my head and it's completely speculative. So the numbers I'm going to say are not. Let's ascribe 10 out of the 100 points to whatever power the US wheels in that region to have allowed that regime to come in. But that regime carries the other 90 points of the 100 because they are the ones who for the next 47 years implement the reality that the common Persian is going to experience. Everything in the world can ultimately be linked back to oxygen, to the United States, to the military complex, to design a slobby. Because in some very facile way, all of those entities are connected in a meaningful way in this causal network. But using Ocom's razor, does it really make sense to blame, for example, people say ISIS is really due to whatever Israel? I mean, in some facile way, you could draw the causal link of how there was a vacuum that was created by the US when they debathized Iraq that allowed the mixture. So do we blame ISIS on American policy or design a slobby? Or does ISIS itself have any personal agency in terms of what it then does for the next 10 years that it's in power? Do you see what I'm saying? I do. So this is the old story. I'm going to butcher it, but I quoted it in the parasitic mind. For the man who has a hammer, he only sees the world as being made up of the nails. Right. So this is when you're you're presuming that there is greater explanatory power to a particular cause than there really is. Look, I'll give you an example. Okay. Let's suppose that the night before an eventual dictator that was going to become a dictator, his parents felt particularly amorous that night. And what made them amorous to then eventually conceive that guy who became a dictator who killed three million people is that they played very white music because very white music is baby making music. So it is in a very silly way, absolutely true that had very white not been such a great singer with a deep voice that makes the ladies drop the panties. Then those two parents of the eventual dictator would not have had sex that night. I will stop you right there because I don't think there's sex. It's ever been had because only a very white. I think people have been having sex since the beginning of the time. I don't believe it. It's wonderful music. I don't think it causes sex. Do not criticize very white. I'm not criticizing. I just says great music. Yeah. I don't believe it. I think people might get it on from the beginning of time. And they probably would have done the exact same thing that night. If it was very white or very man alone, I don't think about that. So let's not put very white. There was some facilitating mechanism that rendered them amorous on that particular night. Whatever that mechanism is, it is absolutely true that we can lay the blame. Some blame of that dictator eventually killing three million people. He would have never been born had they not had sex exactly at that moment. I think that's a bit of a stretch. I think it's a bit of a stretch when you actively work to overthrow a democratically elected government. Me. So this now we're talking about what when they well, not even democratically elected government because Libya wasn't a democratically elected government. Right. Like not really. Like let's be honest, right. Like Putin's not really a democratically elected president of Russia. But you know what I mean? But we 100% funded the rebels 100% to kill Gaddafi. Right. That's it's our responsibility by living a fell. Okay. But if. Okay. True. That position 100%. Gaddafi the way you made him out to be was I mean he was Robin Hood, right? Gaddafi was not. No, no, no, no, no, no. No good for the people in many ways. Pretty nasty guy in other ways. There is no egalitarian, beautiful leader out there. They've never existed because the cold, hard reality of running enormous groups of people that are in conflict with other groups of people is you're going to have to crack some eggs and sort of do some terrible things. Especially in those regions of the world where if you don't have an incredibly strong armed guy, then religion comes in and it becomes a strong guy. So you have it in Egypt. You have it with Saddam Hussein. So in you have to say that then has been his son. So those guys are if you're a universalist who wishes for individual liberties and freedoms to flourish for everybody around the world, then you're probably not supporting these guys. Right. Well, okay. We can use Saddam Hussein as an example. Sure. Look at what happened there. I mean, it became a complete and total disaster result in the death of at least a million innocent people. Yes. And didn't do anything positive in terms of turning that into a beautiful Western style democracy. Yeah. By the way, that last sentence, I would argue that that's because of the Americans' lack of cultural theory of mind. Because they presume that the desire to have democracy around the world is exactly what everybody wants. And therefore they're culturally blind to the fact that other places around the world may not share our own affinity for democracy. Well, not just that, but culturally ignorant to the fact that there's Sunni and Shia Muslims and they were going to fight with each other. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Now, but you, okay. So the Americans come in, they create a bad set of ecosystems that permits for ISIS to flourish. But what point would you and your causal link of explanations shift from the catalyst of the Americans having done something that allowed ISIS to flourish to then saying starting at time t, my causal weaponry is going to be targeting ISIS moving forward. Well, it's a good question because like why did ISIS flourish in the first place? Was it because of the removal of Saddam Hussein? Was it because of the overthrowing of the country? I mean, it wasn't that. It was. Yeah. So if that didn't take place, what would Iran and Iraq look like right now? Right. Right. So think about all of the people that have suffered horrifyingly as a result of ISIS. If you are a individual that's walking around who is the recipient of that brutality, what would make more sense if you're engaging in statistical inferencing? Would it be to say, you know, the guy that's about to string me up because I looked at a girl wrong and he's going to cut off my penis and my arms because I touched the girl. I really can't blame ISIS because really it's American foreign policy that intervene in Iraq. That's not how people navigate through their budget. How did you get to that? I mean, the target is penis chopped off and it's arm chopped off. Where'd you get there? You know how under Sharia Allah there are very strict rules about that govern the dynamics between men and women, right? So I was just being hyperbolic. But let's say whatever the punishment, you stole a loaf of bread under Sharia Allah, we cut off your hand, right? So let's say you're a 12 year old kid who just stole a loaf of bread from the Sook and the ISIS commanders have caught you and they're about to institute Sharia Allah by cutting off your hand because you're a thief. And would it be natural for you or your parents, the parents of the 12 year old who are crying because they're about to see their hand, the hand of their child cut off. Would they say I really can't be upset at ISIS and their brutality because I ultimately ISIS only came in because of the geopolitical intervention of the United States. Do you think that that would be a reasonable idea? The whole idea sucks. Like the, and that's the treatment of any group of people under totalitarian regimes terrible. But that's it. The question is how were they funded? How did they get into the position that they got into in the first place? But how they rise to power? But nothing can happen. But how much of it is because of our meddling that they rose to power in the first place? So let's suppose we hadn't metal. So we met, we meaning the United States, let's say, and I'm glad that I'm now including myself with me. Almost. You're close. You're close. You're close there. So we metled because whatever calculus, some of it wasn't correct. Maybe there was no weapons of mass destruction. Right. I mean, Saddam Hussein was a horrifying guy. I think if you have to rank all of them, maybe in terms of pure evil, he might have been the biggest of all the thugs. Right. And this is a son's or the son's are even worse, maybe. Right. You've heard of all the stories of their drugs. Just really defies the complete serial killers. Okay. So now if I am a typical Iraqi who's going about my business, I really would like to not live under Saddam Hussein's thumb. And I probably don't want to live under ISIS thumb in an ideal world I could live with complete dignity and liberty and so on. The Americans with all of their miscalculations may be naively thought that will come in and then come by, yeah, we will create a new democracy in Iraq. They completely miscalculated. But the root cause of the daily evil that the Iraqis go through cannot be put on the broad shoulders of the Americans because then that removes the personal agency of the actors in their daily lives that are causing them all the pain. But there is a reflex and there I say forgive me as suicidal, the empathetic reflex that renders you somehow. and their daily lives that are causing them all the pain. But there is a reflex, and there I say, forgive me, as suicidal the empathetic reflex, that renders you somehow progressively sophisticated if you always turn all of the world's ills on your own society. I agree with you in what you're saying, but the reason why we're there was not because we wanted to help people. The whole reason why they came up with this fake weapons of mass destruction narrative is because they wanted to control the oil. I really can't speak to that, you could be right. Oh, 100%. You're saying I'm right. Yeah. There's, we're not doing that for speak to help people. We didn't go to Iraq to help people. It didn't even make sense that we were in there. They weren't involved in 9-11. The whole idea was nuts. Okay, so let me... I think the whole weapons of mass destruction narrative was complete bullshit that was cooked up to give it excuse to go over there and take really well. It's not, they made an error, they knew it was... Yes. I mean, I think there's a lot of evidence to that. There's no evidence that they had weapons of mass destruction as described by everybody to give the motivation for us to support the war. Okay, so let me maybe as the distinguished professor of the Declaration of Independence Center for the Study of American Freedom, I hope University of Mississippi will be happy that I'm defending the United States as a Canadian, not yet American, but in chal best interest, right? So when Trump says America first, Maga and all this, that's what he's appealing to us. So does the US ever do things that might be less than savory because they're pursuing their selfish interest? 100% and we can come up, right? But that makes them a country made up of this thing called human beings. In other words, no society has ever been created that is made up of these utopian machines that as they navigate the world, they look to the other, for their, unless they are suicidal, empathetic. So the US is made up of real human beings and downward real brains whereby they might say, hey, maybe if we take their oil and concoct a strategy, now, is that good or bad? We can debate it. But in the grand buffet of societies that have ever held power, does the, you and never mind the power asymmetry that the US has vis-a-vis everybody else, is it the most restrained society ever? If the United States today said we need more beaches. All the Caribbean's are becoming the 51st state. Could anybody do anything about that? No, yet they don't. So I think it would be good, certainly for Americans and me as an honorary American to say, does America do sometimes things that are less than perfect in a utopian world? 100% yes, you're right. I can see that. Does it wield its power in the most gentle ways compared to what it could do and compared to what other societies if they had that power would do? I think the America does pretty well. No. Am I too, am I too rosy about my views of America? Well, that's an interesting question because China doesn't metal in other countries the way we do and they have a similar military might. Not quite commensurate, but pretty similar. Like you don't see them invading other countries and doing the type of things that we do and none of the threatened to tie one. But they believe the Taiwan is a part. They call it Chinese Taipei. Right. So I'm going to use here some Arabic words. Okay. I'll try to explain in English, but maybe to your Arabic listeners, they'll appreciate it. The Chinese have greater what Hanne and Nessnesi. They are duplicitous in the way they do that stuff. Right? They correct. They caress you this way while they take. Right. So yes, they are using a different modality to wield their power compared to the brush, Ra Ra Americans. But let's not sort of romanticize what the Chinese could do. Right. Well, they're taking advantage of the openness of American society. They've infiltrated universities. They've infiltrated a lot of tech sectors. They've sold American military a bunch of cell phone towers that are surrounding military bases that may or may not be transmitting data. We've had to kick Huawei out of the country because it turns out that a lot of their equipment could be used for spying. Yeah. Like they buy farmland all around military bases. They're doing a lot of things to take advantage of our silliness. But that's because we should have better laws to prevent, you know, what's essentially, not our friends from doing that. I mean, you can call them an enemy nation or whatever you want to call them, but we shouldn't be allowing a foreign nation that we are in conflict with to control land around military bases. That's just stupid. But that's because of our capitalist society. I mean, you can't even, you can't own a business in China. You can't go over there and buy stuff. Right. Like you can't do it. Business with them. And then you know what they do. They just kick you out and take over it. Right. Change the name of it and take over all the IP and you're gone. Bye bye. And there's not a fucking thing you could do about it because they don't have an open society like we do. Well, and think about, I mean, if we're doing the ledger of sort of cruelty and evil, we could talk about how the US versus China wields power around the world. How about internally domestically? We had a guy called Mount St. Tung that was kind of pretty brutal that if we do the history of China in terms of how many millions of people were killed by that regime versus anything that's happened in the US. Has the US been perfect in the past 150 years? Absolutely not. No, there's never been a perfect regime. Exactly. So it's no perfect regimes. And you know, what they did just with their one child policy. There you go. I mean, there's a lot wrong with the way China does things. But so to me, once I, maybe that's why University of Mississippi was keen on having me come. I look at the United States as someone who, thank you for your earlier question about sort of where do you come from, God, tell us your story. Some of the biggest defenders of the United States are typically, it might sound paradoxical. But if you think about it, it's not are usually immigrants who have sampled from the wide variety of buffets of societies out there. Therefore we know that the anomaly called the United States is truly an anomaly. Whereas the American wakes up in his life and he thinks that the liberties and freedoms that you have in the United States are just the default value. That's just the way it is. It isn't. That's what makes the United States great. So for me, by the way, that also explains why people think, for example, that I defend Israel because I'm Jewish. There is an element of that. I mean most of my families in Israel. But it's really, I defend Israel because many of its values are congruent with those that we hold dear in the United States. So given the region of the Middle East, if I'm going to send my daughter or yours to some university to study, I would much rather for her to be in a society in Tel Aviv or Haifa than I would in many of the other places. So it's in that sense that I'm pro Israel. So if you ask me to allocate 100 points to how much of my support of Israel is due to the fact that many of its foundational values are similar to those of the United States versus the fact that I'm Jewish and Israel is a Jewish state, I would say 80, 20 former for the latter, meaning that I am defending the civilizational values of Israel in a very, very difficult and belligerent neighborhood. Does Israel always do things perfectly? No. Do they have politicians that are corrupt? Yes. Have pedophiles who did bad things here, tried to go there and have Aliyah, meaning get residency there and run away from the yes. But it could also be the case that a bank robber or pedophile goes back to Thailand if there are no extra dishes, you know, mechanisms to bring them back to the United States. So my position of defending the United States or Israel or whomever else really stems from some foundational values of liberty and freedom. There is no conceivable place in the world where given the neighborhood that Israel exists in, one would conceivably defend any of those other societies instead of Israel. If the metrics that you care about are personal liberties and freedoms, we could then debate specific policies and you'd be completely in your right to say, I don't like when the Israeli government does this. But let me ask you and forgive me for asking you a personal question. If let's say your daughter today said that I'd like to go and study one year abroad and it's going to be somewhere in the Middle East. You Joe Rogan, how likely would you be to support her going in the Middle East to a university other than in Israel? That's interesting. When you say the millies, do you mean like Saudi Arabia or the United Arab Emirates? Because I think it's pretty safe there. Okay. So I'll get you right. That's true. And by the way, I'm loving the openness that many of these countries are exhibiting. And I'll tell you a quick personal story and then I'd love to then hear you. Okay. I was approached by Al-Aravia. Al-Aravia is the premier news network from their Saudi, but they were actually located in Dubai. And Riz Khan, who was the anchor that was flying from Dubai to interview Main Montreal, for Al-Aravia, he used to be the main anchor, I think, at BBC Global or CNN Global. I said to Riz, are we going to be talking about things like Islam and these guys? He goes, yeah, yeah, feel free to talk about whatever you want. I said, well, I'm not worried so much about me, but you're going to have to go back to that region. Are you comfortable? I mean, I'll be very professorial and proper, but I will say some difficult truth. He goes, say whatever you want. That aired, it was a two hour conversation where we, you know, we talked about all sorts of things, but we talked about Islam. And then he said, they loved you about a month or two later, another state, another show contacted me. And I went also on Al-Aravia. And then they even wanted to offer me a show. Now the Saudi group is offering the Lebanese Jew, who's often been critical of some of the tenets of Islam. So I'm very optimistic about that. So I agree with you that if your daughter wanted to perhaps go to some places in the Gulf countries, you'd probably condone it and support it, but that would make it too easy. So let me choose which country to see it. That would be too easy, but that is the Middle East and there are Islamic countries. Because those countries are having a revival of modernity. Right. Well, maybe that's what we should talk about because is that possible with Islam that they could have a revival of modernity across the entire country? Like imagine if Iraq, Iran, all these countries were run like Saudi Arabia or run like the United Arab Emirates. You would have a much more peaceful environment, wouldn't you? Yeah. So I'm going to be done very optimistic. There is a package of cultural richness in the Middle East like no other. And I come from the region, Arabic is my mother tongue. The spirit of generosity, the spirit of loyalty when you're in the group. The hospitality is like no other. Actually, I recently was telling some folks in Mississippi that the Mississippians remind me as though they were honorary Lebanese because they're so it's that Southern hospitality, really like over the top wanting to make you feel good. So there are elements of the Middle East that have such a fabric of richness that if we can mine that and quell all of the tribalism associated with religions, I think it could be one of the most fertile and rich places in the world. Now it depends what we do with Islam. If Islam is something that you practice privately as part of a long historical narrative. So for example, I'm Jewish. I'm very wedded to my Jewish identity. But I don't take many of the edicts of Judaism seriously in the practice. I don't light the candle at 421 for Shabbat because at 422, God would be upset at me. But if I went to the rabbi, he'd say it has to be at 421. So I pick and choose cafeteria, Jew. I pick and choose the parts that I wish to. Right? I don't practice some soft version of Judaism that allows for the eating of pork and shrimps. I simply say I'm a glutton that likes to eat well and shrimps at some pork tastes really good. So I'm just going to ignore those parts. I think if Islam could allow for that cafeteria, which by the way, many Muslims do now, right? Like hundreds of millions of Muslims want to cause zero harm to Jews. So the problem is radical Islamism like we were talking about before. So you kind of radical. It's just Islam and I choose to ignore the parts that I don't like. You're putting an appilation on Islam that is unnecessary. Islam is made up of many tenants. It's not radical Islam. There is no book called Radical Islam. There's only Islam. I mean, Erdogan said there is no moderate Islam. There's just Islam. So is he an Islamist? Right. So there is a bunch of tenants. There's the one that says kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, take a break, continue killing. Fuck that. I'm going to ignore it because I'm a good person, right? Because they are mean Jews and nice Jews. Mean Muslims, nice Muslims. Right. So many other... So if there is a way to maintain the Islamic heritage, there's Islamic architecture. There's Islamic poetry. There's Islamic philosophy. There was a period under Islamic rule where many of the ancient texts from Greek philosophy were safeguarded by Islam, right? So it's not as though that entire civilization is void of incredibly rich things. But there are unfortunately elements of the religion that are not congruent with Western values. If there is a way for us from this side of our mouth to honor Islamic architecture and poetry and from this side of our mouth, forget the parts that says kill, kill, kill everyone, then I think you could have wonderful flourishing. Right. For it to evolve then. Exactly. Yeah. I see what you're saying. You know, there's a really good argument that the reason why ISIS and these various radical organizations exist is because of the United States meddling in all these countries for decades and decades. You know, I don't know if you ever saw it, but Glenn Greenwald was on Bill Marshall. And Glenn, he's a very brilliant guy and he had a very balanced take on it and he was arguing with Bill Maher versus why they behaved the way they do and making the argument that a lot of it was because of the United States intervening in their countries. We've been over there and meddling in their countries and being meddling in their policies and their government for so long that this is the reason why these things happen in the first place. And I don't know if you've ever seen it. We might do a good thing to play it because it was kind of interesting to watch Bill Maher kind of push back against it. But Glenn Greenwald is very well read and really understands the history of this region. I'm not a huge Glenn Greenwald fan. Many of the positions he's taken I really like, he does seem to have a bit of the self modulation reflex when it comes to it all comes down to something that the US has done that's evil or something that Israel has done is evil. So to our earlier conversation, there are features that ISIS believes in that they believe in independently of anything that the US could have ever done or will ever do. But if they were flourishing and we hadn't intervened in their country, do you think it's possible that the rest of them in the least could be in a similar, and not to say that Saudi Arabia is perfect, right? The Jamal Khashoggi thing is horrific. I mean, just that alone, this is a big criticism for a lot of the American comedians that went over there and participated in the Riyadh comedy festival. So like, do not know what this regime did to an American journalist. But is it possible that these countries could have evolved in a very similar way? And if it come for us? Yes. No. No. You don't think so? No. So Islam is existed for 1400 years, right? In the civil war. Why did these countries, why did the United Arab Emirates, why did they have a much more open society? Now, I mean, there are all sorts of reasons. Maybe the rulers, I can't speak to you. It is a lot of the rulers. Exactly. They're much more progressive. Exactly. So they've taken a pill of pragmatism that says that we could still maintain our unique identity while turning an open arms to the West. And it takes courageous leaders to say, this is how we can have these two things coexist. I could still be fully steeped in my Muslim identity, but I'm not going to look at the other as a dirty kufa, right? The dirty, non-Muslim, right? And so good for them. That's great. But over the 1400 years, so we're going to, we, US is going to celebrate the 250 years soon, right? Islam is existed for 1400 years. So we could very easily temporarily just go back 250 years prior and remove anything that could be due to the US. Is that true? I mean, empirically. Sure. OK. And if we want to remove Israel from the story, we just have to go to 1948. And so that's 70 something years. And then anything that Islam would have done prior to 1948 could not be blamed on the Zionist entity. For sure, we could go back to the beginning of the United States, where the United States was being attacked by the Muslim. Is that what we talk about? Yes, exactly. Yes, Thomas Jefferson. Exactly. Yes. So my point is, tell everybody that story. I don't know it too well, but Thomas Jefferson, I think, was being belligerent to some incursions of Muslim piracy or something. Where they said that it was their right to do so. Exactly. Because we were infidels. Exactly right. Winston Churchill has some really savory quotes about what he thought about his interactions with Islam. And he's British. He's got nothing to do with the United States. This was well before the existence of the Zionist entity. It is part of the playbook to try to always blame some other agent other than our cannons for why we're doing what we're doing, right? I think that's why this is a good conversation, right? This is very nuanced. We're kind of waking up both sides of it. That's why I love coming on the show whenever you have me on. So if you crack, I don't mean you, but anybody who's listening to this crack a book to say, okay, let me look at the number of military conquests where Islam was the offensive party, right? For example, people say all the Crusades. Well, the Crusades were a retaliation to hundreds of years of Islamic aggression. It's not, it didn't come out of nowhere, but there's always what I call the amnesia of causality. People always forget what was the original starting point. Under Islam, as I said, the primary canonical requirement of Islam is to render the entire world Islamic. Now again, that doesn't mean that every Muslim believes this, that doesn't mean that every Muslim leader believes this, but we're talking about what's in the canons of the religion. It is a violently expansionist ideology. I mean, nothing could be clear. I've explained this previously on the show, but if you allow me, I'll explain it again. Islam has dual logic. In Islam is broken down into two camps. There is dar al-harab and dar al-Islam, the house of Islam and the house of war. Any country that is not yet under Islamic dominion is classified as under the house of war. That's literally the words. Now any country that has ever become under Islamic dominion, ever. Then Islam loses canonically. It must revert back to Islam. So El-Andalusia in the current Spain was at one point controlled by the moors, Muslims. Therefore, when now you hear a lot of these Islamic extremist guys saying, in chala, we will get back El-Andalusia. It's because once it became ours, it must always belong to us. The same argument applies for Israel, even though Israel has thousands of years of lineage of the Jews to that land, as the indigenous owners of that land, the fact that then Islam took over that region. That means it belongs to Muslims. Now we may tolerate the Jews to live there, but there can't be a Jewish state there, canonically, in the religion. So those are just facts. You could study the history of Islam to count. There are currently 57, well, if you include the past and territories, in the organization of Islamic cooperation, the OIC, there are 56 or 57 countries that are part of that block that are Islamic. Each of those countries, once upon a time, started with 0% Islam. It wasn't magical. Indonesia was not Islamic ones. Libya was not. Many of those countries were Christians, by the way. Egypt was Coptic Christian, Syria was tons of Christians. Lebanon within my lifetime, I was born in a Christian majority country. Today within my lifetime and yours, it has completely flipped to Muslim majority. Wherever Islam goes, sometimes it might take five years to flip it, sometimes it might take 500 years. But as the Taliban explained to us, the American soldiers have the watches. We have all the time in the world. So it's a long project. So when Islam comes into the United States, it's not as though suddenly the United States of America is going to become under Sharia a lot tomorrow morning. But if you have the imagination to extrapolate in two, three hundred years, if you were to repeat Dearborn and Paterson, New Jersey and Minneapolis into 20 more cities, 50 more cities, 100 more cities, would you be living in the same United States? And if not, is that a good thing or a bad thing? Well, that's what people are, some people are very fearful of what's going on in New New York City with mom Donnie. Yes, sir. It's a Trojan horse. And then under the guise of progressivism and democratic socialism that you're going to open up the door and eventually you're going to have called a prayer in the middle of Times Square every day. Exactly. Well, listen, I'm wearing right now a star of David. Be careful. Exactly. As soon as I'm in New York and I go to one of those, I mean, I don't as much anymore because my stomach's a bit more sensitive as I get older. But let's say one of those street vendors, I write away, put away my star of David because I'd love to have my shower my without spit in it. The fact that I now even think of that and that that's a reflex that I have today, that's not a reflex I had 15 years ago. What changed? Well, what changed are the demographic realities that causes that there's a greater number of people that are triggered by the star of David. Emography is indeed destiny. So you and I could fully agree that most Muslims are perfectly lovely. And I mean, I'm the first one to say this because I come from that culture. No Muslim has ever killed me. No Muslim has ever raped me. But I do know that I've spoken to many Muslims before I was known and they knew who I was, who say things about the Jews that would make Hitler and himler go, look guys, we also hate the Jews. But I think this is too much Jew hatred, even by our standards. So there is an endemic feature of Islamic societies that renders the Jew as the ultimate shaitan, the ultimate devil, he's demonic, right? It's everywhere. It dictates every interaction. I'll just give you a couple of examples. And Charmal Sheikh, which is a Red Sea resort area in Egypt. Jamie is welcome to fact check me if you want. And then I think in 2010, there was a spot of shark attacks on tourists in Charmal Sheikh. Do you remember after the investigation by the Egyptian authorities, what they concluded? No. Want to take a guess? No. It was that there is very, very clear evidence that those sharks were Zionist trained because the way that you can harm the Egyptian economy, certainly in that region is to render the tourism activity lesser if you have a, you know, many attack. And so I'm not saying every Egyptian thought this, but this was coming from the authorities saying that there's really very clear evidence that those sharks were Jewish assholes. Okay. Hold on a second. Wasn't there some evidence that there was like illegal dumping of carcasses of animal carcasses offshore? I, I think that had something to do with the shark activity. It's really conspiracy theory. The attacks, Park and Spirit, there's possible Israeli involvement. Egyptian television broadcast claims from South Sinai government, Mohammed Abdul Fadil Shoshah that Israeli divers captured a shark with a GPS unit planted on its back, allegedly by Masah describing the theory of sad professor Mohammed, Hanafi of Swiz canal university, pointed out the GPS devices are used by marine biologists to track sharks, not control them remotely. Okay. But wasn't there something to do? Yeah. That's what the last sentence speaks to what you said. Yeah. Ultimately thought the dumping of sheep carcasses there. It is during the Islamic festival of, how do you say that? Festival within. Oh, eh, the adha. On 16 November was most likely explanation. That makes sense. Yeah. That's why there was so much shark activity. But the fact that somebody somewhere said, I think this got Jewish signature all over it. Right. But there's people in the United States that think the world's flat. You know, I mean, does not, that doesn't make mean it makes sense. The capacity to be parasitized is hardly restricted to Muslim minds. Everybody has the capacity to believe stupidity. So I agree. But there is something, there is a unique feature of the Muslim mind that tends to find causality in all maladies in the Jew. So right. And by the way, I have a theory if I can share it with you here. Okay. As to, this is not just Islamic Jew hatred. Why is it that so many societies end up turning their, you know, animus towards the Jew? Can I share it with you? Yeah. Why do you think that is? So here I'm going to use some of the my psychological background. So in, in psychology, there's something called the self-serving bias. The self-serving bias is how we attribute causality to the wins and losses in our lives. So most of us will attribute. The self-serving bias is how we attribute causality to the wins and losses in our lives. So most of us will attribute successes internally. I did well on the exam because I'm smart and I studied hard. And excuse me, we will attribute failures externally. I did poorly on the exam because Professor Sad is an asshole. You can understand why we would have evolved that rosy prism, life is tough. It's an ego defensive strategy. I do well because of me. I do poorly because of the cruel world out there. Now, imagine if we could find the culprit and I'll explain why it is specifically the Jew. Imagine if we could find a culprit, a universal culprit, for all of our individual and collective failures. And it's the Jew. But why is it the Jew? Why isn't it the Armenian? Why isn't it the whatever? Here I'm going to use a term from Amy Chua. Do you know Amy Chua? No. Okay. I thought that she might have been on your show. Amy Chua is actually the mentor of JD Vance. She was his professor of law at Yale. She's written several popular books including the book on how to raise children as a tiger mom. Have you heard the tiger mom book? Sure. That's kind of tough parental, Asian excellence and so on. So Amy Chua introduced the term. I mean, the concept is not hers, but the term is hers. Market dominant minorities, meaning when you have a small miniscule group of people in any cultural ecosystem that are boxing well above their weight cost. Now in many cases, for example, you have Lebanese non-Jews, Lebanese who are the business owners all over West Africa. So they are fitting that market dominant minority. They're a small minority, but they carry all the business. Okay. So it's not as though it's only the Jew that's the only market dominant minority. Wherever you have market dominant minorities, you have animus towards that group because the greater group, many of whom are not being successful, look at that group with animus with envy. The Jews wherever they are are always by definition short of Israel are always a miniscule group that is always boxing well above their wives. There are several reasons. I think predominantly it's really a punishing cultural of excellence. And if you want, I can share a story from my own personal background. I don't know if I've ever shared it on this show. And I saw I did my undergraduate in mathematics computer science, pretty serious stuff. Then I did an MBA both at top universities. Then I was going on to pursue my MS master's of size and PhD. One of the places that I had been accepted from my PhD at UC Irvine, I ended up going to Cornell. At the time my brother, the judo player was living in Newport Beach and he was keen to try to convince me after my MBA to work with him and put on hold going on for my PhD. When my mother found out of his design to try to convince me not to pursue my PhD, when I returned to Montreal to their house, she says, can I speak to you in this room? And I'm thinking, oh, am I in trouble? She goes, I want to talk to you. What's up, mom? She goes, I'm hearing that you're thinking of maybe putting your studies on hold. I said, well, she goes, well, I just before you say anything, do you want people to know you as somebody who dropped out of school? So from now, that's a very powerful story because in my mother's eye, having an MBB and then taking a break before I pursue a PhD was something that would bring shame to the family as someone who would drop out of school. Now, do you think that if a group of people have internalized that level of excellence, are they likely to be successful or not? If another group of people thinks that getting good grades is acting white, is that a recipe for success or not? So cultural values matter for whatever reason, whatever is in the water of the Jewish home, they tend to excel. So now wherever they are, they're doing really well. Well, I wanted to be an actor and play in the Avengers and I didn't get the part who controls Hollywood, the Jews. I wanted to get a small business loan and I didn't get it because my numbers weren't quite correct. Who controls the banks? It's the Jews. So it becomes very easy to attribute or ascribe all of my individual and collective failures on this minuscule group of people for all of my failings. Thomas Sol, whom I know you appreciate, yes, gave arguably the greatest one word answer that I've ever heard. At one point he was appearing on some show. This is not too long ago, maybe 20 years ago. He's now 95 and I think it's a travesty that he has in one of the presidential freedom medal. I pray that President Trump gives it to him before he passes away because he's deserving of it. He was asked once, professors, so what do you think it will take for people to stop hating the Jews? And he gave a one word answer. Do you want to take a guess what it is? No. Fail. How did Thomas Sol get this? He's brilliant. If the Jews were suddenly no longer succeeding in ways that are anomalous to their per capita numbers, then maybe they wouldn't be as hate. Okay. Let me give you an argument against that. Please. Asians in this culture, in this society, it also box way above their way. The extremely disciplined family environment pushed incredibly hard to succeed. But don't get nearly the kind of hate that Jewish people do. So you're right in the United States. That's the case. But in some of the ecosystems in the far east where they are a minority, I think it's the, I don't know if it's the malaise. I can't remember the exact grouping. You have the almost the exact same animus for that group that succeeds a lot. And actually, Thomas Sol has done those analyses. So in other words, the point is it is what I'm describing is not singularly relevant for the Jew, but it is universally relevant for the Jew because there is no other grouping of people that is as successful in as many places and yet minuscule in all those places. So the Armenians also get that treatment in some ecosystems. The Lebanese get that treatment. Indians get that treatment in some ecosystems. So it is not a unique feature of only animus towards the Jews. The fact that in so many societies, you turn to the Jew to blame your problems, I think stems from that. Don't you think you could also make that exact same argument that those same people that are small in number but hyper motivated and hyper successful would also be much better at influencing policy in the country that they live in? Hence meaning that they're more likely to get the ears, the lobby. Not just the ears, but donate money, you know, fund campaigns, get the ear of the president, donate money towards his campaign, fund him. I suspect that the answer is your right. Yes. Most people would say that that is absolutely the case. But also we could say that if we look at the philanthropy, Jewish philanthropy compared to all other philanthropy, we'd probably score very highly if not one. What kind of philanthropy we're talking about? Worked philanthropy, hospital philanthropy, literary philanthropy for the art. So in other words, look, my family, we moved the Montreal from Lebanon. We moved the Montreal for two reasons. What three reasons? Number one, Montreal's also French in Lebanon. France, Lebanon used to be a French protector. So you already spoke French in Lebanon in addition to Arabic. So that was one. Number two, the immigration policy for war refugees was maybe easier to navigate Canada was a more welcoming country than say maybe United States. But number three is that my mother's sister had already immigrated to Montreal with her husband. And that husband became the director general of the Jewish general hospital of Montreal, which is the biggest hospital in Montreal. It's the Jewish general. So in other words, it is undoubtedly true probably. I don't have the empirical evidence that probably the Jewish lobby does its job really well and effectively. But let's look at all of the other things that they also do well. They contribute and so for example. Well, that's wonderful. But that doesn't take away from the influence that it has on our policies. Yes. And our political candidates on, like for instance, one of the reasons why mom Donnie won in New York City is because when they had the mayoral debate, he was the only one that said he's not immediately going to go to Israel. Right. And a lot of people were shocked by it. They're like, why is everyone saying they're going to go to Israel when they win as the mayor in New York City? It didn't make any sense. And people kind of just confuse by it. New York City's a mess. It's got a lot of problems. This one guy said, I think I can serve Jewish Americans better by staying here in New York City. And I'm not going to go to Israel. And everybody was like, thank God someone said that because all the other candidates, it seemed at least to me as an outsider were being heavily influenced by the Jewish lobby. Maybe I don't. Why don't they do that? They're not saying I'm going to go to England. They're not saying I'm going to go to France. They're saying I'm going to go to Israel. Right. Is it surprising that if you have a group of people who have been historically persecuted the way that they have? By the way, I don't think that it's running for mayor of New York City. And they're saying I'm going to go to Israel. I think it's totally wrong if there is a conflict between the best interests of the country that you reside in versus Israel. You should always side with the former. Which understandably, I agree. But I think that the reason why they were saying that is they were being influenced by the people that were funding their campaigns. And I think the people in New York City recognized that and said, hey, there's something where they're not looking out for our best interests. They're looking out for the best interests of the people that are funding them. And those people have the best interests of Israel in mind above the interests of the United States. This is the same sentiment that people have for why we invaded Iran and why we funded Israel, whether bombing Gaza, the same sort of thing. And I would say from October 7th on, first of all, immediately afterwards it's a tremendous support for Israel. I mean, it was a horrific attack. But the response, I think, is created a lot of anti-Israel sentiment in the United States. Do you think that other lobby groups that very feverishly lobby for their self-interest would receive the same animus as the pro-Israel lobby? So for example, do not connect it to a specific country. That's the problem. This one group is connected to a specific country. Okay. So let's do specific country. Okay. I've been a professor for 32 years. So I care about the ideas, the bad ideas that flourish within university's ecosystem, hence, parasitic minds, was that empathy? If you do a histogram of all of the nations that contribute to try to alter the types of ideas that are promulgated on American campuses, which lobby or which country scores way higher than anything you could ever hope for them is that? That's a very good question. And I think that's a different thing because I think what you're talking about is influencing American education systems. And that you could say China and Russia. They both have the Qataris. Sure. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of people that from other countries specifically influencing our education education system and doing it within their best interest by donating a lot of money, by funding programs, by having a lot of foreign exchange students. So that's, there's a big impact by other countries for sure. But they're not representing another country. Like no one's saying, I want to win New York City and then go to Beijing. Right. Anybody who does that in the way you just said it, in my view is violating its most with the crazy things that they all did it, they all did it except mom Donnie. Cuomo did it. They all did it. They all said I'm going to Israel. So I can't speak to that. I really can't. But do you understand why people would say that? Yeah. Here's why post October 7th, this negative sentiment because of the destruction of Gaza. Any lobby group vociferously fights for itself interest that tobacco lobby spends all their time convincing doctors, this I'm talking 40 years ago, that there is no evidence that smoking is bad for your health. From a drug company, from New York City, and New York City. So the reflex for a group that has its own interest to promulgate are going to do exactly that. That's why they're called a lobby group. So if from this side of our mouth, we care about the fact that there is a Zionist lobby, it cannot be that from this side of our mouth, we don't care about the fact that there are Islamic based funding to all of the American universities that have parasitized your daughters and mine in ways that should be problematic because it's your loss. Explain how they've done that. So any Near East Studies program, also known as political science program, also known as government programs, or at Harvard, you call it the Department of Government. So all those schools will then produce kids. All those kids are called John Smith and Jeff Bro Roscoe, but yet they are on the front line after October 7th, wearing their Kefia, stopping Jews from going to class. And that happened at UCLA and at Wellesley and at everywhere. And at Concordia University, my university, what caused that to happen? It's because there is one particular viewpoint that becomes the norm on university campuses when it comes to these geopolitical realities. So by the same way that I can be frustrated if Mario Cuomo is concerned about going to Israel when he is running for mayor of New York, I should also be very concerned that all of these Islamic countries are having a free fall, free fall with all of our children's things. But yet I don't see many people concerned about that. It is that double standard that then makes you go, hmm, why are you who lives in Iowa so concerned about it? Maybe there are really valid reasons for you to be concerned about the pro Israel lobby. And let's have a conversation about that. But then are you honest enough to have a similar discussion about other ways by which we tilt our policies and our children's brains? Probably not. Can you explain how this is done? Like what do you think is happening in the universities where they're tilting people towards a pro Palestinian perspective? Well, I mean, several ways. One, I mean, if it's directly through funding, you fund a $30 million whatever, you're probably not going to have faculty members who are going to be incredibly vociferous and there's anti-Islamic rhetoric if you have that. I'll give you an example. When I was potentially going to come, maybe they don't want me to hear this, but so be it. I was one of the places that I was being recruited at was potentially University of Austin, and I came called, I mean, they were going to make me an offer. The University of Austin doesn't have a tenure system. They have a constitution. It's a different kind of system. Of course, what allowed me to not be canceled, I would have been canceled 30 years ago for all the things that I say and all the things that I write, is that I was protected by tenure. And so I was very concerned about whether the fact that they don't have tenure, what happens if tomorrow. And I remember having a conversation, I won't mention his name, but you could probably guess who it could be, where I said, what happens under your constitution? If tomorrow, you get a $30 million donation from Muhammad Beltaliktilal. And he says, you know that little Jewish professor who's going on Joe Rogan and talking about bad things about Islam, that has to stop. His answer was that my interlocutor was, well, we're on the same team. I fully support what you're saying. Well you support what I'm saying until money talks, right? I can pick you a number, a donation number where you're no longer support with equal alacrity, my criticism of Islam. Maybe it's 100 million, maybe it's 200 million. But they're just given the people that I know that are the founders of the University of Austin. I don't know if that's likely. You mean there is no reservation price? It doesn't seem like they would be willing to go against the idea of Israel. I will. Maybe it's to you though. I mean it does, but it wasn't sufficiently reassuring. Reassuring. Yeah. I can understand. I mean if I was offered 10 year or no tenure, 10 years the way to go. the only way you can have real intellectual freedom. And by the way to that point. So when I now got this beautiful position at University of Mississippi, I don't have 10 year there. I don't really care that much. But they put a clause in the contract that says that my rights to say speak and write whatever I want will be protected with the same staunchness that the First Amendment offers me and that 10 year would offer me. So even though I'm not officially there, a 10 year professor at this stage of my career, I don't care. But they they they enshrined it. So what so to our earlier point, I think there is a way whereby I could put a load of money in front of you and say, so how much do you now support freedom of speech for God's sad? And I'm saying maybe you're right that the University of Austin guys would never buckle to that. But Harvard government department did buckle Columbia University under Edward Edward Said, you know what that is Edward Said. Edward Said was a kind of very pro Palestinian guy who was kind of a big shot in their political science department. All of his teachings at Columbia University were rather skewed in terms of being anti-Israel. And so the students that come out are going to be a product of what we taught them. It's not surprising that they're all wearing kafia. And you think that this is directly because of funding and not because of what they've seen the horrors of what's happening. Well, because I think that's what's turned most people that have no affiliation within a university because it's not all university students that are reacting the way they reacting. They're reacting because of what you could see when you see Gaza. Right. I mean, it's obliterated. It's true. But we can go back to a time before October 7th and I can point you the difficulties that I faced at Concordia not being able to walk around on campus freely also held true before October 7th. So we know that we could eliminate the retirement. In that case. Right. So that goes to our earlier point. We can blame ISIS for the U.S. but then I could take you to a time where the U.S. didn't exist, which is called 1776. Right. Who are you going to blame now? Right. You can blame things in the Middle East on Israel. I could take you to 1948 when it's not that. So the it's a very facile reflex to always find that culprit. The reality is that any lobby group is by definition of the word lobby is going to espouse positions that are in their self interest. I understand that. It doesn't surprise me that the pro Israel lobby does that as the as do the Qataris as do the Romanians as do the Haitians. Nobody does it for various dynamical reasons. Yes, the Israelis are probably more in the ears of the things. Is that because they're demonic? No, because they have more power. Is that weird? Well, let me ask you this. Sure. Do you agree that anti Israel sentiment has ramped up since the response talk, October 7th? Absolutely. You may not like what I'm about to say. I think most of the anti Israel sentiments, ultimately, if you scratch enough the onion and peel enough the stuff is rooted in Jew hatred. Really? I do. Really. So you don't think that it's a direct response to people seeing what happening Gaza? No, because I think that has an impact. I've lived in the world before October 7th and the world that I lived in and the Jew hatred that I face. I don't have Joe Rogan's platform size, but certainly by the standards of most people have a huge platform, the massive, the orgiastic, the himler level, Jew hatred that I have faced, certainly precedes by countless years, the October 7th. So then how would we explain why I'm called a parasite, a pedophile, a child killer, a rat, a vermin? Why am I called those things? I have nothing to do with the Israeli war. Okay, but this is anecdotal, right? I mean, what we're talking about is the general sentiment in the United States has changed pretty radically since the response of October 7th. I've experienced it. I've experienced it with people that I know are experiencing it online, people that never talked about Israel. Never had anything bad to say about Jewish people and now are just furious when they see what's happening in Gaza. Now what they see is happening in Southern Lebanon where their Christian villages are being bombed where those people also mad at what happened to the 600,000 Syrians who were killed, which in the Lebanese and the Syrian civil war, a lot of 600,000 Syrians were killed. Okay. I don't know if they knew about that, but I think this is kind of a case of what about Islam, right? And I just, we could go to that and we could talk about that and maybe that should be publicized more. But what I'm talking about is the people that I've encountered in the United States that really generally didn't have an opinion about Israel at all have had a very negative opinion about Israel because of the response talk to Upper Southern, because of what they've done to Gaza. So let me address the what the, what about this. Okay. I know I'm loving today's conversation has a different timbre to it, but it's, it's keeping us sharp. I like it. So thank you for keeping me on my toes. Let's suppose that I had a rule in my head that says I only get incredibly irate and animated if an MMA fighter commits a crime. But when I see the exact same crime committed by anybody other than an MMA fighter, I don't have the reflex to be upset. It'd be what about us and for you to say, how come you got upset when the MMA fighter did this, but when the non MMA, that wouldn't be what about us. Because what you would be saying is I want cognitive consistency from you, dad, that if you're upset that an MMA fighter commits a crime, you'll be as upset when a non MMA fighter commits the exact same crime. Could you illuminate me on this Syrian thing? Yeah. So when this, when the, but I'm only vaguely aware of what happened. So there was a civil war that was started in Syria, I think, at 2011, that where the various Islamist groups were trying to overthrow Assad. And as a result of that dynamic, innumerable people Muslim on Muslim were completely ravaged into the tune of about 600,000. Okay. So let's, let's put that here. So let's not call that what about them because you could easily say, I am angry whenever it is what about us. Because we were specifically talking about Jew hatred in this country being ramped up post October, October 7th. I mean, it is what about us. Because we could address that. Yes. This is one particular thing, one particular moment in history that is caused this extreme reaction. This anti is resentment. The guy in Iowa who has never heard of the Middle East, but got rightly upset at what he saw in Gaza. Why wasn't that guy if he is a honest purveyor in his moral calculus of any innocent woman being killed? I'm asking you, I pose that question to you. When he sees the thousands and thousands of Yemenis that were killed, the children that were eradicated much more than the tune of whatever happened in Gaza, every single individual. Let me go on record. Ever you talking about the drone bombing in Yemen? What are you talking about? There are many, many, there are many, many different ways by which Yemenis have died as a result of the conflicts in Yemen. There are a huge number of people that were killed in the fight between Sudan and the South Sudanese. I mean, really in the many hundreds of thousands. So if I am just an Iowa guy, my moral calculus operates according to the following rule. Whenever I see innocent people being killed, it drives me crazy. I am outraged. For if that's the rule by which I navigate through the world, I will look at the October 7th victims and say, those Jews didn't deserve this. I'm pissed. I will look at the gazins that were killed who were innocent and I'd say, those gazins did not deserve it. So far so good, you agree? I will look at the Syrians and say, that is not right. I will look at the Ukrainians that were being butchered endlessly by Putin and say, that's pissim me off and on and on. But if it would appear that my calculus is abiding by the no Jews, no news mechanism, then I have a right to say, how come you're focused only on when it seems that the mean Israelis are killing the beautifully peaceful Palestinians and your moral outrage never gets invoked across all of the panel plea of much greater disasters around the world. Why is that? Well, I think initially in October 7th people were very outraged at the attack on the Israelis. They were horrified at what happened. The videos that we saw were terrible, videos of people cheering in the streets when they were bringing the Israeli captives. But then the difference between the capability of the Palestinians and Gaza versus the Israeli army, which is one of the most ferocious and capable armies in the world and the devastation that they did to Gaza, the city, just the city alone where you see apartment buildings, hospital, everything just blown to smithereens. There's a complete difference in power. What you're talking about in Syria, I'm assuming this is a civil war between civil war. and the people are killing each other. Well, that's the government versus militia, but similarly, armed people may not see that with Gaza and Israel. With Israel, you're seeing United States funded Israeli military, which is insanely capable, destroying an entire city. Fair enough. I see how much is our very tough. There's no question. But the reality of the numbers is very tough too because we don't even know how many people are dead. We can talk about the numbers if you want to second, but let me ask you this. If October 7th. It's very tough too because we don't even know how many people are dead. We could talk about the numbers if you want to second, but let me ask you this. If October 7th had it happened, I'm not being flippant, I'm not playing games, I'm really honestly asking you. If October 7th had not happened, how many of the innocent Palestinians that tragically perished would have perished? That's a good question. Probably it would have never happened. There probably would have been a bombing of Gaza. We could get really dark here because there's a lot of people that believe that it was allowed to happen so that they could have an excuse to attack Gaza. But that goes to our earlier point of the election. It gets goofy and I'm not the person to comment on that because I don't really know, but there was stand-down orders. We know that. At least some of the army was told to stand down. I actually had the former director of the Mossad on my show and his name is Yoseko Hen. I was like, you'll see. How did it happen? The best of my understanding in terms of what I've told is that shit happens and someone falls asleep, metaphorically speaking. It was a gigantic, but anyways, if you're not you, but if someone is of the conspiratorial mindset, there's nothing that I could share. But speaking literally to the former Mossad, the former director of Mossad, he said it was a catastrophic failure of where everybody is asleep. But my point is this. Right, but let me stop you there. Because if I was the former head of Mossad, the last thing I would just tell you is that while we allowed it to happen because we've been wanting to blow up Gaza for a long time and take it over and turn it to a big resort, you would never say that. Right. Right. And we also know that on record Netanyahu has said that they fund Hamas so they can control the size of the flame because they don't want the Democrat, democratically elected people to take over and turn Palestine into a state. So you don't know anything. There's something in that. Yeah, true. Well, Israel left if if I'm getting my history, right, they left Gaza in 2005. Is that the right number? Do I? Am I getting that right? So from 2005 till 2023 or maybe 2007, so someone will correct me in the comments section for many, many years, Israel left and there was no problem in the region. Right? Is that true? I don't know. You know better than that. There was no problem. Okay. I mean, then there was a catalyst and event happened. Now we can debate whether it was proportionate, whether it could have been, you know, adjudicated differently. We can discuss all that. And all that, you can discuss it without ever worrying about being called anti-Semitic. It's totally within the fair bounds of having those conversations. Right. But what is true is that if Israel wanted to eradicate Palestinians, it would take them a lot less time than when you and I have been talking on the show by orders of magnitude. It would take 15 seconds, but they didn't do that. Right? They don't do that. As a matter of fact, Johnson, but they kind of have in the Gaza. Gaza is done. There's almost nothing left. So the numbers that I've seen videos, right? You see what it looks like when they fly overhead. We could show some videos. So okay. Most recent videos, they show the drone videos of flying over Gaza. It looks like a nuclear bomb hit it. They just, they did it slowly. They did it over years. Just consistent, constant bombing. And there's almost nothing left of it. Right. And there's also been this crazy talk of putting resorts there. You know, and Trump said, we're going to turn into the what did he say? Something of the, you know, like Monte Carlo, yeah, monocle. Something crazy. Right. Again, it's totally fair to discuss what constitutes proportional things and so on. But I take a broader view, which is Israel exists and you have two choices. You can keep creating generations of your people whose, whose entire daily animation of terms of their objectives is to eradicate that place. Or you could recognize that every single millimeter on earth has at some point been owned by someone else. Is that, is that not true? I mean, is, is the definition of history, not the accounting, leguring of who owned what when? You know, now in every other conflict that has ever existed throughout all of human history, there is a winner of that conflict and a loser and people move on. Okay. Just just hear me out. Okay. I lived in Lebanon. I grew up in Lebanon. We had to leave under imminent threat of execution. It's very unfortunate. We lost everything. We moved on. We made a life for ourselves. Our home was stolen by Palestinian people. I never held any animus towards Palestinians. I moved on with my life. One day, I was interesting enough to have the privilege of appearing on Joe Rogan show. My daily animation is not to go and kill people for things that were done to us. And very few people have had things happen to them as what happened to us. Right. Jews were exterminated in the Holocaust. It didn't create an endless litany of Jewish terrorists throughout the world trying to get back. So in every part of the world, we are now in Texas, that land was owned by someone else before the United States came along. We are sitting quote on stolen land in Canada. We are sitting on stolen land. It's called history. Most people are able to move on and say, Hey, the dice went this way or that way. Let's hold hands and let's build a better future. You can't do that if canonically, the Jewish state should not exist. But doesn't Hamas say in their charter every Jew that is anywhere we will find him and get him. So did that make sense that they would be the leaders of that region? Wouldn't it have been much better for them to train their kids to becoming neuroscientists and podcasters and classes and physicians? But that's not what they chose to do repeatedly for nearly 80 years. The minute that that clicks and they say, you know what, you have this part, we have this part. Let's shake hand and let's be one family. The problem will go away. So I agree with you. The images are very jarring. Right? I'm also a very empathetic, loving guy. But I also know the reality, which is I've never heard Jews saying, Let's kill all Muslims. I always hear the opposite. Jews are an existential affront to Islam. Mohammed on his deathbed said, promise me that you will rid Arabia of Christians, but really the Jews. So how could you have a coexistence between two people when one people wants to eradicate the other? So did Israel over react? I'll leave future historians to decide that. What do you think? I think that given what they were trying to achieve, they did the best that could possibly be. So as you know, the best they could possibly be, would be eliminate the entire city. No, and turn it into rubble. There's been about 70,000 that is not the right number. We don't even know. I mean, that's the numbers that I've seen. Was the accounting? Who's who's the no? How many of those numbers are coming from the Hamas? That's true too. Okay. But if you just look at the destruction, the buildings that have been leveled, the sheer volume of destruction, there were two cities called Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Okay. They were fully nice. What about us? And then, but it wasn't a bottom. We didn't have to do that either. And we could you could say that that was a horrific thing because Japan was about to surrender. Well, and we were like, from the American, let's practice. Let's see how these things work. Again, that's the least let's show you that we have nuclear bombs. That's the least generous interpretation of that. I think it's a pretty accurate demonstration. I think it's a story. I've heard something else. What have you heard? I've heard that they did the calculus of if we and by the way, it could be a very cold Calis calculus. But what I've heard is that there is a very clear pro pro con thing where if we do this, this many people would die. If we go on in the war and it takes that much more before they surrender, there'll be this many dead. Drop those bombs. That's possible. Yeah. It's possible. So do you think that if Israel didn't kill 70,000 people and completely destroyed Gaza, that more than 70,000 people would have died during the same time period? No, I'm not applying that same calculus of Japan. What I'm saying is images of destruction are very vivid to our brain. Right? Wait, don't you think? But that doesn't mean that that's the information that I use to establish that what is morally righteous. What else can we use other than information? We can use what is the existential calculus that animates each society. One society says will even help you build a better society just please don't spend all your time screaming about eradicating every last one of us. The other society says, I don't think so. If we're ever strong enough to kill all, unfortunately, we were only strong enough to kill 1200 of you. And boy, that was orgiastically pleasing. But if tomorrow, God willing, hey, maybe the Iranians have nuclear bombs, we can eradicate all you assholes. My God, the world. So this is Hamas saying that. Right. And the people that live in Palestine that were killed, the 70,000 plus people, how many of them do you think were Hamas? Well, the numbers that I hear is that it was one to one ratio, which apparently is a pretty good ratio out of where those numbers coming from. I mean, like, you want me to give you the reference? I don't know. No, no, I mean, is it coming from Israel? Is it coming from Hamas? Is it coming from Palestine? So there's bit. So the one I'm going to use is from John Spencer. Do you know what that is? No, John Spencer is a war urban war researcher. I think he's at what's the military where they train the military West Point. He's a professor of urban warfare. He's come on my show. And based on whatever analysis that he's done, he's not he's not Jewish. He's not uniquely pro-Zionist is that he's saying. And again, I see to whomever knows better about this than I do. I don't know all the details. He said that the ratio of civilian to, you know, fighters killed in the Gaza war is better than, you know, most other comparable situations. So Hamas had 35,000. It's one to one. So Hamas had 35,000 militants in Gaza. If that if the one to one number is right and 70, that's what it would be. And so all those buildings needed to be destroyed because you'll get at least one out of one was. So let me ask you this, let's suppose I think it's totally reasonable that you'd be upset that all these people died innocently. I think Pharaohs people that see it with the upset, right? Fair enough. What give me the specific details of how you would go about getting your hostages back, given the reality. So give me a way hostage to get back. In terms of alive or dead? Yeah. I don't know what the exact numbers, but is it something in the order of like 3040 alive and all the other ones were dead? Does that sound right? Right number? I don't know. Whatever it is, it could be 50. It could be 100. It could be 200. So I am representative of Israel. I need to get those people out. Let's suppose that Hamas had said here are all the people that we have kidnapped and we are returning them to you and putting down our arms. Would Israel have caused the destruction that they would have caused that they did cause? I don't know. But what do you think? Probably not. Right. If they did that. So nothing happens in a vacuum, right? It's not, there isn't something. But does that just because they wouldn't have done that? Does it justify what they did? What does it say here? Final release. Total returns 168 hostages were returned alive, including eight rescued by the IDF. The bodies of 85 hostages were repatriated after they were killed during their captivity. US deal broker that landed a cease fire of an a swap for nearly 2000 pounds to the Imprisoners. So they swapped some of them. Well, let me actually speak about the swap issue. I discussed this in suicidal empathy, Sinwar, who was the architect of October 7th. Do you know his background? No. Sinwar was a ardent militant whose entire life has been animated with eradicating Jews, not Israel, all Jews from the world. Because there's a hadis that says in Islam, the world will not stop until every Jew that is hiding behind the tree is found and killed. And they refer to that hadis from Islam, not radical Islam. Islam. He was taken in one of those sweeps of Palestinian militants to prison. He was diagnosed with a brain tumor, a deadly terminal brain tumor. The Israeli's, you know, the mean Israeli's who are killing everybody because the Hippocratic oath in their view supersedes any other calculus. The the Israeli neurosurgeon doesn't say, F the sky, he's killed, you know, tons of my fellow coreligenists screw him, let him die. They operate on him and they save his life. Right. So let me ask you this, Joe, if you and I, let's put ourselves in the mind of right. I was saved by the hands of the Jewish Israeli neurosurgeon. Otherwise, I would have died. Then he was let go in one of those swaps. Would that have not bought you sufficient existential empathy to say, probably I shouldn't then spend the rest of my life being the architect and repay the largest of the Israeli neurosurgeon by doing October 7. Yet it didn't buy him that empathy. Right. So he was swapped in an earlier deal. Just you could, Jamie could look it up. You could do Sinwar S I and W A R. He was one of the guys who you saw him in one of those rubbles and a drone comes in and he's covered in rubble and then they take him out. Right. Well, if you and I, if I could put myself in your mind, if we had been ardent haters of a group and then that group had shown us tremendous compassion and generosity by literally saving our lives, that might have shut off my hatred to that group. For example, Bridget Gabriel, the Lebanese Christian woman who grew up in the Lebanese Civil War like I did, had always been taught as a Lebanese Christian that the Israelis are terrible and evil. They're the problem for the whole region. But then she escaped to Israel was welcomed in Israel. She completely flipped because she saw that they were nice human beings that treated her well. And then her brain washing was no longer there. Well, if I've literally taken a brain tumor out of your brain in that brain of yours, could I have not bought a bit of existential empathy for the Jews? It didn't. What do you think of that? Well, I think that person was probably deeply radicalized to whatever their ideology was. And that wasn't enough. Like saving them wasn't enough. It gave them, it was probably a law giving them another opportunity to kill more Jews. Exactly. So don't you think that's just, you know, that's one person and one person saved them. I don't think it necessarily changes the relationship between Israel and Palestine, particularly because Palestine was denied statehood. It's not a, it's not a country that's own. Can't do things that other countries can do. Do you know what Bill Clinton, who's not a Republican said regarding Palestine and statehood? Well, he said, I'm paraphrasing him. I killed myself bent myself backwards to give them almost everything that they wanted. This is sort of the Oslo. And yes, I thought was not interested in it to state solution. Let me ask you this. If you were the head of Israel, how would you handle it? You mean moving forward? Yeah. In my, in my utopia, it would be to try to catch the brainwashing that happens straight out of the womb, where the type of animus that is shared regarding the Jews is so outlandish, outlandish that it would make Hitler and himler squirm in unease. If you can get rid of that brainwashing, you will learn to see the other as an equal human being. Could I interject there? Please. Do you think that the bombing of Gaza and the destruction that's so clearly visible to everyone would actually stop that? Do you think that the bombing of Gaza would maybe make more people radicalized that would make more people want to take Israel? It would give them 100%. You're right that you are creating a new generation of terrorists. But again, it's you're choosing to decide where to place the causal point. Gaza existed fully peacefully for 20 plus years without anybody dying. The day that they decided to do what they did resulted in a retaliation, which we can discuss, whether it's good or not enough or too much, that is true. At the root of the problem is an open society that allows for the expression of all religions. When I was in Israel two months ago, I was in, well, all over Israel. I gave a talk in Tel Aviv and I gave a talk in Jerusalem. I spoke more Arabic in Jerusalem than I did English or Hebrew or anything else. To your point, I think Israel is only 73% Jewish. Exactly. Look at that. Please do. You thought it was maybe maybe 80%. But your number would even prove my point of view. Yeah, I think I might be wrong, but it's not 100% that's for sure. And there are Arabic Muslim communities in Israel that are tolerated versus not having a Jewish community and tolerated fully embraced. So I can show you the valedictorians. Let's see. Jewish populations, the largest in the world. 78, I said 83. What? 73% of the population. So what's the seven? It's Jewish, including, look, right there. Israel Bureau of Statistics. So it was right. 73% of the population is Jewish. 500, 3,000 people living in the West Bank beyond Israel self defined borders, recent updates of 7, 2025. So total population of 10,140,000 with Jews and others at 7, let's do a few analyses. Many, many valedictorians of universities graduate their Muslim. Some of them are in hijab. That's happening in Israel. You go to a medical school, the valedictorian that's chosen is a woman in hijab, because that seemed like it's animus in the Knisset in the parliament of Israel. There are tons of Muslims that serve, right? As I was walking around all over Jerusalem, everybody that I was interacting with was in Arabic. They were fully Israeli's who were Muslim, right? I have tons of pictures with all of them. Some of them recognize me. There was no animus. Why? Because they've internalized the reality that I am part of a country that is made up of, it's a Jewish majority country, but it's a place where everybody has equal rights, right? There are people who serve in the highest judiciary that are Muslim. Is there an Islamic country where the opposite could be so? I don't think so. It's also interesting when you look at the statistics, the polling statistics of people that support the war with Iran in Israel versus the United States. It's way more people support the war. Obviously, I live in America and I'm immune to the effects of being surrounded by people that hate me and want to blow me up. I could only imagine what that's like for the national psyche of living in a place like Israel being surrounded by. Paradoxically, though, forgive me for interrupting you, Israeli score as one of the highest on the happiness scales. So in a sense, it goes against what you're saying. And I think I've got an explanation, tell me what you think of it. When I am spending my entire existence to your point, possibly being eradicated tomorrow, I don't have the luxury to debate what constitutes male or female. It creates a laser focus about what's important in my life. My kickboxing coach, my old kickboxing coach, Shuki, he's from Israel and I went over his house once for dinner and it was crazy. Like they're dancing and playing bongo drums and I was, you know, I was saying to America, I'm saying to him, I go, why? I go, why are you guys so happy? I was like trying to figure it out. I go, is this just uniquely? Because it's in Israel. Everybody's happy because you know you could die any day. So just party party party party. Have a good time. And so you go. That was his mentality. And I never forgot that because I remember thinking that like Matt, and he went back to Israel. He's there right now. Have you been to Israel? No. Okay. You know what? I suggest. It doesn't seem like a good time to go. Seems like it's a little dangerous. I mean, and that's it. Yes. But go there and live live out the vibe. Look, it's an incredibly gay tolerant place, right? Tel Aviv, short of San Francisco, New York, Montreal. It's one of the most queer friendly places. It's very Bohemian. It's, you know, reggae music playing. Israel, is our in French, you say, bon vivant, good livers. But it's also Israel, Israel society doesn't universally support the war either. Exactly. But that speaks to the fact that there is a multiplicity of reality. It's an open society, right? I mean, there are, there are Muslim guys who will go in front of this, can I say it? And we'll say things that would never be tolerated in any other society. Is Israel society perfect? No. But is it the beast and the monster and the demon that you see as a caricature? I mean, nothing could be further from the truth. But do you think that perhaps the more right wing authoritarian aspect of the Israeli government is a problem when how Israel's perceived in the rest of the world in this over-response in Gaza, the way they're bombing southern Lebanon, that this is feeding into this? Look, there's been, there, there have been governments in Israel covering the whole gamut of political orientations. And while to your point, I think there's greater animus towards Israel today than maybe in the past, I've always known there to be Israeli animus in many places. For example, at my own university, well, which I'm will be leaving shortly, Concordia has been colloquially referred to as Gaza University for 25 plus years, Benjamin Netanyahu in 2002 was not able to speak there. They shut him down and they canceled him. And this is when he was then a private citizen. Now this is in 2002. So why did they say they were shutting him down? Well, because it's the Zionist entity and the same talking points, right? You just changed what is the culprit. So now we say it's the devastating images of Gaza, but 20 years ago, it would have been another story. So the reality that's that university, I don't necessarily think that was universally thought of in terms of like if you went to all the other different schools. No, you're absolutely right. But now that I think comes from two sources. The first source was when I told you earlier that the brainwashing that's going on American campuses where where Jethro is now also wearing the Kefia, but also the but the demographic realities of the West in general, including the United States, are such that we've let in people from those societies at a much greater number than in the past, right? Right. So I mean, you know, the Pew Survey, General Pew P. W. Right. So there there's a nonpartisan survey company that if anything tends to lean more towards progressive, they did a survey global survey of animus towards Jews, not Israel Jews. This was I think 2010 and they had a whole bunch of Islamic countries that were pulled. Now let's suppose I told you that we pulled people in Indonesia or in Libya or in Jordan and 10% expressed, you know, very serious Jew hatred. That would be an arresting number. You'd be a while. One out of 10 hates the Jews. That's a lot. Do you know what the average numbers were? Just picking up the witch countries? So in many, but I'm talking now mainly the Middle Eastern countries. So not not in Indonesia or Malaysia, which also we're not loving the Jews, but we're not nearly as hostile towards the Jews. I'm talking Jordan, Lebanon, Egypt, Syria, you know, those kinds of countries. What was the average number? And Jamie can pull it up. And when when the question was asked, how was it phrased? I don't know these afterwards, but it was like, do you hate Jews? Not do you hate Jews, but do you hold favorable or this favorable? It's enough that there is animus, but not I don't think the word hate was used. And is it Israel or is it Jews? Just Jews, just Jews guess what the percentage was like? Just give me a not like 70% it's 95 and up. Wow. Right. So if we sampled a thousand people from Syria and it's hate the hate Jews. How's the term? Have a, I don't remember because negative opinion, negative opinion, this favorable, this like whatever the number, whatever it is. It's a, it's a measure of your either proclivity, affinity or disdain for the Jew, whatever the word is. If you get 95, 97, 98% of pulled people saying that they don't like the Jews. And now you let into your country, your host country hundreds of thousands, if not millions of those people. Do you think that Jew hatred is going to co up or go down? So in Quebec, for example, as I may have mentioned previously on the show, Quebec had a very open policy towards Islamic immigration. And the reason that in Quebec, it was so, is because the most important sense of personhood in Quebec is that you maintain your linguistic identity. We are French. We don't want to be subsumed by the mean English language. Yes. So therefore, since many of the immigrants coming from Islamic countries were also francophone, in their infinite wisdom, the Quebec government said, hey, you know, here's a great idea. There was a 1997 civil war between the Algerian government and hardcore extremist Muslims. The latter lost. So they were fleeing from getting killed by the Algerian government. Why don't you open the borders for them to Quebec? The decapitations will happen only when they say Bonjour to you. So given that they will address you in French before they behead you, don't worry about it. Let them all in. I'm obviously being facetious. But the point is that Bonjour to you. So given that they will address you in French before they behead you, don't worry about it, let them all in. I'm obviously being facetious, but the point is that hundreds of thousands of Islamic immigrants came to Quebec. I started seeing the changes, a lot more women in hijab, a lot more dangerous to go to campus, a lot more requirements for accommodations, prayer rooms, public prayer. When you say dangerous, and what were? specifically to me, dangers going to campus and what were... Well, I'm somewhat of a known entity who doesn't mean words, and so I started getting a lot of death threats. The first set of death threats I got were in 2017, where for that semester I had to follow a protocol to walk on campus with security. They would lock the door so that the students could leave but not come back in. So I had to check in with the security. That lasted for about a semester, and I mean literally I would lecture and then I would be ushered out. My wife would be waiting for me and I would sort of let out a deep, like sigh that thank God I survived another week. Did you ever experience like people trying to get at you? So all of those threats were online that necessity, but then we had to file with Concordia a Montreal police report and so on. In 2022 I had in-person threat. So a guy came up to me, I was walking with my then, so 2022, so four years ago you had a month to been nine. I was walking with my nine-year-old, 10-year-old son, and this guy looks at me, he goes, are you got sad? I said yes, then he kind of composes himself to kind of deal with the hatred he feels and he goes, I'm not going to do anything to you out of respect for your son today. And so then the detectives got the footage of that, you know, because it was outside of the building. Yeah, I remember you told me about this. And then, and then by the way, I couldn't, they didn't want to show me a line up of things, of possible things because it would be racist to do so. So the process of a police line up, which is the most fundamental mechanism of identifying a perpetrator was viewed as racist, because the guy who levied the death threat to me was black. I think he was maybe Somali, he looked Somali. So I took a two-year leave from Concordia University and I'm now leaving in large part, because it became difficult for me, if not impossible, to be a high profile Jewish professor who supports the right of Israel to exist. Is you think happens in the future to Concordia and just to Montreal in general with this influx of people? It's a slow death. It'll take, you have to have the imagination to extrapolate into a distant future. So if you today go to your friend who's got that stake house on that street, I don't know if you want to mention it in Montreal, right? Would you walk around and think that it's all Islamic? Of course not. But it's a drip, drip, drip, it changes. Right? So for example, until very recently, the Quebec government was fully tolerating the public prayers, Islamic public prayers all over the place. I can tell you. I can tell you. And now they passed a law banning it. Well, why did you need to wait till then? Why didn't you listen to me when I was standing on top of the mountain, screaming into the void saying, this is what's going to transpire. But do you understand that you have more of an understanding of these things, more knowledge about these things and to these people that are trying to get elected and that are dealing with their constituents? And so this is a politically dangerous thing to bring up. I get it. But then you're engaging in suicidal empathy. Yeah. Well, it's also they're just, they have their own personal and dramatic. I get it. But you know, the reason why I love, I mean, and I'm going to get threats for this. The reason why I appreciate Trump is precisely because he implements things that most politicians wouldn't have the testicular fortitude to do. But that's what you want in a great leader. Right? Most people come in, do their time, parasitize the system and then leave having accomplished nothing. Well, the reason why Donald Trump has had not won not two but three assassination attempts. That is a testament to the fact that he is a danger to the status quo. Why? Because he does things, whether you agree with him or not, he's bold, he's fearless. He doesn't give a shit to your point. Most politicians would rather go la, la, la. I don't want to hear it until it's too late. The playbook is very clear, depending on the number of Muslims in a society, you can exactly predict the level of conflict. And that statement that I just said holds true, not withstanding the fact that most Muslims are perfectly lovely. Both those statements are both vertical. So when you are 0 to percent, you're just the quiet exotic minority. When you're three to five percent, you become a lot more engaged politically. When you become six to 10 percent, you start creating Sharia and no-go zones. We don't want your dogs here. This is not tolerated in our zone. Look at Britain. Look at France. So in the same way that I can predict the trajectory of diabetes, and no, I'm not saying that Muslims are, I'm drawing an analogy. I am explaining a trajectory. So if you wish to protect the liberties that make the United States so uniquely wonderful in the full range of societies that have ever existed, recognize that all religions are not equally likely to be congruent with the American experience. If you do, you'll survive. If you won't, your future descendants will root the day you were born. All right. Shall we handle that? Love being with you. Love being with it was a great conversation. Very lively. Thank you, sir. Suicide on empathy. It is available now. Did you read the audiobook? I did. Yes. And I constantly said that Joe Rogan would beat the shit out of me if I didn't do it. I would not do that, but I would be right. You slightly. But I'm happy. I'm happy you did that. Thank you. Always good to see you brother. All right. Bye, everybody.