Joe Roman, Mike, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Gentlemen, great to see you. Put them on. So, that mom, what's happening? Good to see you, gentlemen, again. Taking off. Take it off. One more time. Yeah, one more time. Yeah. So, what is the latest? Give me the latest. Where are we at? Why don't you take it, Brian? You just got to. You are the most current on where we are, what's going on? Man, there has been a lot of stuff happened in the 15 months since we were here. Yeah. Let me, like, stunning amount of stuff. So, let's not waste any time. Tell them where we're at. All right. Well, the last time we came to visit with you, I believe, was on December the 27th of 2024. We were just on the front end of having organized 30 committed Texans whose own families had had experiences related to trauma, addiction, alcoholism, and the wounds of war. Who, after hearing a plan that was developed for the state of Kentucky to bring I've gained to the American people as an FDA approved medication and breakthrough treatment for addiction and trauma, committed themselves to using their time, their talent, and their network to achieve what had never been done before. And that was to convince an individual state to undertake drug development to create a therapeutic medical breakthrough for public health crises within its borders that are representative of the national reality. After you released the interview with us on January 2nd, 2025, we pursued a five and a half month blistering campaign to convince 188 blank slate Texas legislators to find the single largest psychedelic research and medical development project in history. That'd be in the $50 million Texas I've gained initiative. We had the assistance of some in-state allies, one of which was Texans for greater mental health led by a dear friend and brother of mine, Logan Davidson, who was my right hand, going to meet with legislators continuously. When I set up shop at a hotel here in Austin and lived here just about part-time, wearing the shoe leather off, sweating, and making sure that everybody who needed to be introduced, educated and motivated to get behind this would do so. At the end of this five and a half months, we secured the votes of yes, of 181 out of 188 legislators between the Texas House of Representatives and state Senate. There was one individual who we had to persuade at the 11th hour to get behind this project. On May 14th, 2025, just 36 hours before the Texas budget was finalized, this bill that would create the first unified FDA drug development trial with I began in U.S. history was not funded. I woke up that morning and I believe very much in keeping your prayers and the closet as Jesus taught and not getting out there parading about it. But on that morning, I got a call and it was, hey, we're getting to the 11th hour. We don't have money to secure this. It may not make it. We've done everything that we can. I just literally got down on my hands and said, God, please let this happen. And if it cannot happen, how may I understand why? Three hours later, I got a telephone call asking if I could go and meet with the Texas House Speaker and Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick. I went at 430 in the afternoon on May 14th and spent an hour with these two gentlemen going back and forth about what this project was, why it was so existentially necessary for Texas in the country. And on Friday morning, May 16th at 10 a.m., we got a text message from the Lieutenant Governor Patrick Confirmen that he would approve and fully fund the Texas I began initiative. As we walk in here today, literally, just 10 minutes before we walked into your studio, I can confirm that the great state of Texas is going to fully fund the Texas I began initiative originally intended to be a public private partnership, but now has decided on its own to commit a full $100 million to launch the development of I began all the way through the FDA's drug development process for the benefit of the American people to do so on its own without any drug development partner and to do it for the good of humanity. That's phenomenal. Did you have to say to Dan Patrick to convince her of this? And kudos to him for doing this. Well, I had some very wonderful advocates who proceeded my meeting. Was he skeptical? Oh, he was completely disengaged from the process highly skeptical as we learned through intermediaries, but we had two wonderful brothers on mission who happened to be twins, Marcus and Morgan Lattrell. I know Marcus very well. Marcus and Morgan Lattrell reached out to the lieutenant governor. They spoke to him very moveingly and personally about their own experience with I began what it had done not just to save their lives, but what it was doing to save the lives of war fighters who had come to the end of being able to live. And as they explained to him what it did for them and what it has done for their brothers and sisters at arms who've returned to war to broken government systems that can do nothing. To cure what else them at their core, he was persuaded to have an open minded conversation. And through that conversation on May the 14th, we essentially went through what science suggests are the powers of the most sophisticated molecule on the planet to resolve physiological substance dependence and thereby create psychology within the human being whereby they believe they have ownership of their selves and their future and that that future will be one to find by choice rather than compulsion. And the most powerful aspect of the I began argument not just for the lieutenant governor and how speaker before most of these legislators who voted yes is the experience endorsed by many that I've again confirms without question the reality of our individual human divinity. And that is the greatest truth conveyed by this fabulous plant. And I don't think it's just I began the confirms that I think you could say the same about many other psychedelic drugs that are unjustly maligned and treated as if they're an escape from reality. But in the interest of this being a standalone podcast where people don't know what I begin is and don't understand the efficacy of it and how unbelievably effective it is, especially treating addiction. Did you please just go over that? Yes sir. So I'm again is an alkaloid that is derived from the e-bogashrub. The e-bogashrub is originates in the central Congo basin. It's native country is modern day gabong. It is the mother country of the e-bogashrub which has been used for centuries in the spiritual and cultural traditions of the bhui-di, a group of spiritualists who include the pygmis as well as the bond II tribes that lived there in gabong. In the early 60s it was discovered that I began an e-boga had a significant interruption effect on opioid addiction. There was an individual who had been addicted to heroin for a number of years. They took time again and not only did they not experience any withdrawal when they stopped taken heroin, they stopped having any desire to use any drug whatsoever. This touched off 60 years of open label field studies that are mountains high in decades wide that firmly established that I began has a unique and singular interruption capacity on physiological substance dependency. Whether that's opioids, alcohol, methamphetamine, cocaine or tobacco. Recent evidence also suggests that it has a significant interruption effect on compulsive behaviors. Anything that kind of impacts that brain stopamine system and produces a rush. Particularly gambling? Yes, sir. Now, in 2018, U.S. Special Forces Special Operators started going to Mexico for treatment of symptoms of traumatic brain injury. Express through treatment-resistant depression, anxiety and suicidality. Many of these veterans had gone through the VA system. They had been given an unbelievable amount of synthetic pharmacology that in their end effect. Essentially, unless the ties is the sole and slowly euthanizes the body and they were at the end. So, as they were going to Mexico and would get out of the game treatment, they came back with these just unbelievably just powerful recovery results that seemed too good to be true. So there were some scientists at Stanford University that were funded by a philanthropist who wanted to understand what was going on. And so what we have come to learn through Stanford Research Study on traumatic brain injury travets is that I've again has remarkable neuroreginative capacities on the brain that are unheard of in the annals of western science. And while information is still very small and amount and preliminary, there are individuals who have had eye-be-gain treatment for not just traumatic brain injury, but for multiple sclerosis. Lyme disease, Parkinson's disease, post-surgical complications related to the removal of brain tumor who endorse a restoration of functionality and an ability to live that are otherworldly. And as we recognize that the opportunities to improve the human condition as scale are multi-lifetime and appearing, we believe that we have found one of those. And if we're going to do just as to the human species, it is incumbent upon us to take what appears to be a promising therapeutic improvement and deliver it with speed through the U.S. medical systems. And that's what Governor Perry and I have founded Americans for I've again to do just that, achieve the moonshot of our time. And that is to bring I've again medicine to the American people as quickly as possible. And thank you again, Governor Perry, because if it wasn't for your involvement in this, I think a lot of people would be far more skeptical. You being a former distinguished governor of the state who is a Republican, generally speaking, most people think Republicans being anti-psychodelics. And this whole thing is just a bunch of people trying to escape reality and poison their mind and tune out of society and become losers. That's the general consensus of people that are just for lack of a better term, ignorant of the effects of the substances. They don't understand it. But if it wasn't for you, your open-mindedness, your willingness to engage in this and try to understand it and to speak to these veterans, I don't think people would be taken into seriously. Yeah. So thank you. And thank you as I've watched you over the last 15 months, same like ever six weeks or so. You would have a guest on here and you'd be talking about high-begane in particular and what is the progress that we're making. What comes up so often? Yeah. Well, and it should. It should. It should. It should. Because this truly, this is not what I came into the world for. This is not what I came to politics for. This is what, you know, I got led to this through that relationship with Marcus and in turn Morgan Lattrell and seeing those two boys literally, particularly Marcus, on the doorstep of committing suicide. When he came to live with us at the Governor's Mansion in 2007, we had met the year before just by the grace of God. And I told him I said, if you're ever through Austin, come by and see me knowing that the chances of that would be pretty slim. He knocked on that guard door in May of 2007 and said the Governor said, if I was ever through here, come by and see him. They called, I let him in for dinner and my wife who's a nurse, she recognized this young man who was really troubled, addicted to opioids, masking it without the call really sick. And for the next two and a half years, he lived with us at the Governor's residence. Wow. I started this long journey literally with him and trying to find ways to healing. We sent him to a host of different places. Carried Brain Center and Dallas, we sent him to what's called now Axios athletes performance in those days, but a great rehab facility down in the Panhandle of Florida. And they helped him conquer or helped him manage the opioid addiction. I was suggesting until he was treated with Ibogaine, which did clean that completely away from him some years later. But the point is, he really struggled and he has become like our son. As a matter of fact, I talked to him this morning. He said, be sure and tell Joe howdy for me. He just thinks the world of you as well. I talked to his brother the day before. They understand how powerful this compound is from the standpoint of treating post-traumatic stress, traumatic brain injury, addictions. This and as I became convinced, one of the things that I will say that I've been, I've been open to change, just like criminal justice reform. In the early 2000s, I was kind of like a lock there, asked up, throw the key under the jail. You break the law in the state of Texas. Here's how we treat you. And I had a district judge in Fort Worth, John Cruzo, a Democrat district judge who I knew and had been friends with. He said, Governor, we got a program here that allows these individuals who have broken the law. They maybe got caught with an illegal substance or what have you. And rather than sending them to jail, sending them to the penitentiary where they become professional criminals, we give them a second chance. We put them in a rehab program. We put them in a treatment center. We put them in a boot camp. Give them these options rather than sending them to prison where they're going to become professional criminals. And the recidivism rate is going to continue on. I'm kind of like, nope, I'm tough on crime. That's what us Republicans do. But it really got me thinking. I mean, I am curious, mind it about concepts and ideas. So that brought me to having conversations and long story short, that single conversation led to Texas leading the nation with criminal justice reform. Texas Public Policy Foundation that now Secretary of Agriculture, Brooke Rollins, was operating in the mid to late 2000s. They came on board, saw this, supported it. We passed it through a very Republican, very conservative legislature. Texas led the nation in criminal justice reform, saved us billions of dollars. We stopped building prisons. We stopped sending people to prison where they were becoming professional criminals. So that template, if you will, was what we took to Donald Trump in 2018. And he was just like me initially. I'm tough on crime. But he was open. He was curious. Brooke Rollins, interestingly, had come up and was his domestic policy adviser at that time. And she made the pitch. And he was open. And that conversation led to him being open to federal criminal justice reform. And today there are people who, I mean, you know, you may have different ideas about President Trump and what have you. I know that's the case. But on this issue of criminal justice reform. This man was curious. He was open-minded. And he's made a real difference in people's lives following the Texas model. The reason I share that with you as a example, that's where I was on these compounds, these drugs, these psychedelics. I mean, I grew up in the 60s, Timothy O'Leary used an LSD marijuana, any of that kind of stuff. But an ethma to me. Absolutely and totally. I don't have anything to do with it. This is crazy stuff. You get in trouble. They'll throw you in jail. You'll jump off of buildings. I mean, you, every story that you can imagine that people. And then think about from the 60s forward, how, you know, I went into the Air Force. They, you know, we took drug tests at least monthly. So the idea of being involved with the drug was just totally and absolutely not on my radar screen. These are bad things. And we're reinforced in the 80s with Mrs. Reagan, just say no to drugs. Here's your brain on drugs. I mean, we have been browbeat as a society for 60 years. And when you add to it what Nixon did, President Nixon did in the late 60s, early 70s, with his war on drugs, he hated hippies, he hated blacks. And one of the ways you could go after them was to go make these compounds schedule one, which he did. Schedule one says there is no medical purpose for it. And it is highly addictive. I've again fits neither of those. I've again is not an addictive compound by any sense of the imagination. It's also absolutely not a recreation company at all. It's not something that someone can do at a party. We are proving without a doubt to the Texas legislature, to legislatures across this country and Mississippi and Tennessee and Arizona, West Virginia, that it does have a medical purpose. There's some extraordinary things that can happen for their citizens who have PTSD, who have sexual trauma, who have addictions, I mean, saving lives by the thousands, hundreds of thousands I will suggest to you. When this is approved across the country and we see it as a relatively easily studied and accessed by medical care compound. So that story of seeing these two young men who have given everything literally up to willing to give their lives. And a lot of their friends did for our freedoms and our liberties in this country. And for us to say to them, oh, sorry, you can't have access to this because you know their, you know, President Nixon said this was bad stuff back 60 years ago. And it was taken off the shelf as a schedule one drug, put over here. And for 60 years, Americans have suffered through so many different eras, the late 90s when the Sackler family and Purdue Pharma comes along. And we literally, I think one of the most demonic things I've seen in my public life is this family who used oxycoden and sold it to America as this be all to end all. And then our federal government in the mid 2000s, we didn't know how to deal with these young men who would be putting these horrible conditions and positions of being at war time after time after time rotation after rotation. Tempos that we'd never seen before in the history of mankind. I'll suggest to you. I mean, Joe, we were at war for 20 years. 20 years during that period of time. There's, you know, special operators that were deployed eight, nine, 10 times. And then they come home and the government gives them a sack of opioids and that makes them feel crappy and they mask it with alcohol. They sit around and go, why did Bobby kill himself? Well, because the government failed and it's great responsibility to take care of these young men and women in my opinion. So we owe it to them. As a matter of fact, a dear friend of mine who just passed away within the last two days, he had worked with me for, gosh, 30 years. When he first saw that I was getting involved with this psychedelic drug, this I began compound and we were having a conversation. He said, you need to be really careful with that. And you know, you've got a great reputation. You spent 40 years building that reputation up. He said, you don't want to throw it away on some cockamame idea here. And I told him, I said, well, I don't think I'm doing that. I've studied this pretty intently. I'd talk to a host of different people. And I said, so I'm comfortable about the science here that I'm seeing and what have you and I say, I think it's worth going forward with. I said, right, their lives are not worth more than my reputation. And that's what kind of continues to drive me. There are people that still kind of say, why are you doing this? Because I believe in it. I mean, I believe it to the point, Joe, that I'm willing to risk my reputation. This episode is brought to you by BetterHelp. A lot of people hit stretches where money gets tight. And it's not just the bills. It's the constant pressure, the mental load, the second guessing of every decision. And honestly, one of the biggest difference makers isn't some perfect budget. It's having a solid support system when things feel heavy. And if that support system includes therapy, even better. Because while it can't solve your money problems, it can change your relationship with finances. It can help you manage the stress, anxiety, and maybe even any shame you feel around money. A good place to find a quality therapist is BetterHelp. Plus they do a lot of the work for you. What you really all you need to do is answer a few questions and BetterHelp will match you with a fully qualified therapist online. They have an industry leading match fulfillment rate, which is a fancy way of saying that they typically get it right the first time. But even if they don't, it's super simple to switch to another therapist. When life feels overwhelming, therapy can help. Sign up and get 10% off at betterhelp.com-jre. I don't think you're risking your reputation at all. I think that's foolish thinking. I think it's people that don't understand the times. This is a different world. We're living in a world of information now. And you can't go buy these false narratives that were adopted in the 1970s. And we're winning. I mean, I'm telling you what Americans for Ibogaine has done. You know, we started out. I tell people I said, you talk about a small group of people. I think there were six of us. He's a CEO. I'm the chairman. We got Dr. Rulen, who's the secretary and Claire Stapleton, the communications person. And then Marcus and Melanie Lattrell. Marcus's wife are the other two members of our little board. And we were this small little group kind of going long and doing what we were doing. We were successful in the Texas legislature and what have you. It's exploded now. We have ambassadors. Americans for Ibogaine ambassadors all over the United States now. This people have seen what we've been able to do in Texas. Mississippi followed suit. They've, since they're, they're governor of Peace and Legislation. I want you to talk about that. We're going to do the road call here now. And just and share with with Joe and his audience just the great progress it's been made. And and quite frankly, we've out, I think about Michael Dell when he was selling computers out of the trunk of his car back in the late 80s and then his college dormitory. AFI kind of found itself like that just a few months ago. And I'm not trying to say that we're Dell computer today. But we are growing at such a leaps and bounds and, you know, and having the resources that we need to be able to put our people in various places. I mean, he's the travels all you were in Cabo. What you're telling about the group that you met with Cabo. And I mean, just 200 of these extraordinary people down there. He travels all over the country. And you know, and we have to have the resources to to be able to do that. And you know, so I hope you're the folks that are listening or, you know, go to Americans for Ibogaine. You know how to tell them how to do that and help this organization because this is what I'm going to do the rest of my life. I'm 76 years old. And this is what I hope the Lord gives me a lot of years to make a difference because I know for a fact that what we're doing today, what you're helping us with is making a difference. And if we can get these clinical trials to the conclusion and, you know, thank you to the Lieutenant Governor and to the Speaker for what they committed to today. I mean, to know that we're going to be able to go forward now with these clinical trials to show the world exactly what we know. But so that the naysayers out there, the skeptic can look at that and go, you know what? You can get 85% of the people who are hooked on opioids clean in 72 hours. It's not amazing. That's such a stunning thing to me. Dr. Goldol and we were at South by Southwest, we can have a go. She was sitting on the stage. She's an MD PhD. She was at Johns Hopkins. She's over at Cow Berkeley now. And she gave a little primer, if you will, on the different psychedelics. There's a critical period that the mind opens up and you're able to go in and if you will, the medicine treats the mind, I think, from my Aggie, you know, non-pharmaceutical, non-scientific mind here. But to go in and repair, reset the brain. The technical word is neuroplasticity. Ketamine has a critical period. I think she said 48 to 72 hours. Silasibin has a critical period from 14 to 28 days. I think I'm pretty close on these. But I began the critical period, the time when that neuroplasticity is active and the brain I think I'm pretty close on these, but I began the critical period. The time when that neuroplasticity is active and the brain can be trained, healed, reset is from 90 to 120 days. And then with the addiction opioids, which I happen to think is one of the most addictive substances that's out there. I mean, this is some horrible stuff. You know, you're just very current event with Tiger Woods and Tiger's accident. And, you know, he had Oxycontin and his, you know, I'm not judging here, but I'm just kind of saying that may, when I was ran for president in 2011, I'd had major back surgery in July. I announced that I was running for president in August. I had six weeks to try to get over that major back surgery and I had a terrible condition called a neurological hyperfusion in my right leg. I've never had a pain like that felt like a blow torch going down my right leg. And they gave me Oxycontin. And I was taking that to cover up the pain. I was taking Ambien to go to sleep at night and I was taking some stuff called Pro Vigil to get back up in the morning and be focused. I laugh about it now. I'm surprised I did as well as I did in that presidential effort in 2011. Hell, forgetting that one thing, that third thing in that debate. I was going to hell. I'm surprised I could remember any of them. Knowing what I know now about Oxycontin and the incredibly nasty addictive nature that it has. I mean, this stuff is just poison. I began in 48 to 72 hours after one dose, one oral application of this compound and that addiction has gone not only is that addiction gone, Joe, but Stanford has done functional MRIs on an addicted opioid brain and then treatment with Ibogaine. And they have shown that brain from the addicted look that those experts, those postdocs that look at this to a normal brain, a normal brain scan in 72 hours. If you were to go through the normal process of healing yourself of opioid addiction through an abstinence program. It would take you 18 months and there are very few, I'm going to say single digit people that are successful and being able to do that. But think about that. We got a compound here that has the ability to heal people of opioid addiction in 48 to 72 hours and we're not doing everything that we can and our power to make that available. I mean, what the hell is wrong with us? How bad you got to hate people to not make that available? With two doses, it's even more spectacular. 98% that is amazing. 98%. That is truly amazing. There's nothing you remotely like it with standard practice addiction therapy. Nothing. You know, he mentioned the Americans for Ibogaine. We have ambassadors and Joe, what you really helped us do on January 2nd of 25 was create a movement. Our organization is the custodian of that movement. We are a public policy and advocacy organization and Governor Perry mentioned to keep it me on the road. Wherever there are state leaders, citizens of conviction and influence, whether that is California, whether it's Massachusetts or whether it's Alabama, we exist to plant the seed of a scientific understanding of a public policy framework and of a spiritual understanding of the significance of what we have in our hands here. An opportunity to improve the human condition at scale. And while we have talked tightly about Ibogaine's impact on substance dependency and upon the wounds of war, our ambassadors reflect essentially the universal human condition and the way in which individuals who have tried every way to overcome various forms of trauma and debility. And as the last step, a redemptive restoration through Ibogaine treatment, it is not for everybody. It should not be a first resort. It is an exceptionally powerful medication that comes with a series of side effects that are highly unpleasant as you previously mentioned. One of the selling points ironically in the Texas legislature was to say, you know, if your idea of a good time is being in a state of semi paralysis for 12 to 16 hours and throw an up continuously through the process, you're going to have a real good time. And if there is the equivalent of being brought to the judgment throne of God on this side of life, it is an Ibogaine experience. That seemed to motivate a lot of support, especially for those who subscribe to puritanical notions of punishment for wrongdoing. That's not what I'm here to advocate, but certainly. It is not fun. But what we know is that, for instance, we have two fashion model twins whose fathers sexually abuse them for a decade. And the results of that horrific experience that they shared produced all kinds of psychological maladies that included an eaten disorder for one, persistent neurosis, and the other, they tried every form of talk therapy. They tried every psychotherapy, modality known to try to overcome that. And it was Ibogaine that restored their lives and their capacity to enjoy the life that God has given them. We have first responders who are emerging in numbers, one who is a firefighter from Oklahoma who was demoted because of decades of alcoholism. His life has been restored by Ibogaine and he's back working full time. We have a gentleman who was Charlotte's Bill police officer who was hit in the face with a brick during the riots that occurred in Charlotte's field. His life was restored by a single Ibogaine treatment and he has attained a level of functionality that he didn't think was possible, nor his doctors. We have a gentleman who was a pilot who unfortunately did a bombing run on a village and killed a number of innocent people who he learned about this. And sent him into a spiral as many war fighters who are exposed to moral injury do. Ibogaine has restored this gentleman's life. We have a gentleman by the name of Robert Gallery, a former NFL player who exhibited all the signs of CTE in his post retirement years. He was ready to kill himself so that he wouldn't harm his own family. It was Ibogaine that restored his life. There have been other NFL players who are as yet unnamed, some incidentally, that have been in the paper who have gone for Ibogaine treatment to address similar symptoms. Players in the NHL, players in other contact sports that include soccer and rugby and the United Kingdom where there is an emerging cohort of professional athletes who have reached out to us to say, we want the United Kingdom for Ibogaine. I would love to get you guys connected with the UFC. We would love to be connected to the UFC. Because that is obviously an issue with professional fighters. So, Hughes, Matt Hughes, and Matt had, I met Matt through Marcus, gosh, in like 2008 or so, and we went out for a fight. And then subsequently, Matt had a, I think a car accident of which he really had. a trip, our train. Yeah. Just an incredible traumatic brain injury. And I just want to, I want to have that conversation with him. And I'm sure you have great relationships with those. We know for a fact that cumulative impacts on the brain are what lead to CTE. I mean, that's, I don't think that's even a question of them. Here's how it happens. These multiple concussions have cumulative effect on the brain. And at some point in time, that CTE has a long time effect. And this medicine has the ability to remove that trauma, to reset that brain, to heal that brain. I don't know how it works, Joe. But that's the reason these clinical trials are going to be so important as we're going forward. And I can't tell you, I'm ecstatic that the, the, the Lieutenant Governor and the speaker today announced 100 million dollars. They're, they're full Texas support behind these clinical trials. We're fixing to become the epicenter for a movement that literally can change the world. And I know that sounds kind of a little bit over the top. If we have within our grass pier, a compound that can heal our loved ones who have an addiction, be it a substance addiction or be it a non-subs extinction. If we have the ability to heal people who have been dramatically impacted by concussions, if we have the ability to address PTSD in all the different forms that it comes. I mean, the hope that that can give to the society that we live in. And I'm not talking about just the United States. You think about what's going on in Israel and Ukraine in the Middle East today and the trauma that people are facing. I mean, this truly can be an extraordinary gift to the world. And you know, listen, I think it's really interesting. You asked a leading question about how did I come to this position of being able to be supportive as I am. And when I think about my growing up and I grew up in a very conservative Christian family. And I think one of the challenges we still have in our society is that the conservative Christian faith is like, stay away from my stuff. I mean, that's bad. Do not, in any circumstances, don't be going there. It's demonic. And there's a book that's about to be published. I think is it about, I think the first week in April, so we're approaching it. There's an author by the name of Wendy Reese, R. W. S. And Wendy with an I, Debbie N. D. I. R. E. E. S. And she, not unlike the two twins, was sexually assaulted by her own father. He's a pastor of a church. Joe, I'm telling your brother. I can't, I can't dream up in my worst nightmare. A more evil thing than a father that would sexually assault their, a preacher father, their daughter. And she dealt with it with I began and has come to the conclusion that her great gift to give to the world out there is to write this book called A Christian's Guide to Psychedelics. Now, if you think that will catch some people's attention when they're going through the bookstore and they go, a Christian's Guide to Psychedelic, holy, macro. But this is a book about her experience, but it's also a book that I would suggest that every believe in Christian, go pick it up and read it because it talks about chapter and verse and gives you scripture about where God talks about these compounds about these things that he's given the world. He means them for good. All of them for good. Are you aware of the scholars in Israel that are proposing that Moses seeing the burning bush was the Akisha tree? Yeah, like there's an Akisha tree, the Akisha tree, which is very common in the Middle East, is rich in dimethyl trip to me. And they believe that what they're trying to relay in this story was that Moses encountered God through the burning of this bush. So the burning of this bush releasing the psychedelic compound dimethyl trip to me and allowed Moses to bring back the Ten Commandments. Thank you for mentioning that. I have been following scholarship around the use and the recognition that there's a lot of psychedelic category in holy scripture. That I think is the favorite, where that burning bush reveals the great I am. And when Moses says, you are you, I am who I am. And the beauty about I'm beginning the other plant medicines are their capacity to reveal the I am that was in within each of us and that I am as our eternal creator who absolutely has engineered and placed these plants on this earth so that we can be affirmed in what there are true identity and ultimate destiny is in praise God for it. And then there's also the sacred mushroom in the cross, the John Marker Allegro book, where he was one of the ordained ministers that was his task was to decode the Dead Sea Scrolls. And he wrote this book that details what he believes is the use of psychedelic drugs and ancient Christianity. I have hard for me to argue with. I mean I just think our modern perception of it, which is very tainted by what happened during the Nixon administration where they were trying to squash the hippie movement, the anti-war movement and the civil rights movement. And that's why they demonize these drugs and these compounds. And that's why they put them in this category of having no medicinal use, which is clearly not accurate. It doesn't mean that they should just be given to everyone and everyone should do them with no restrictions and no regulations. It just means we should understand that they have a long history of human use and have spectacular results on all sorts of things that our society is suffering from greatly and to just pretend that that's not the case based on what happened in the 1970s is just insane. It doesn't make any sense. I would suggest that one of the greatest lessons learned by Americans who are age 50 and younger, those of us who I call the bicentennial children, is that the most morally depraved criminal in America today is power. And the power of the human hand when it is wielded in its most abusive context will always seek to deny any access to individual human divinity and the liberty and autonomy that is conferred upon each of us as children of God. And as far as we find ourselves at the precipice of what I believe is the emergence of a broad-based spiritual movement where all of us modernists within the empiricism of modern American society are able to see through the fog of all of our wealth and gadgetry and recognize. We are in the midst of profound spiritual famine in the United States. You I know and forgive me for reference in age. Remember back in the mid-80s where we saw all these horrific images of starvation and dissension, distension, and fly-covered death from mass famine in Ethiopia and Sudan for millions of people starve to death because the malevolence of power forbade the delivery of any relief sent by the outside world. When we look at what's right in front of us in the United States today, there is no denying that we are in the midst of a terrible spiritual famine and the malevolence of American power is feasting on our starvation. This is an emancipation movement for the mind, body, and soul of every human being in this country and across the globe who is lethally estranged from their own spirituality. The Abigail mission is a mission to foment, dramatic, medical breakthroughs across a host of conditions that have no effect if therapeutic answers, but above and beyond that. It is about the affirmation of the spiritual essence of life that can unify us as a species in a way that is necessary if we're going to navigate these changes over the next 20 years. Governor Perry mentioned this wonderful invitation that I received to go to what was called the Earth One Summit. Now, Joe, I come out of Hillbilly, Hall, Virginia. I do. I introduce him from time to time. I said, look, this guy, he looks like and he sounds like a Hillbilly from eastern Kentucky in the Appalachian Mountains. And I said, he is. But I said he's one of the most brilliant people I've ever met in my life and one of the most extraordinary orders I've ever had in my life. I love you, brother, but you are a Hillbilly. I'm much more comfortable with that than I let other steps in. But when you come out of scratch, nothing sometimes. There are certain sophistication that you lack. And I'm no exception to that. So there was this Earth One Summit. It was 200 thought leaders from across the world who came to basically discuss the future. And I was very honored to have received an invitation to come and attend the gathering to speak about what Governor Perry and I are working on through Americans for Ibogaine. And they presented me with the honor of being the closing keynote speaker for the gathering. And as I listened over the course of four days, I heard individuals who included Campbell and Christiana Musk. And I've read interviews by Elon Musk speaking about the advent of AI. And the capacity of AI to solve the central dilemma that we as humans have had since we emerged from the caves. And that's the dilemma of scarcity. So as I was there, listening to folks speak about being on the edge of a time when we can automate the means of production and essentially create an unlimited amount of abundance for every person on this planet. I couldn't help but think about where we are right now as compared to where these individuals see us being in 20 years. You cannot create and deploy this kind of God-like technology which has the capacity to produce unlimited abundance, potentially usher in the age of Aquarius and drop it in to these Frankenstein monstrosity government systems that we currently have that are enthralled upon the helplessness of powerless people that perpetuate problems that they are supposed to solve and that monetize sustained human misery. So long as government makes its buck over keeping its foot on the necks of the American people, we are looking at a future that much more resembles mad max than we are Star Trek. And if we are going to create the degree of social cohesion that is necessary to hold these systems accountable and to create a system that can truly usher in that age of unlimited abundance to improve the human condition for all. It begins with a spiritual rear awakening that I began first and foremost and the rest of the psychedelics can see and foment within American society. To that end, and then I'll be quiet for the next little bit. We love listening to you. There is a six-part docuseries that will come out next year called psychedelics and it is a series of interviews with a cross section of leaders across the United States where they speak about their own quest for meaning and how psychedelics has helped them understand that we are more than just these material beings that get up and go to work every day and are a productive economic unit, go home and repeat. But there is a much higher sense of purpose that we are here to serve and that the plants themselves have the capacity to enlighten us at scale in a way that is absolutely necessary if we are going to make that age of abundance, those visionaries articulate and dream for. What I think is fascinating about the age that we are living in is that change comes very slowly, but it comes much faster when you have the kind of access to information that people have today. And I don't think this conversation was possible 20 years ago. And that is kind of amazing. It is kind of amazing. And I don't think there was a format for this conversation 20 years ago. This format has occurred because of the age of information, because of the internet, and because there is no gatekeepers anymore. And because people have the choice to decide what they want to consume, what they want to listen to. And to be able to be a part of that, to me, is an incredible privilege. And to be able to have you guys on and to have this conversation and to recognize that the reason why this is possible is because for a lack of a better term, the world is waking up. Yes, sir. It is just taking more time than we would like. But the world is waking up. It changed happens. It just happens. People have to change their opinions. And that's very difficult because a lot of people identify with their opinions. Their opinions become a part of their ideology. And it's just very difficult to get people to change their ideology. They identify with this. It is them. And I've always tried to tell people the way I try to approach things. You are not your ideas. You are not your opinions. These are just thoughts. And if you identify with them, you are trapped in them. And you will be held hostage by them. You will try to defend them. Even if they don't make sense, you will try to ignore evidence that points you in a direction that's contrary to what your current belief system is. Don't be your opinions. Don't be your ideas. Just sit in them. Be consistent. Be honest. Have ethics and morals that you adhere to. But the ideas are just ideas. And if you're wrong, you should be proud to say wrong. It's a sign of growth. It's a sign of intelligence. And it's a sign of you being an honest human being who cares about the truth. Not about being right. Because there's too many people in this world that they don't really have conversations. They have ideological sparring matches. Where they just involved in these little intellectual tugs of war. Where they're just trying to be right. And this is not the time for that. It's just... So my going from hard-know on criminal justice reform to literally a leader on criminal justice reform in the mid-2000s. My going from hard-know on any psychedelic drugs that could be used in any way to now being what I've humorously referred to as the Johnny Appleseed of Ibergain is to your point. Be open. Be willing to say you were wrong. I know my wife would like to hear me do that more often. But hey, if you don't mind, I want to take a minute and talk about how far this movement has come. And Brian talked about Americans for Ibergain and our ambassadors all across the country and the growth that we've seen in this. And I want to give you one example of to your point that five years ago, if you had a institution that had its own reputation dealing with brain health and brain science and those kind of things, they would have just kind of moved you off to the side and said, you know, no thanks. But the Center for Brain Health in Dallas, this is an extraordinary institution that's connected to the University of Texas Dallas. In fact, it's just next door to UT Southwestern, which is one of the great medical facilities in the world, UT Southwestern. And Dr. Sandy Chapman heads up the Center for Brain Health. And they've done some great work. We went up and presented to her, I don't know, probably 60 to 90 days ago. And there was another organization called Forward Intent. Forward Intent, just a beautiful young man in his wife, Alex Duran, and his wife, who have funded an effort. And what they're doing with their resources, they're sending, I think, 250 individuals down to Mexico to both, I think, a facility called Transend and to Ambio. And Ambio is that facility that I've been to, Brian's been to, Marcus and Morgan O'Trell have been to, I think, probably 2000 more fighters been down to Ambio now. That's under right to them. And just as an aside, this has blown up so big. And I'm talking about the eye-be-gain effort, the education of eye-be-gain, people. There's some hope out there. And people are rushing to find where they can go to treat the addiction that their loved one hands or deal with their PTSD and what have you. And Ambio is just covered up. And I'm sure the other facilities are as well down there. The organization VETS, which is really where I came into this, the Amber and Marcus Capone. They don't have, they don't have any openings anymore. They are completely covered up. But I mean, that's a good challenge. I'm glad we had that challenge. But my point is, you've got an institution in Dallas, Texas that just like the state is getting the signal, it's okay to be out there talking about this. It's okay to be a leader. It's okay to get out there and lead the charge. And I want to read to you what Dr. Chapman, because I asked her, I said, do you mind if I talk about what you all are doing? And she said absolutely. And she said, Governor, great to talk with you yesterday here are some comments to guide you and how to discuss our existing collaboration. I'm excited to announce that we have begun a partnership with the Center for Brain Health University of Texas at Dallas. for Ibogaine and forward intent to create the largest research study of Ibogaine. the University of Texas at Dallas. Americans for Ibogaine and forward intent to create the largest research study of Ibogaine to date focused on understanding its impact on the brain among the veteran community. Dr. Francesca Filby, an expert in cognitive and translational neuroscience, especially the use of neuroimaging to study brain behavior relationships will lead the research. Our mission together is to move beyond the question of, does Ibogaine help? And instead, answer the more practical questions, veterans and clinicians need. Number one, who benefits and why? How long did the benefits last? Which aspects of daily life functioning? I.E. cognition, sleep, substance use, and overall well-being. Improve our worsen following treatment. And how are these changes associated with brain alterations? The three-year study will follow those treated with Ibogaine over the course of 18 months, which will allow us to create the first understanding of the sustained impacts of Ibogaine on the brain across various treatment regimes. We'll be diving more into this topic on November 19th at the Center for Brain Health's, Brain Health presents speaker series to share more. By bringing world-class scientific rigor to this space, we aren't just studying a substance. We're creating a foundation of knowledge that will expand safe, informed access for those who need it most. That is what Americans for Ibogaine is really all about. Making that type of penetration, having that type of success, seeing what Brian and the other folks have created here in the state of Texas, I'm going to tell you something, brother. There is nothing that I've been involved with in my life that gives me more pleasure than to see what we're doing and knowing that there's a father out there, a mother out there who's child's going to be saved. You mentioned Dogma. People are in particular in American society. There is a quest for identity. There is a quest for belonging. So much of what we see on social media and in broadcast media that is rage and anger and disaffection is tremendous loneliness and a tremendous lack of belonging to something. And a tremendous amount of trauma related to heaven never haven't had anything that resembles unconditional affection within the context of a safe and stable familiar relationship. That's its scale within the United States. And the degree to which Dogma can afford evolution is 100% right on. And I just use myself as an example. I was a child of Reagan's America. I can remember I was about five years old when he impressed and Carter had their first presidential debate in 1980. President Reagan was like the mother goose to the gostlin. He just imprinted on me. And whereas other young boys had pictures of Joe Montana and Michael Jordan and Michael Jackson all over the rooms, my name was wallpaper with Ronald Reagan. I was the president of the teenager publicans in high school. I wrote him fan letters all the time. He actually replied to one and I put it in a frame in my room. It was written on my birthday. I was president of the college republicans at George Mason University. And I mean, I aim to be the king of conservative Republican conformity. That was my whole mission in life. And I used to joke that when people said, well, how did you get to this? And what do you think about the fact that you're talking about it in your sozealous and your advocacy? I would kind of make a half statement and say, well, if 25-year-old me could come and see 50-year-old me, he would look and say, what in the world happened to you? And I would kind of get a good life about it. Well, here's the answer. If 25-year-old me could come back and look at 50-year-old me and say, what happened to you? 50-year-old me would look right back and say, you happened to me. You happened to me. Your youthful sense of certainty, your belief that you headed off figured out, your belief that you had no further greater evolution to achieve, sir. You and your insolence of youth, you happened to me. One of the things that I have so enjoyed learning about Governor Perry and as he and I have built relationship, the first time I really started following him was when he ran for president in 2012. And I believe that had he not had that back surgery, we would not have had a second of our term. He would have won that race. And I think he would have won it handily. It's been remarkable to listen to this gentleman who has been so firmly identified with the conservative wing of the Republican body be so willing to be curious and to have that human value of curiosity and a willingness to hear and a willingness to know and a willingness to entertain that perhaps everything that he had been taught about this particular subject was not correct. Curiosity is a prime human value. And if you allow dogma to shut off your curiosity, you have hobbled yourself. And I think it was Muhammad Ali who said, if a 50 year old man thinks the exact same way as a 20 year old man as he did when he was 20, he's wasted 30 years of his life. And that is dead on right. Dead on right. Yeah, I could have tested that. Curiosity is my number one attribute. The thing that's led me in life and everything I've ever done is just being open-minded and curious. I'm very fortunate is that I didn't think I had things figured out when I was 20 at all. I was sure that I was a moron. I was good at one thing, kicking people. That's it. And then from then, I realized that there's a lot to learn. And that as much as I learned about martial arts, I could apply that sort of open mind discipline. Because you have to be open-minded to be good at martial arts because you have to be able to listen. You can't think you already know. You cannot. You won't grow and you won't get better. You have to be listening to coaches. You have to be listening to instructors. You have to be listening to your teammates. You have to listen to everybody. If you don't listen, if you don't tell me, those people don't go anywhere. And I learned that very early on. It's very fortunate that I found that path because I've applied that to virtually everything that I've ever done in life, instead of having this belief that I have things figured out. I mean, I've certainly been more sure than I should have been at many times in my life, but always willing to stop and go, maybe I'm wrong. And if it wasn't for this podcast, it would have never gotten to where it is. Because I've fortunately been able to talk to brilliant people. And then I grew up in California for 26 years before that. I lived in Boston and New York. I thought of people that the southern accent in particular, right? Then this is a standard thing that a lot of people on the coasts have. You hear people talk with the southern accent. You think they're dumb. And it's a terrible stereotype that actually came out because of hookworm parasites. I'm sure you're aware of that story. And I'm not. You're not. OK, me. The stereotype of the lazy, dumb-minded, southern ear came out of the fact that a large percentage of people in the South had contracted hookworms. From walking around barefoot and hookworm parasites will rob you of your intellectual capacity. They greatly diminish your ability to think. And exhaust you. You get slower and, you know, in quotes, lazier. But you're really just infected with the parasite. And it's an enormous percentage of the population in the 1900s where we're infected with hookworm. And in the South, in particular, hot climates. And this is where this stereotype came from. When someone like you speaks with such insane recall, like your recall's bananas. Like your recall of dates, names, and times. And I have a pretty good recall. It's nothing like yours. It's extraordinary. And I love when I meet someone who's brilliant, who still has a southern accent. Because it's like, you know what I mean? Yeah. Forget about your hair stereotypes. Let them all go, baby, because they're not real. It's not real. No, none of that is real. Individuals vary wildly. And I've met brilliant people from coastal cities. And I've met fucking morons that talk like a person that you would assume would be a highly educated intelligent person. But their clothes mined and foolish in their ways. And having had this ability to have all these different conversations with different people, it's just like every time I have another conversation just expands my understanding, just a little more, and a little more, and a little more, and a little more. And I love it. And it's all out of curiosity. And I'm very happy that I've been able to make that curiosity infectious. My favorite cities, and I know we're getting off the beaten path here a little bit. I love to get off the beaten path. That's my favorite thing to do. My favorite cities in America are those that you can go to and not feel like you're in the country. My ami is fabulous. So while playing, you should have a passport to go to my ami. It is fabulous. And I remember the first time I went to New York City one time when I was about five years old. One thing I could remember was the Empire State Building, and someday with Purple Hire Stickety's tongue out at me. Next time was in 2019. And I'd always had kind of that stereotypical Southern Earth's attitude, a bunch of, you know, haughty, reggae, mean-acted, yanky people, living in an obnoxious locale that would just be hell on earth the hefty end year. So I had the opportunity to go and spend a day there, and rode into Grand Central Station on the railway from, I think it was New Haven, Connecticut. And just to watch the dimensions of the architectures we rode into the city, I was in the expansion of scale of this place. How old was it? Well, see, I was about to turn 44. I think I could hear the Beverly Hillbillies be the plane in my head when I was going down through there. So I went get off of Grand Central Station. And I mean, I walked all through that. I walked from Grand Central Station all the way down to the tip of where the World Trade Center was. It was New York City is a monumental human accomplishment. When you can have the entire world within 300 square miles, and it is a living affirmation of everything that the United States is supposed to be as the last best hope of humankind on earth just to be in that place. Any time I'm going back since, I mean the minute that I go to get the Uber at LaGuardia Airport, and I see that skyline. I mean, my heart just starts racing racing racing. I would have never thought that I would just fall in love with New York City, but it is fabulous. San Francisco is the same way. There are so many wonderful places in the United States where you wouldn't think that somebody necessarily who sounded like me would endorse. But one of the best things that I have done is stop watching television news. The last time I watched television news was after the first Obama press conference in January of 2009, and I cut it off. Wow. Aside from presidential debates and election returns, I've never turned it back on. The number, I shouldn't tell this, the number of times I've left my front door wide open, the garage door open, and my neighborhood and nothing has happened is remarkable. This country, in terms of her people, is as much like it was back in 1950 as it has ever been. The complexion is a little different. We've got a lot more diversity now than we've ever had. But once you take that blinder of mass media mayhem and all this fabricated division that is purposefully put out there to keep us divided, to keep us tuning in, and segregate it. Once you take yourself out of it and you just start having a conversation, next time someone gets into an Uber with someone who doesn't have English as a sacred language, strike up a conversation, ask them, how did you come to the United States? What brought you here? And your heart is going to feel with just the unbelievable amount of pride and love to hear those accents from the Middle East and from Africa. Speak about this country in ways that take us right back to 1776. It's fabulous place. And I'm able to say so much of this because of what the plans have helped clarify, by way of that universal human divinity that we all share, that this country is the cradle to protect and to honor, which is what makes this mission so incredibly important. And I do want to, oh, I'm sorry. No, go ahead, please. There's two people that I left off of our ambassador program that I think are really show stoppers among a mention. One is a gentleman by the name of Rear Admiral Jim Hancock. This gentleman received an eye-be-game treatment for his wounds of war. He was the Navy Medical Corps Chief and was the medical officer for the United States Marine Corps. One of our other ambassadors is a gentleman by the name of General Glenn Curtis. He served in both Gulf Wars. He served in Afghanistan. His most recent stint of service was as the command in general for the Louisiana National Guard. And he is one of our prime spokespeople for legislation that's dependent in Louisiana right now to join Texas as a partner in this Ibogaine trial. So that's fantastic. Please stay what you were going to, because I'm curious. I don't even remember. Hey, well, I remember what I wanted to talk at least. So and I want to get us back on the track that we were talking about. You know, Brian's done a great job to discuss the spiritual aspect of the medicine and what I mean, that's incredibly important. Don't get me wrong on that at all. And but what brought me personally to the medicine, obviously my relationship with Marcus and Morgan and what have you. And then as I've studied it, I'm like, if you're really going to be a legitimate spokesperson for this, if you're going to, you know, put your reputation out there, you need to be treated. You need to go through the treatment. And I'm going to get to you at the end of this conversation but I want to set this up if I may. And in 2023, if my memory serves me correct, this is the same time that Nolan Williams was heading up the 30 veteran study that Stanford was going to oversee. Kind of the early days, if you will, of some clinical trial type effort to have the data, to have the background, some early day efforts to start educating the public about that is how I do this. They had 30 vets, I think they were between the ages of like 22 and 42. They all had moderate to severe PTSD. They were some of them addicted to alcohol. You know, they were pretty classic veteran population that had some real challenges. They were sent, well, to Stanford and they did baseline functional MRIs. And then they were sent down to Ambio to South of Tijuana, where they were given the treatment. And then that last, I think about a four day treatment protocol, you go down, work your way in, Tuesday, you get in preparation, Tuesday evening, you get the compound, Wednesday's a recovery day, Thursday, there's a five MEO DMT treatment. And then you go home. They went back to Stanford after five days after the treatment and had follow up MRIs. I think they did an MRI 30 days and then a functional MRI at six months. So there was a good piece of data there to look at, just stunningly good results. And the results, I think there was 87% of them who six months now, better than two years later, but that have zero PTSD, the addictions were at that level of reduction that we talked about in the high 80% house. I mean, just, I mean, we've seen all of this data before, this is nothing new. But the reason I share that with you is that I basically went down and followed the same protocol. I wasn't part of the clinical trial, but and I only wanted to be treated with Ibogaine. I did not want to take the five MEO DMT. So what I was looking at, and I was interested in this from the brain regenerative side of it. I had about as bucolic a life as you've ever had. I never had anybody mistreat me to anything that you could even get close to call and traumatic effect. I had no trauma in my life. I grew up on a dryland cotton farm, 60 miles from Abilene, Texas, 16 miles from closest place. It had a post office in a part of Texas that this is a lovely wonderful loving place. My mom and dad love me and I knew it. And my scout master and my principal superintendent of my Sunday school class, who by the way were all the same person and he drove the bus and was a football coach. But I had a as non-traumatic growing up period as you could imagine. So I was concussed severely concussed three times. Twice in athletic events and I'm talking about knocked out completely for over one minute. And those are severe concussions. Two times athletic events, one time on low-norses, knocked completely out. So what I know now is that as I got to pilot training and I started noticing that I was having trouble sleeping and that this thing that I understood later in life was anxiety had crept into my life. So I had, I'm gonna put it in the mile category, anxiety. And in Somney, I went into a very odd line of work and politics to have those two kind of things. And I'm asked them rather well. Most people didn't know I had that, my wife did. But other than that, even my senior staff in my office is through the year, agriculture commissioner, lieutenant governor, governor. They did not know that I had this challenge of maybe sleeping three and a half, four hours a night being anxious at times to the point of being never dysfunctional. But from my perspective, I'm probably some people out there in the political world said, hell, Perry, you were dysfunctional a whole damn time. What are you talking about? Anyway, I decided to point. I had the treatment. I had the brain scan going in. I had the brain scan a week later and I had the brain scan at six months. The first brain scan, they said, look, your brain looks pretty good for a 73 year old guy. He said, you're actually in pretty good shape. You don't have a lot of atrophy. You got some mild atrophy. But your brain looks pretty good. The week after scan showed a 27% increase in the prefrontal cortex of my brain. That's where you're focus, your concentration, your emotions reside at a 27% increase in that prefrontal cortex activity. My six month scan, I have a dear friend who's a neurosurgeon from Tyler, Dr. Charlie Gordon, who is a 40 plus year neurosurgeon, spine expert, looked at lots of brain scans. A respectful skeptic of this. When I told him I was gonna be treated with this compound called Ibogaine, the psychoactive compound, he was recalled a little bit. He was like, he needs to be really careful with that. He has now gone from being respectful skeptic to looking at the data from the clinical trial that was done at Stanford, talking to a fairly good number of the veterans that went through that trial, talking to Dr. Williams, talking to other specialists at Stanford. And he has gone from respectful skeptic to a full-on believer in this medicine. I mean an absolute supporter that this medicine does what it says it does. It heals people of addictions. It heals from PTSD. This medicine does what it does. We're driving back from the airport that day after the six-month scan. He had looked at it as it came off of the machine. And he said, Governor, I'm not gonna blow smoke up your dress. Your atrophy is gone. He said, I have no idea why this has happened, but he said the difference between your initial baseline scan and six months later, clearly the atrophy in your brain is gone. He said, your brain looks like a 40-year-old. Now, the reason I share that story with you is because number one, that's partly what drives me about this is that there is a regenerative aspect of this medicine that we don't really understand yet. And if it does, what we think it's gonna do. And that's the reason these clinical trials are just so stunningly important. That's the reason what the Center for Brain Health and what they're gonna be doing and the data that they're gonna be collecting. I'm convinced of what this data is gonna show. But for all of those individuals out there who don't have substance abuse problems, who are traumatized as a child, but who have been concussed. And we know that that damage is out there and that the cumulative side, Robert Gallery, that great professional football player who had really bad CTE, and he will tell you today this medicine say, just like, my question for you, Joe Rogan, is how many times you think you've been concussed in life? I have no idea. Dozens. You have to go back and think about times, most of it was from sparring or a few from fights. But if we think about that, if there is this cumulative effect, are you, how do you now? 58. Would Joe Rogan be willing to say, you know what? I've seen enough. I believe that this medicine does what you say it will do. And for a person like me, that it could be incredibly helpful to my long-term plan of living along and healthy and engaged life that Joe Rogan would go and be treated with I've gained. Yeah, I would definitely do it. I'm very fascinated by it. Cool. I mean, I've never heard anybody say, I wish I didn't do it. He mentioned his brain scans, post-treatment. A couple of weeks ago, I'll have a set that Earth, One Earth, Gather, I'm at a lady who I will call Lonnie. And she had just returned from an I've gained treatment in November of 25. She related an early life of just an ungodly physical abuse by her father. He was addicted to Oxycontin. You know, we began this conversation about the realities of the opioid epidemic in America. While death is the most terminal outcome, is measured down about 700,000 Americans. There is a much broader way of hard core travesty that exists around each of those death outcomes. And Lonnie experienced that. She had multiple concussions from her own father. Like many individuals who experienced trauma of this nature, she developed her own drug addiction. She was in an L.A.J.O. She was homeless at different point in time. She managed to get recovered. She had a separate traumatic brain injury that was fairly severe in 2018. And then she was diagnosed with what I believe is called young onset Parkinson's, Parkinson's diagnosis that is pre-H50. Her Parkinson's had progressed at the point of where she could not write because of the trimilousness in her hands. So when I saw her two weeks ago, and she introduced herself, she had all of the appearance and affect of a perfectly healthy human being. It was only after we sat down and she explained what her experience had been, and where she was at now, that the Ivegained disclosure was made. Her hand was just as calm as man. And she said that it had been essentially three months and that she had been able to resume a normal life and then her mind felt restored. Now, based on the responses we got after our first interview with you, I wanna be very careful here. This is truly the edge of science. And there is much unknown about the variety of Parkinson's that this can treat. There's some suggestion that it is better for those who have a genetic predisposition for the disease that it is for those who contract Parkinson's as the result of environmental exposure. Ivegained has not appeared to have any impact on Parkinson's disease. for the disease that it is for those who contract Parkinson's as the result of environmental exposure. I've again does not appear to have any impact on Parkinson's developed as a result of exposure to environmental toxin. The stage of the disease, which you catch it, also appears to make a big difference. The earlier, the better. It has also been asserted that I've again does not cure Parkinson's. What it does is slows disease progression and creates for some a broad window of opportunity for the restoration of function that can dramatically improve the quality of life. Now I'm just given a number of qualifiers about its impact and efficacy on one individual. But think about what we just said here. This is a woman who was diagnosed with young on such Parkinson's. She had lost the ability to write because of the tremulousness in her hands. She's four months out from a treatment and she's been able to resume her four normal life with a complete restoration of function. If we could get a COVID vaccine out in nine months, there is no reason why with the focused effort of Texas and the other states will discuss here momentarily that we cannot achieve the moonshot of our time within three years or less. And that is the completion of an Ibergane medication that can be fully integrated and at the U.S. healthcare system and may just as universally available as every ineffective opioid-based treatment that we currently deploy through the medical system at a cost of $700,000 per patient sponsored by Endivior, which is one of the chief pharmaceutical developers of everything that we have that fails 75% of the time. Yeah, I mean, if we could do it, it would be pretty extraordinary. And if it is done, I really do believe that it would have a complete changing of society when people have no hope and there's nothing and then all of a sudden there's something that comes along that you do at once and it's an 85% effective rate. And you do it twice and it's in the high 90s. I mean, change, how many people are out there struggling with something, whether it's alcoholism, whether it's obesity, whether it's, you know, that's another thing. Like there's people that are calming themselves with food, right? And it's masking. That's probably a sugar addiction, don't you think? I mean, from the standpoint of the studies. But for a lot of people, there's something else, you know, for some people, sexual abuse and they're younger and they eat. It's interesting. It's an addiction. And then and it's not just a physical addiction. It's a psychological addiction. I brought up gambling because I know a lot of people that are addicted to gambling. Pornography. Pornography. But you're sure. There's a lot of things. The tons of models we mentioned are ones who had developed those eating disorders, one of which was a compensator as a result of that childhood sexual abuse. And I've again was the treatment of last resort, not the first option. And their own recovery story, which can be found on the Americans for I've again website, it is truly extraordinary. And speaking of extraordinary, when we came in here to push Texas, our belief was and still is and is now playing out its scale that if Texas did this, it would be joined by a number of other states who are no longer willing to sit and wait on an inefficient, often incompetent and also, incompletely corrupt federal bureaucracy that will not move in response to the genuine needs of the American people at the pace that it needs to. There are a variety of well-intentioned reformers within the current administration, Secretary Kennedy, Secretary Collins and others who have voiced their support for the advancement of plant medicine has breakthrough treatments primarily for US war fighters, but also for other members of our society for whom these medications could help. We believe that these individuals are stymied by two realities. The first reality is the Byzantine complexity of the federal bureaucracy, the degree to which it has been compromised by the institutional capture of much of its functioning by companies that make money on keeping problems alive. We think they're probably also stymied by perhaps some other political cross currents within the administration view psychedelics with skepticism and that are therefore willing to be indiscriminate in their resistance to the advancement of any of them. When in fact, the advancement of this one is of existential critical importance as a breakthrough treatment for millions of Americans who need yet now. And so to that end, Americans for I began following the Texas success convened a gathering of 200 people in Aspen, Colorado in November of last year. These individuals were invited appointed and elected state officials from 22 individual states and aligned citizens of influence who would be willing as the Texans were here to get behind efforts and state legislatures to create a partnership with Texas that by end result will form the unstoppable external force through the states that can crash through the federal wall using not just their resources, but their political influence to execute one unified FDA drug development trial and to force the federal government to be responsive to everything that is required to ensure it is successful. So as we sit here today, we have been working with elected officials in Alabama, Georgia, Idaho, Maryland, Michigan, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Vermont, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Florida, South Dakota, and California, each of whom have legislators who are willing to introduce and to pursue bills to join their states in to Texas as this trial. Governor Perry and I spoke to the American Legislative Exchange Council as keynote speakers on December 5th of last year. This is an umbrella, think tank organization for center right, mostly Republican legislatures from across the country. In its entire existence, Alec has taken two positions when it comes on the war on drugs. More prison, more penalties, more prison, more penalties, at if and item. After we spoke about the necessity of I beguain's medical integration into the United States and the capacity of the states to force this reality in to be an Alec issued a formal position statement as well as model legislation and Dawson what we call the American I beguain initiative to bring the states all together to make this happen with one unified voice. And so now, as we sit here with you today, in the state of Tennessee, there are two bills one each in the state house and the state senate that are making its way through that legislature to join Texas. Before we walked in here this morning, the Tennessee Senate Finance Committee evoted 11 to nothing to move Tennessee's bill forward to the full state senate for consideration and what will I believe be passage and I would like to give a shout out to a special sister by the name of Ricky Harris, who has led that Tennessee campaign. Right now, there are two bills in the Missouri legislature, House Bill 2817 in Senate Bill 1581, which are receiving good, considerate, deliberative, thought by legislators there, but frankly need a little motivation. So if you're in Missouri and you want to see I beguain medicine for your family member, for your community, for your state, you call into the Missouri legislature and say move the I beguain bill forward to join Missouri with Texas. Oklahoma, the Oklahoma House of Representatives has passed its I beguain bill, it is now pendant in its Senate. In Louisiana, Senate Bill 43 has been introduced to join that state to Texas and in what I can only describe as full circle justice. The Kentucky Senate passed Senate Bill 77 by a margin of 35 to two to join Kentucky for this all began with Texas as a state partner in this I beguain drug development trial. It is now sitting in the Kentucky House of Representatives. So you if you are at home, please call the Kentucky House of Representatives and asked them to pass the Kentucky I beguain initiatives of the state will not be left out. Now here are some just unbelievable words are going to come out my mouth. The state of West Virginia, their House of Delegates by a vote of 96 to nothing and their state Senate unanimously passed their I beguain bill to join Texas and it has now been sent to their governor for signature and the one that is the most poignant and moving for all the obvious reasons. The state of Mississippi, the crucible for the triumph of uniquely American hope over horror and the leadership of Representative Sam Kreekmore. It's state House of Representatives passed by a margin of 1111 and its state Senate passed by a margin of 51 to 1. The Mississippi I beguain initiative which will tie the state of Mississippi with a five million dollar appropriation permits opioid fund to Texas to develop the most powerful psychedelic on the planet as a breakthrough treatment for trauma and addiction for the people of Mississippi. That's incredible. It is going to be signed actually has been legally signed by Governor Reeves, Governor Tate Tate Reeves and Governor Perry and I have asked for a special sign in ceremony with Representative Kreekmore, his legislative leaders there, to stand in Jackson, Mississippi and see that sign into law as a matter of ceremonial formality. What I wonderfully redemptive opportunity that we have here to shepherd and we hope and pray that our organization can be sufficiently resourced and sufficiently engaged over the next three years so that we can see this process to conclusion. I'll mention a couple of others since we're talking about the capacity to make this a broad-based humanitarian mission that improves the human condition. Just Friday before traveling down here on Sunday I received a letter from the government of Gabon, name in Americans for Obigaine is its official partner for the advancement of a Bogom Edison globally. Gabon has 2.3 million people. It's got 100,000 square miles of territory that's the modern Garden of Eden. I've had the opportunity to take a trip there from and I mean trippas in the geographic sense, not the psycho. Not the Uboga trip though. I hope that that will be on the agenda in the ceremonial way sometime within the next year. We traveled there from January 6 to January 20th and if someone would have said when you go to Gabon you're going to have one of the most down-home experiences you've ever had in my life. It would have blown my mind but it was a fabulous journey one in which they were jubilant about our ability to demonstrate that what they call the sacred wood in fact is one of the most scientifically advanced substances that has perhaps ever been discovered and we're honored that the government would choose us as their partner to move this forward. On Monday after a conference call with Chief Gary Batten, I can confirm that the Choctaw Nation will seek to join Texas in the expansion of this Obigaine Drug Development trial onto their sovereign territory as the third largest Native American tribe in the country. On April 7th, I will be traveling to Durant, Oklahoma for what is being called the Inner Tribal Council meeting of what they describe as the five civilized tribes that's their name not mine. This is a gathering of the leadership of the Choctaw, the Chickasaw, the Cherokee, the Mosqui, and the Seminole. We expect a passage of a resolution that I will be there to lobby for. For the five civilized tribes would declare their solidarity with Americans for Obigaine for the integration of this divine emancipator into the U.S. healthcare system as expeditiously as possible and make all of their resources available to explore the extent of which we can operationalize Obigaine Medicine as quickly as possible. It is my hope and aspiration that we will see all of Native American join this effort before the end of this year. Can I stop you there? Would that make it so that they would be able to immediately establish retreats there? So similar to the way they have casinos? Because they don't have the same sort of regulations that some states do. Tribal sovereignty is an area of the law with which I am not familiar. I would not be able to speak to the degree to which they could autonomously open a clinic. The most immediate issue would be related to the creation of a supply chain because you have traveled through interstate commerce and the U.S. states which you theoretically restricted. However, there is one spectacular opportunity not just to expedite the creation of Obigaine treatment access for Native America but for all of America. And this gets into federal right to try legislation authored by former U.S. Senator Kirsten Sinema and signed by the president during his first administration in 2018. And then what federal right to try legislation or the law provides is that once any medication makes its way through Phase 1 safety test and within the FDA's process, then anyone with a life threatening condition for which that medication is being developed can request treatment with that medication and obtain it from a Willon prescriber. What does that mean? That means that as soon as Texas or as soon as one of the Native tribes effectively completes a Phase 1 safety study under the language of the law, anyone who has a life threatening condition for which this medication is being developed first and foremost opioid dependency can go and request and get the treatment. We have one complication. Presently the Drug Enforcement Administration and keeping with the practice of many government agencies that use their arbitrary authority to interpret law has asserted that federal right to try does not apply to schedule one substances. This means that based on not the language of the law but on DEA's interpretation preference of that law. Once I began clear through Phase 1 it would be disqualified for access under federal right to try because the DEA says that if schedule one substances were intended to be included, they would have been specifically listed in the legislation. When Kirsten Sinema, the author of the bill, explained to them that the language is unambiguous and it says any medication. Their response was insolence and a refusal to honor what the statute actually says which is one of these numerous examples of the use of fictitious legal realities to do violence to legitimate reality. The DEA needs to be told to relent on its misinterpretation and extra judicial interpretation of federal right to try to interpret it as written so that once any Phase 1 study on Ibergan is completed delivery can be effected through the medical system immediately. I might add one of the challenges that I've seen over my 40 years of being involved in government is that bureaucrats, the easiest and the safest answer for a bureaucrat is no. I think that's part of what we're running into in DC with the DEA. One of the issues that I certainly hope and pray and as we go through the summer and as we see what's happening in Texas and Mississippi and these other states that will have the opportunity to sit down with President Trump and to just share with him what we're doing and what we're seeing across the country and that we could potentially have a conversation about the rescheduling of Ibergan from 1 to 3 to 3. You get it out of that schedule 1 which there's no reason in the world and you talked about this many times. Joe that Ibergan is on schedule 1. It does have medical purposes. I mean it's very clear it does and secondly it is not addictive. So the idea on its face that Ibergan is shown is this schedule 1 compound is just a fallacy. Well the schedule 1 the sweeping schedule 1 act of 1970 is just no. They just threw a bunch of stuff in there. Many of the things that aren't even psychoactive. A question, the obogatory. Can it be grown in the United States? Theoretically. Is it climate dependent? It's climate it's soul dependent. It is considered an entourage plant whereby it absorbs essentially the essence not just of the soul around it but of the other botanicals. One of the things we learned in Gebone is that much like we have great varadals in California for all the different kinds of wine that they produce there are different varieties of the obogash rub had grows in the north of the country. It's very different than had grows in the south. In terms of the amount of compound that's in it or the type of compound that's in it. The potency, the strength. The nature of its effect on the person. The way that it kind of facilitates the spiritual journey. There are some of it that will kind of have a dark angle. There's some of it that has more of a light angle. We are just really scratching the surface of knowledge as to all the ways in which it can vary based on how it grows naturally. One of the most fascinating things that we learned there and this is going to give you chills. We visited a five hectare, they used the metric system. We visited a five hectare e-boga plantation right in the center of Leberville that is run by one of their former prime ministers. It's an experimental form to kind of understand how it grows, the optimal ways in which to grow it and what different outcomes are. So as we were walking along we came to these two small bushes. It takes for about 10 years to come to maturation. We come along this pathway and they were two shrubs identical, growing just a couple of feet apart from each other. They pointed those out and said, well what does that look like to you? And I said, well those are e-boga shrubs. They smiled and they said, well it would appear so because they are identical. They said, but in nature when you find an e-boga shrub you're going to have to be very careful to determine which one's which because in nature it looks like they grow in pairs. One is the real deal. The other is its poison imposter and they grow together and they look identical. Look identical. How do you differentiate? It's not until they get fully grown into their 10th year. One byers fruit which is the real deal and the other does not. Wow! Now how does that do you for the physical communication of a mystical spiritual reality? So it takes 10 years for it to come to fruition to the point where it could be useful? No. Though you could use it before then, but you don't know whether you're getting the real deal you're just killing yourself. When you see him grow in pairs. Wow! So there's one group of people who know how to differentiate. One of the things that we learned is that there is a healthy underground international market for the bark. Just like we use vitamin B complex, we use valerian rope to help us go to sleep. People in Geboam will use the the evoga bark for mental acuity and just like drinking a cup of coffee. I mean to get the psychoactive effect you have to eat like five big huge heaps and plates of this stuff over the course of time. It's so bitter it will burn your mouth. I mean it's an olympian or de-arc. Yes sir. It's an olympian or deal to consume the amount of bark that's necessary to get that that mystical effect and you're sicker than a dog the whole time you're doing it. But apparently piracy in the country for the shrub is is fairly prominent and they explain that what poachers will do is that they will take the poison imposter and basically like the streets apply where you put pollutants in with you know cocaine or whatever here. They put that imposter bark in with the real because you cannot visually differentiate. The embungo pigmy who we had the privilege of meeting who hosted this for an overnight ceremony of blessing and protection that was just phenomenal. They apparently can just taste the bark even when it's mixed together and they can tell if it's adulterated with the imposter. Wow. But to know this looks some all years of I mean yes. That's a great way to put it and I've against my yay. I might have to go over and get tattered. Yeah. I wonder what that process is like boy. Well it just it seems to me that with the incredible effectiveness of this compound and it being adopted by all these states he said it almost seems inevitable that change is coming. Well here's what we need to make change happen. We need to dea to get on board. Well we need to dea to get on board but we need one man to get on board and that man is the president of the United States. We're here to recognize America and her 250th year 25 of those 250 now 10% of time has been spent at war and there are conditions unique to war that only this medication can responsibly address in a way that nothing else can. If there is an opportunity to improve the human condition of scale particularly for those who are even right now by in March 10 to go and fight yet another war. Take an executive action that would direct I began to be moved to schedule to that the provisions of the HALT Fentanyl Act be applied to the Texas Multistate I began drug development trial that the DEA be directed to interpret federal right to try so as to not exclude schedule one medications that are in drug development and that it be appropriately interpreted so that any medication that makes it through phase one can be accessed by a person with a life-threatening condition and then directing that federal scientific research agencies whether they be within health and human services or the Pentagon come alongside the states in direct partnership to fund and foster the accelerated pharmacological development of I begin so that this medication can make its way all the way through the FDA's process with their supportive guidance within three years or less it is the moonshot of our time and if there's a humanitarian legacy to be left for the ages by a president who very much wishes to have a legacy that is well reflected of home by posterity this is one of the most monumental opportunities he has to help folks at scale in a way that no president perhaps has before where at an inflection point in history not just for this country but globally. Well I certainly hope that this message reaches the president and I will try to make sure that it does thank you sir I mean I think in terms of the amount of people that it can help in the crisis that our country is enduring with opiate addiction with PTSD with all sorts of trauma with CTE with from sports from car accidents and in what have you I mean this is it's astonishing that this is even a struggle when you consider the effectiveness of this it's astonishing that we have to plead and that you have to put in so much work and kudos to you for doing that and kudos to Dan Patrick for this recent adoption of it here in Texas and I mean I just can only hope that momentum is on the side that's correct and that this this is implemented through the entire country and that people wake up and realize like we can help people and everyone at this point in time because the opioid crisis everyone is touched by this everyone has a family member everyone knows someone a friend a neighbor everyone everyone knows someone who's been hit by this my friends that have no problems with anything else and they had an injury and god hooked on opiates and had a terrible time kicking it at the opioids are I'll use the word demonic I just I don't know any other way to good word to rob it people of their life and and and to have seen you know back in Kentucky where this all started in my opinion and in your work there and to have the success that we're seeing now in Kentucky and having it blocked historically when you were there at the opioid abatement commission and and and the current governor being a part of that blockade if you will former employee of the of the Sackler family and and today to have the opportunity you know for for the Kentucky people of Kentucky to finally get the opportunity to make right what they got so tragically impacted by back in the late 90s and the 2000s I just I mean it it gives me great hope not just for this country but for the for the the side of righteousness that this happens in a big and a powerful way here you mentioned the Kentucky experience before we rolled out the abigating initiative there and ran the opioid committed stood at the opioid commission I thought our first job was to go and to hear from the people of the state you know we were getting a billion dollars in settlement funds this money was coming to us because thousands of their family members had died so recognizing that confidence in government is at an all-time low I thought it was important to go out and say hey here's who we are here's the job we've been given here's the resource we have tell us what need you have in your community that we can look to fund this is something that needs to be accessible to grassroots organizations it needs to be accountable to you as people and we need to make sure we're transparent with how we use this money but our first job is to listen well over the course of 20 town halls across the state to use the evenings from 6 p.m. until we racked up what began as a 15 minute technical credit presentation of what this state commission does turned into these these mass catharsis events were hundreds of people thousands over the course of those 20 town halls poured out the depths of their grief right at our feet and after they did the sum total of their response to us was we don't think that you have the competence or the integrity to do anything that's going to make a meaningful difference in this line in our lives and we don't expect one sin of this money is going to make the least bit of difference for us at one of these town halls I heard about a young woman by the name of Tamra and the woman who told Tamra's story was a volunteer at a clinic for the survivors of child sexual abuse this particular clinic made sure that children received appropriate medical treatment that they received proper therapeutic counseling and that they were placed in family circumstances where they could perhaps have a chance to have a decent life so this volunteer told about meet the young woman by the name of Tamra and that they were placed in family circumstances where they could perhaps have a chance to have a decent laugh. So this volunteer told about meeting the young woman by the name of Tammer when Tammer was 10 years old, had been horrifically sexually abused by a family member. Tammer had to have a series of reconstructive surgeries because of how awful it was. And she said that she worked with Tammer for about two or three years and that she went to her adopted family and she hadn't been heard from since and that she assumed that that was despite how awful her circumstances were when she came through the door that she managed to get well and go on and have a relatively functional and happy life as happy as one can to be a survivor of those circumstances. This same woman said that about 10 years later, she was volunteering at the Perry County Kentucky Detention Center in the county seat of Hazard and that she was offering mindfulness and yoga classes to inmates there, just as a volunteer. And she said she went in one evening to teach her class and that she saw this young woman sitting in the corner after herself kind of withdrawn. She didn't want to participate in any of the yoga exercises or anything and that she was looking at her. And she said, you know, even though she was an adult, she looked kind of like what this young woman appeared, Tammer, when she was 10 years old. She said, so I walked up to her and now, Damba, Saturn, I said, is your name Tammer? And she said that young woman looked up at her and recognized and she said, yes, had she now? She said, I'm the volunteer who worked with you when you came to our clinic when you were 10. What are you doing in here? And Tammer explained that because of the surgeries, that she had performed to be reconstructed, they had given her opioids. And that what began to treat her physical pain, she continued to rely upon to treat her tremendous spiritual and emotional pain. And she had gotten busted by an oxyome street by a deputy with the Perry County Sheriff's Department and put in jail. Now you think about what I just said about how this young woman's life got started off. And the response of power to her was a prison. This is why what we're doing is so necessary. And Governor Perry mentions one other reality that's important. Some of your viewers may have seen a political article published on Sunday about a presidential aspirant by the name of Andy Beshear, who is the current Kentucky governor. Andy Beshear was the attorney general of Kentucky before he was governor. He is the son of his father, Steve Beshear, who was governor for eight years between 2007 and 2015. Andy's greatest accomplishment is being his father's son because he has never accomplished anything outside of his father's lab. The legislature in Kentucky has been controlled by Republican super majorities over the entirety of his term and everything for which he claims credit actually belongs to them by way of accomplishment. There are a few things for which he can claim credit. One is shutting down the state of Kentucky harder than Gavin Newsom shut down the state of California which resulted in the educational hobbling of an entire generation of Kentucky children who were already well behind national average standards on both reading and math. You could go to a liquor store or a strip club for months in Kentucky before you could send your child to a public school. Andy Beshear is responsible for that. He shut down the state's entire economy. He had an antiquated unemployment benefit system that he instructed the director of to make sure that his contributors and his family members were placed into the front of the line while regular everyday people at home got a busy signal for months on the end and had no financial lifeline while his family and friends got valet treatment. When this was discovered, he scapegoated the director of an employment system. for following his own instructions a guy by the name of Muncie McNamara and Mr. McNamara took his own wife. But the most egregious reality about Andy Beshear and his father pertains to the fact that they were both law partners at the law firm that represented Purdue Pharma against the people of Kentucky and the litigation over Oxycontin while they were law partners there. Andy Beshear and his daddy drew law partner paychecks of Purdue Pharma client bills while they were there. And the people of Kentucky should have received a billion dollars but instead received a measly 24 million dollar payout from Purdue Pharma because Andy and his daddy's law firm malpractice that case. The public record will establish that is part of the Purdue Pharma settlement 17 million documents were destroyed. The case was put under seal and as a condition of the settlement, their law firm was allowed to cure their malpractice of the case which resulted in a 24 million dollar settlement within days of Andy Beshear becoming the attorney general. That's right, the attorney general. I said I've been Republican all my life and I have. I found this been Republican going back to the Civil War. I don't care if it's given news some. Come on, my house, Pete Buttigieg, that Illinois governor, governor Pritzker, any national Democrat who needs my time, my effort, whatever I can offer by way of volunteer resources to make sure that Andy Beshear never sniffs the sewer grade of the White House, they've got it. In this political article, Andy talks about in much the same way as other performative public piety purveyors, that his life is guided by the golden rule and the good Samaritan. He likes to wear his Sunday school and deacon affiliations on his sleeve as so many other performative public piety figures too. If he were actually going to preach the part of the Bible that he is lived, he would talk more about Judas and the 40 pieces of silver than he would any golden rule. And a good Samaritan. And I just want to make sure that the people of home and the people of America know who this man is. As the national media takes up, Kentucky media's grotesque narrative about his decency and tries to lie him into the White House. Thank you for letting me say that. This meant a long time coming. I understand. Anything else for wrap this up? I think we covered it all. I think we had a good, thank you Joe. Thank you. Thank you Brian. A really big supporter of this effort. And I think it's just incredible. I mean, I can't believe it's happening. I'd always kind of given up hope that people would wake up to the powerful potential that a lot of these compounds have to change people's lives. Yeah. Well, I'm sure there were some teachers of mine back in the 1950s that the idea that that little burr-headed kid that is obviously not paying a lot of attention could somehow end up being the governor of the great state of Texas. And there's probably a long list of those, as a matter of fact. And I'm sure there's some people over the course of the last 15 years as I matriculated up through the political process that said, the idea that this guy is going to be standing up, putting his reputation on the line for something like psychedelics is that that ain't going to happen. But it goes back to your point about be curious, be courageous, and make a difference. And you're doing it Joe Rogan. Thank you, man. Thank you. Thank you, too, Brian. Thank you, and you've magnified a share of one nice thing. Sure. And because it is the 250th anniversary of the country, this comes from the heart. The bicentennial children have had the blessing of being the grandchildren of that greatest generation that overcame the great depression, defeated Nazism, killed Jim Crow, and crushed totalitarian communism. That greatest generation lived, suffered, bled and died to leave us the shining city on the hill. Over the past 50 years, the bicentennial children, or those who are known as generation X, have experienced the mass extinction of family and community. We are the first generational cohort of mass refugees from obliterated biological families who had to seek and build new families of choice based on the salvation bond of unconditional affection, reject and only the superficial socialized separateisms of the skin suits and of which we have been born. Over the past 30 years, we have watched truth justice and the American way be overrun by institutional deceit, white collar criminality in the thavened tiring's will, an odious alignment of official depravity which has produced, the opioid epidemic, the greatest engineered humanitarian catastrophe to play out within our borders since the end of the 19th century in an epidemic which has disfigured this country. The 2008 financial crisis, which forcibly dispossessed millions of us from the American dream, including 52% of African American homeowners and sent us the bill for the cost of our disposition, a bill that everyone under the age of 40 continues to pay through their lack of economic mobility and finally and most deplorably, 25 years of unremittance warfare, which has taken exponentially more service member lives here at home by suicide than had been lost at battlefields abroad. Over the last 10 years, 1.5 million Americans have died from drug overdose, alcohol related disease, and suicide, a figure that exceeds the total number of war casualties going all the way back to 1776. We've got 102 counties with life expectancies less than that of North Korea, 18% of respondents to a recent Pew Research Center poll said that they believe the federal government has the capacity to do the right thing, a figure that hasn't been above 30% since 2007. 80% of respondents to unlock October 2025 Wall Street Journal poll have said that the American dream is dead. Power has answered these unconscionable realities with a maelstrom of bureaucratic absurdity, impudent incompetence, and predatory corruption, all with the blessing of the law, which is used its power to bind torture and kill the truth. In the decades prior to July 14, 1789, the French government had ruthlessly imposed its burdens, abuseably imposed its costs, and ravenously consumed the future of its people. The arrogance of the aristocracy ultimately answered to the desperate determination of the peasantry and its yeetine blade. We are here to pursue one of the greatest humanitarian missions ever undertaken to serve and exalt the primacy of the human soul. As we sit here right now, there are millions of Americans who have no sense of greater purpose, or have even why they are alive, who mourn to see the sunrise when it comes up and through their windows. And what they need to know is that they are indeed divine. There's only one thing that is known to produce iron, and that's the supernova of a storm. The iron in our blood originated in a supernova eons ago. Every human being has stored us running through their blood. And the movement that Governor Perry and I or Leighton is one that aims to recognize the reality of that human divinity. We are desperate and we are determined. And we will crawl the last mile to deliver good titans unto the meek, to bind up the broken heart to proclaim liberty to the captives and the open end of the prison to them that are bound. Glory, glory, hallelujah. And the truth is marching on. And thank you, sir, for letting us proclaim it right here on your platform, the Walter Cronkata of our age. How's the beautiful way to end it? Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen. Bye.