This episode of the Joe Rogan Experience podcast is one of the episodes that we filmed during the sci-fi program. Joe Rogan questions everything. It is brought to you by Ting. Ting is a cell phone company that gives you cell phone service that makes sense for you. They allow you to cancel it anytime. They don't have contracts. They use the Sprint backbone. So you're getting dependable, reliable, excellent cell phone service. But you're getting it in a way that you probably wouldn't get from a big company. Like for instance, if you don't use all of your minutes, if you use less minutes than you thought you would, Ting will actually knock you down to the lower level and then credit you the difference on your next bill. That shit is unheard of. No company does that. And I think that's an awesome way to do business. They're not trying to rob you. They're just trying to sell you something that's really good. And it's an excellent exchange and even exchange. You give them money. They give you good cell phone service at a reasonable price. Ting has on their website a lot of examples that people have sent to them about how much money they have saved by using Ting. But I can tell you personally, I have spoken to many people on Twitter, social media that have sent me a thank you saying that Ting saved them a ton of money. And it gave them excellent service with really high end cell phone devices. They use the Android phones and they have all sorts of other different kind of phones as well. But the high end Android phones like the Samsung Galaxy S4, the HTC One, all the really top end nice devices that you can get. I recently just got one of these Galaxy Note 3's is a fucking ridiculous phone. It might be too big. I don't know if I'm going to keep it. But right now I got it. And I am very impressed with the Android operating system. I haven't fucked with this in a long time. I got one a long time ago, like maybe three years ago or something like that. And it was like a drunk iPhone. It was such a hunk of shit. But boy, have they caught up in a big way in this screen is magical. Anyway, I'm waxing poetically about my new phone. What I'm telling you is that Ting will save you give you awesome cell phone coverage and make you feel good that you're connected to a reliable but ethical company that's not trying to fucking rip you off. So go to rogan.ting.com and save yourself $25 either off service or device. It's your choice and enjoy. And I guarantee you if you're looking for some cheaper but yet excellent cell phone service doesn't make you feel like you're getting fucked over. Ting is the way to go. That's the new song. Ting is the way to go. rogan.ting.com. Go get your free gun. Before this podcast airs, I just want to say thank you to the fine folks at sci-fi and Arthur Smith, the production company that made my show, Joe Rogan questions everything. Thank you to Tim and Wayne from sci-fi also for allowing us to put this on the the air as a podcast. One of the things that we did when we were filming the show is we wanted to incorporate the podcast into the show because first of all it's the best method that I know of for discussing an issue. There's one of the things that I found about the show that was kind of awkward. I really enjoyed doing the show. I really enjoyed the opportunity to explore all these different topics. It didn't come out perfect. There's a lot of things that I wasn't happy with but that's all just a part of the growing pains of creating a show. But one thing that I did find is that having conversations in front of people standing up in weird circumstances like in a hallway or in a laboratory or whatever, many different scenarios that we had conversations on the show is very awkward. The best way to have a conversation is on a podcast. Sitting down across each other in a comfortable chair in front of a big oak desk where you're relaxed. You feel confident. You're comfortable rather. You feel comfortable. You feel it's quiet. The room is, you know, it's a fun place to be. It feels good. There's good energy here. And we control that for the most part by having it in a podcast form. And my favorite aspects of the show were actually dunk in and myself talking to these people on the podcast. And it was kind of a revelation in a lot of ways. It's like my favorite part of doing the show is the stuff that I was already doing but what I was doing the show. But I want to thank sci-fi for allowing us to do it that way because it really, uh, it came out great. Um, those parts of it. And so now you're going to get the full unedited podcast. This first one is from the big foot episode and it's Dr. Jeffrey Mel, Mel drum. Dr. Jeff Mel drum is in my opinion the most credible of all the big foot believers. I shouldn't say the most credible because maybe there's some out there that are just as credible that I haven't met. He's the most reasonable guy that I communicated with. And I really respect him for his first of all is stepping out and saying that he really thinks this is a big real undiscovered primate living in the Pacific Northwest, which takes a lot of balls for someone who's is a legit professor. Uh, you know, because people, I'm mainly think you're fucking crazy if you tell him there's a unknown monkey living in the woods. He doesn't just do that. He does that from an academic point of view. He's a very, very bright guy. And he also does that as an expert in human movement. And I found his theories on the Sasquatch combined with this knowledge that he has about human movement to be very fascinating. And he's analysis of footprints and what's unique about these footprints and why it mimics actual real pr, real primates and not human beings, in fact, I thought was also incredibly fascinating. He's a brilliant guy and a very nice guy. And I appreciate very much that he took the time out of his busy schedule to come on the show. So enjoy this is Dr. Jeff Mel drum. And once again, thanks to everybody involved in the show, everybody from the cameraman on down was an amazing cool place to work for a few months. So big kiss, you all. And now enjoy a podcast with powerful Duncan Tressel and Dr. Jeffrey Mel drum. Joe Rogan experience. Coming ready. Dr. Mel drum. First of all, thank you very much for coming here and talking to us about all things squatch. Duncan and I are very excited about this. How many years, first of all, have you been involved in this? Were you in that Leonard Nimoy in search of Bigfoot show? No, that predated me. That predated you. Okay. That's the OG of Bigfoot shows, right? Yes. Yeah. I remember seeing that when I was a kid and being so convinced and excited that there was a big hairy man living in the woods. Obviously back then, I didn't realize that it could be species. It wasn't just like one individual dude, but a whole species. And I've been fascinated by it since I was a little child. I don't know why. I don't know what is it about Bigfoot. Maybe you could tell us. What is it about Bigfoot that speaks to man? They're different levels. I mean, there's just simply the mystery, something that's undiscovered, unresolved. I think there's an added mystique because it's so human-like. I mean, that's been an icon and archetype of the human experience since the beginning of history. Some of the earliest heroes hung out with wildmen, whether it was Beowulf and Grendel or Gilgamesh and Incadoo. There were these denizens of the forest that maybe represented our sort of lost connection to wilderness into wild places. Do you think there's a certain amount of arrogance and assuming that we have full detail of the entire fossil record of primates when you see things like homophoreansus, the Hobbit Man, Indonesia, and the evidence of Jug into Pithicus, which is only the 1920s, if I'm not, right? This is a thing that really is placing Sasquatch in a very different context, the one that I keep pushing because I can see this unfolding with every new discovery of a hominid-like homophoreansus. The tree of hominid radiation gets bushier and bushier and then discovery after discovery shows that some of these lineages have persisted to much more recent times in the past than has ever been acknowledged previously. So, you know, homophoreansus is 13,000 years old, a new Neanderthal site maybe 10,000 years old. Really? Yeah. And so the notion that we're the only hominid on the planet contrary to all experience in the past when there were multiple hominids co-existing on the landscape may be a real misnomer, a real misrepresentation of fact, and these relic hominoids may be the rule rather than the exception. It's a real tricky subject, the Bigfoot Sasquatch subject. I have brought it up with people that I love and respect and they have marked me right in front of of my face. My friend Dana, Dana White, Dana White mocked me the other way, Dana right in front of my face. They're believing in his eye. I tell you, I was pretty disappointed when I heard you were going looking for Bigfoot. I was like, how dare you, Sarah? What do you know about Bigfoot? Man, it's one of those things. Bigfoot is like ghosts or flying saucers or crop circles. It lumps you in a weirdo category. But that's because there is a lot of weirdo that believe in Bigfoot. That's right. You must know that. You probably experienced more lunatics than size-ciatrist, too. And that's what Warren's off a lot of my colleagues is they don't want to navigate, try to navigate that morass of the lunatic fringe. So you don't have the luxury of just simply going out and collecting data. You have to win or through all this chaff to find the kernel. And it's very, I'm sorry, it's very like when they lump you in, it's a stain. It really is a stain on your career or on your credentials. They could say, oh, he's that Bigfoot guy. Absolutely. Well, there was a moment as I was sitting here contemplating these footprints that sort of pulled me into the subject. When I was familiar with Grover Krantz, I knew the grief that he'd suffered at the hands of his colleagues because of his pursuit of this subject, you know, in his career, stalling his career. And I contemplated for a moment, do I really want to go down that road or not? But how could you not when you have 35, 45 fresh footprints laid out in front of you that are so clear, so compelling, so persuasive? I mean, for me, that's what science is about. It's going after those interesting, even if they're anomalous data points. What was it that got you started on this? Well, it was that. I mean, we could go clear back to my childhood when I was born in the Pacific Northwest and knew of Bigfoot, knew of Roger Patterson and his film. He came to Spokane where I lived as a youngster and showed his documentary, showcasing that film clip. But my academic interest began in 1996 when I was shown a very, this same line of tracks I just referred to in the Blue Mountains outside of Walla Walla. And I tell you that the hook was set. Is there ever been a moment where you step back and said, hang on, am I wasting my time on some hooey? Sure. Oh sure. Is there a lot of hooey involved in this subject? There is. Yeah. I mean, you got to get past that. But I tell you what I have seen, what I've experienced firsthand, be it, you know, finding tracks in very remote areas myself here in vocalizations, having rocks thrown at me. What have you, it will tell us about your experiences. You've seen tracks where there's no people like deep in the woods. Yeah. Yeah. But just on several occasions. Well, one, one was in connection with kind of an interesting or possible interaction. We never actually saw something or anything. But when you eliminate you know, when you eliminate the the likely scenarios, then the unlikely is what you're left with. And in this case, we had, we were in the Siski, you wilderness of Northern California, one of the first expeditions of sorts that I participated in it. We'd gone off from our base camp quite some distance off trail to investigate some lakes we thought might have been shrunken up in the in the heat and exposing mudflats for more tracking opportunities. We did find a set of tracks in on a dusty stretch of the trail. You know, if you've ever been out to camping, you get up early in the and the dust of a campsite is still moistened with the dew and you step out of your tent and everything sticks those were the kind of footprints that we found on the trail on morning. They were just as clear as could be something with a 16 inch foot, five toes had stepped in that that do laid in dust and it just lifted up a perfect outline of a footprint. Now, as a big foot freak, what was that like for you? This is like your first piece of evidence, you're stumbling upon it yourself. That's right. Yeah. Well, it was freaking out. No, no, I mean, it was it was confirming. I'm freaking out. I'm not right in there. Yeah, me too. Well, at that by that time, yeah, there were moments we'd been in the woods already for over four weeks. And so we had kind of gotten to the point, you know, you have to sort of steal yourself against that natural fear reaction to those circumstances. But I think this is something that a lot of big foot hunters assume, which is that big foot is sweet or big foot's this harmless being that's out there picking flowers and printing his footprints in the do. This could be a killer. This thing could be a deadly, angry, tired, bitter old jungle ape. Aren't you worried that in your quest for Bigfoot, you actually might find him? Well, find one of them too. You know, let's make it clear. There's more than one. Yeah, this is not one lone monster Roman. Yeah, but but but your but your points will take in. I mean, clearly this this if it exists, this is a large powerful, potentially dangerous animal should be shown deference. But I mean, if they were killers, you know, like grizzly bears, they would have been hunted to extinction just like grizzlies were in the lower 48 for quite a period of time. There really isn't the only stories you hear about antagonistic behavior towards humans is usually precipitated when the humans have shot at them. They've started the coral. But otherwise they seem to be, you know, it's just like with gorillas, you know, gorillas were built by Barnum and Bailey as the most terrifying creature on the face of the planet. But now they're considered the gentle giants, you know, the the the the vicar of the endangered imperiled tropical forests. The the predatory primates are the ones of the most dangerous, right? Like chimpanzees are more dangerous than gorillas because they're predatory. True. Yeah. And this apparently, but the the lore is what people believe at least is that if Sasquatch is a real thing, it eats animals and it probably eats elk and it probably follows elk migrations. Yeah. So there is always that risk. I mean, you know, anyone who's going out in the woods should should use do do caution. Yeah. I mean, people eat people. Sure. Exactly. Do you pack eat? Do you pack eat? It depends on the surf sets. Not he's a doctor, duty carries a gun. I'm dare you. He's about to say pack seat. Oh sure. No, it when we're in the field. I mean, we're in areas where they're where they're grizzly bears where there's cougar in Northern California. They've got lots of issues with with cougars praying on or attacking people. So yeah, cougars personal security should be sometimes do that. No joke pepper spray to pepper spray and a thick jacket. These cougars you want you want some some a lot of protection. I prefer a 10 millimeter or so that too son. I'll get some Kevlar maybe a sword. Well, what a predicament you're putting yourself in because let's say you do run into a tribe of these things. Yeah. And they've they're smart enough to know that they can't be discovered. You've got to decide between not getting ripped as shreds by these big foot or blasting them into oblivion. Sure. What do you pick? Well, that's a good question. I mean, it's a I hate to speculate too much on a what if scenario. I don't think that they're in tribal social organizations or that they are that intelligent. I mean, I think we're dealing with, you know, at least a large primate, a large ape. And at most, a very early offshoot of the hominid radiation that, you know, has intelligence. It's not much higher than that of a chimp or gorilla. I just have no experience to to back up anything beyond that. If I could let you pick a toe, any toe, and we hack that sucker off and then immediately take you to big foot with cameras, crew, whole deal. You get to see Sasquatch, a whole Sasquatch family. Yeah. Do you accept that? Do you hack off a toe to meet Sasquatch and know for sure? I could probably get by without a pinky. Oh, my goodness. You got a bad sir. You're ready to chop off toes. I'll chop off my toe throw my pinky into the pot. Would you really? Absolutely. I love my pinkies. I'm not going to do that. What's it for? What does it do? What is a pinky? It helps you move around your freak. I wouldn't. What did barely? Yeah. Wiggles to the left pushes off and helps you stabilize the pinky toe? Yes. It's there for a reason. It's like a maybe yours. Mine's very active. It seems to hard to put that little nail. You know, we have to raise it up anymore. Oh, my goodness. You guys are both sick. How dare you? Okay. It's tempting, though. You would transform human history with this video. I want my toes, dude. It's a question over. It's a valid question. It's a guy like you who's been studying this for how many decades now? Nearly two decades. Nearly two decades. Think about all that time and effort. Just to see it down there. It's been a great ride. I mean, I've got to see places on this planet and see some of the most beautiful landscapes and terrains and meet all kinds of interesting people. It's been an interesting experience. Yeah. As we talked to one Sasquatch hunter, what he said was that even if he doesn't find Sasquatch, he's still camping. So join him. Yeah, exactly. I always tell people, you know, cultivate an appreciation for natural history and join the outdoors because it's like me with fishing. If I don't catch a fish in the first five minutes, I'll start to lose interest pretty soon. And if you're that way, chances of you catching a fish or having Sasquatch experience in the first weekend, you go out pretty slim. So enjoy what you're doing. You mentioned that these creatures throw rocks. How big are the rocks that they throw? Well, in my experience, when we were there in the siskius, it was about a soft, all-sized rock. I mean, if you wanted to cold cock me, it could have probably. But I think it was more of a, I got the impression it was just letting me know that we were close. And I got the sensation. In fact, that we had stopped to take a break at a spot that was on one of the pathways that they followed. It was where we had found that the footprints, the first the first go. Is it a siskius? The siskius in Northern California, six rivers National Forest and siski wilderness. So the primary theory when it comes, what's the matter? So is the primary theory about Sasquatch is that it was something along the lines of of a gigantic pithagus. There was in Asia, came down the baring straight with humans. And that's why there's so many of them happening. The dense rainforest of the Pacific Northwest that it just found it to be ideal habitats that just stayed there. Yeah, that's one model. I mean, in gigantic pithicus, you have a primate that's the right size and the right place at the right time to have expanded its range over the baring land bridge. And there were times when that land bridge was a corridor of forest, not an Arctic tundra. So it wasn't like they were migrating. They were just expanding the range. Each generation would expand into the available habitat. So from Asia, all the way to North America was forest at one point on time. At times, yeah, off and on. It wasn't always ice locked. And so that would have preceded probably the time that humans came. So they were probably here before Native Americans, their paleo Indians arrived in North America. There's a lot of speculation as to how intelligent it is. You seem to think it's very ape-like, but I've talked to other folks who think it's almost a human. But it's like something in between us and the chimpanzee. Yeah. Well, a lot of those people who attribute to primal people or some kind of primitive human often also attribute various paranormal qualities. They're in psychic communication. They're being taught by them, this ancient wisdom, etc. And I don't have any personal experience upon which to evaluate those kinds of subject. How very respectful of you. That was so scientific. That was a nice way to say their fucking crazy. That's how scientists call the Atlantic. So yeah, it is a weird thing, isn't it? It falls into that crystals channeling energy thing. Oftentimes. Yeah. Which gives me, Ajada, I got to get out of the room when someone starts talking to energy and crystals. I really, it's, it, I'm allergic to it. We had it yesterday, someone started talking about energy and safe zone, safe space. I'm like, I got to get out of here. Yeah. Yeah. It's like immediately I feel like I'm threatened. My sanity's threatened. I might get sucked in your stupid vortex. I'll come one of you. Why is that? Why, why do you think Bigfoot is a loon magnet? Do you think it's, because when you have people searching out for other things, like butterflies that they theorize that might exist or other undiscovered species, haven't gone completely mad. But for some reason, a lot of these Bigfoot hunters, it seems like they've lost their mind in this pursuit. Why, why do you think that is? Well, I think part of it is that when, when Bigfoot sort of fell into the lap of academia back in, well, it was coincident with the Patterson-Gimlin film essentially. That's when it was thrust under the nose of, of science, the scientific community. Before that, it was just a bunch of, you know, logger stories and forester stories coming out of the, the northern woods of British Columbia or Northern California, which was still really wild back then. It, it came at a time that preceded a lot of what we understand now about early human evolution and grade eight natural history. And it was just, there was no place to put it. There was no pigeonhole to stick this in. And so it was rejected by the scientific community. And then that vacuum came the amateur fortune seekers or enthusiasts or, you know, those that I thought it was left here by UFO or traveling through interdimensional portals or any type of explanation as to why we aren't finding them. What makes them different from other common wildlife? I think what it is, is that there's, there's, first of all, I think there's two different types of people that get attracted to like really following up on, on Sasquatch and one of them is the looms. One of them is the people that if it wasn't, if they weren't looking for Sasquatch, they would be looking to remote view or they'd be looking to find out the cause of chemtrails or the, they would just fall, they would find some mystery and lock onto it. The other one is courageous people who aren't afraid of looking like cooks because, like yourself, I think you look at it. You're obviously a very intelligent man. You, you're, you're an anthropologist, you're a professor. You know, you know what you're talking about. You look at this and you go, you know what? Um, I don't think I can dismiss this. You know what? I think there might be something here. Right. Right. Even though it sounds crazy to say it, I'm sorry, you guys. This is why there might be something here. That's right. What's the, what's the most compelling piece of evidence? If you were trying to convince a person, if a person was on the fence and they were like, well, she's Dr. Melger. I don't know. I mean, you seem like a normal guy. Um, really big foot. Like tell me in, in a paragraph. What's the most compelling piece of evidence? Well, for me, again, from my point of expertise, it's the footprint of it. That's what drew me into this because my, my study of the evolution of human bipedalism, prepared me, I guess you'd say, I mean, why, why wouldn't I be fascinated by the possibility that there's another biped out there? I mean, it's a perfect natural experiment to, again, and switch to compare and contrast our own adaptation for walking on two legs, which is otherwise considered to be unique amongst primates. And so was Gigantopithecus thought to be bipedal or is that debate? It's in debate. Grover, uh, cramps made some arguments based on the shape of the jaw, given the breadth, the angle of the jaw. So that's supposed to be Gigantopithecus. That is. That's one of the two of the examples of the largest species of Gigantopithecus. Blackie. How we? Yeah. And it looks like it would hurt if it'd be, yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah. Those are massive, massive moles. Which is the head then, like about that? Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. They call that thing blackie. Oh, I, yeah. Gigantopithecus blackie. Yeah. After the discover. How rude. Yeah. That's what he said. That's what, that's his name. Well, the, uh, the thought is that they looked more a rangutan-like than gorillas, I correct. Well, again, it's speculation. It's speculation because they're found in Asia, they're part of what we call the chivalpithecine radiation, the thicken-ammled apes of which a rangutan is the only relic species in existence today. But again, there's no way to know. I mean, uh, gorillas and chips are closely related. And yet their skulls look quite different from one another in many ways. So the footprint evidence is in your opinion the best evidence. Right. And, uh, this one that we have, we both have the same one. Right. What is the origin of this footprint? This was cast by a deputy sheriff by the name of Dennis Harford in the 80s in Grace Harbour County, Washington State. So over at the base of the Olympic Peninsula. And, uh, he was responding to a report of a disturbance at a construction site. And there on that, uh, that spur road, hard packed dirt with a layer of fine pulverized dust from the movements of the heavy machinery, wet down by a rain, uh, left this remarkably clear, uh, imprint. These are actually desecation cracks where that wet mud was beginning to dry in the sun and shrink and crack. But the extrusion of the mud around the footprint and between the toes and all left a very, uh, very striking, uh, facsimile of that foot. It seems so uniform. That's where I start to get, well, skeptical again, it's the remarkable conditions. When, you know, there were photographs of, of a number of footprints at that site, including some interesting, uh, what I refer to as half tracks that, uh, that terminate. I mean, the, the details on here are remarkable. You can see what looks like the head and the base of the fifth metatarsal, maybe a little bit of arthritis or some kind of injury to the joints there. Yeah. Uh, this bulge right here then is the key though that that you have on the side of your foot. If you, if you left a wet footprint on the cement when you came out of the pool, you'd see that bulge and it's at the, uh, it's positioned at the, what we call the calcaneocuboid which is, uh, right there. Now in apes, these two joints across here are much more flexible. They're adapted to climbing trees. If this were a chimpanzee, it would look more like this. And when they're grasping that branch, then you have to, uh, be able to lever the foot without disrupting the grip. When we've, we've changed that altogether by relinquishing that grip and, and incorporating the big toe into one stiff lever like this. So the whole foot acts as, as a, as a mechanical lever, but there's moves here remarkably. Sasquatch foot appears to have retained that, uh, uh, that ape-like degree of flexibility, which is actually pretty, uh, elegant adaptation to climbing on very steep rugged mountainous terrain. Hmm. What would be the evolutionary benefit of keeping of a human-like foot as opposed to like a gorilla or a chimp where they can grab and climb with their feet? Well, when you're 800 pounds, it's kind of dangerous to climb up into trees. Besides what, what would you look for up there? Right. That we don't have fruiting trees in the coniferous forests. The, the fruit element of your diet is in the understory, the berries in the, in the shrub layer. So I've only heard a couple of people say they climb trees. You think that's who we, well, it's probably, uh, juveniles, maybe to, you know, put in a young strip in a tree in order to get it away from potential predators. If you're parking it there while you, while you're off foraging, for example. But no, I don't think, I mean, just as large male gorillas don't spend much time climbing up in the trees, because a fall, even, you know, even for humans, a fall from 10 feet can be fatal if your experience rotten climbing. Yeah. It, it seems like if you wanted to fake that, you would have to have a very advanced understanding of gorillas. From, if you were going to draw that thing and spend the time doing it, you'd have to have a deep understanding of that. Or you're really shitty at making a fake fall. thing of gorillas. If you were going to draw that thing and spend the time doing it, you'd have to have a deep understanding of part. You're really shitty at making a fake foot and you just got lucky and incorporated something that looks remarkably similar to that metatarsal break. I don't know. That's a pretty, that's good luck. I would never throw an accidental metatarsal break. That's not what it is. Metatarsal break. Do you make that up? No, that's right. Yeah, are you going to accidentally draw a metatarsal break? But where is where is calluses? It seems like it's feet are kind of shaved down or manicured. They're beautiful. It's like he could go to the beach right now. He could go and lay out and people would think he had great feet. Well, again, the conditions of that particular footprint were just really quite remarkable, making a very clear imprint. It's indicated that the sole pad is probably pretty substantial and pretty thick. We have some examples of them where they've stepped on rocks or stepped on other obstructions in that sole pad. That substantial sole pad is able to accommodate those intrusions quite remarkably. But it's the composite. If you take one example and you look at it, you can dissect it and criticize it and pick it apart and question it. But when then you see, as you point out, repeated appearances, not only showing, for example, the metatarsal break, but these correlated half-tracks that where they're running. When we run, because of our stiff arch, if we're sprinting, not exhibiting a heel strike, we'll leave just an abbreviated footprint because we're up on the ball of our foot. Since their foot's flexible, when they run, they run like this and it imprints the entire four part of the foot. So in other words, if this individual we're running, its running track would look like that. Again, so that's the question I've often asked. If this is all just spurious convergences of would-be hoaxers, who's passing out the little black book giving instructions on how to fake a how marketably consistent how uniform is that? Oh, remarkable. It's a remarkable. Yeah, example after example, I mean to the point that I took the leap of intellectual faith, if you will, of naming the footprints. There's a convention of taxonomy called ich no taxonomy that applies Linne in classification schemes to trace evidence like footprints where the maker of the footprint is unknown. And so we can now call these footprints a published peer reviewed name, anthropoidepes, Ameriborealis, which is North American 8 foot. Wow. How silly would that be if it's all faked though? That may the whole would be beautiful. It's going to be hard to prove that something doesn't exist though. Well, I guess so, but that's not what science is all about, right? No, it's not. Proving things do exist based on evidence. Based on the evidence. And that's it. It's based on a diagnosis that of distinguishing characteristics. These are not just facsimiles of enlarged human footprints like this example. You know, this is actually pretty large. This would represent an individual with a foot that's probably in the upper 1% of the human population. Have you ever seen skill in the old shoe? No, I haven't. I've always wanted to get that photo. I gotta remember to get it to you guys. It's a picture of me, my face, next to Shaquille, Neil Shoe. It's bigger than my entire head. It's huge. I'm not kidding. It's bigger than this. So she totally, totally bigger than this. So Shaquille, Neil, if he wanted to, it could be the greatest big foot hooks or a ball. He is big foot. I mean, if he went and wanted to the woods, he's seven feet tall. He's more than 300 pounds. He's, he just slaps him for. Does his foot have the same kind of bend? No, it wouldn't. That's the thing. Even as large as his foot is and it's not, it would probably not be, and I don't have his metrics to say this with a certitude, but I would predict that his foot is not as wide as, as this imprint. Most likely. Yeah. Most likely. He doesn't have the mid-torsal. It doesn't have evidence of that. He probably has. They probably got him from the league. No last Sasquatches. Because if they ever did catch Sasquatches and then they found other Sasquatches or people, very similar to the Neanderthals, and they wanted to start playing football, we'd have real problems. They would. They would have real problems. Oh, what the problem, the success. Football would be interesting for once. They'd start banging all the white chicks first of all. So what? That would be a huge problem. You're going to have Sasquatch hybrids. Great. The giant nine foot people. I'll take them. Sasquatches won't want to enter into the UFC. We'd have to make new weight classes. Everything gets better if you had a Sasquatch. I don't care what it is. They start showing up for set. Now, gorillas are fairly intelligent. Chimpanzees are intelligent. Dolphins are very intelligent. We have zero problem locking them up in swimming pools. Sure. If we did find a Sasquatch, do you think because of the bipedal nature of it, there would probably be some pretty intense debate us to what to do with this thing. Well, our humanity isn't defined by any one characteristic like bipedalism or opposable fums or non-divergent big toe. I mean, it's a composite of a number of characteristics. And so we're beginning to understand that bipedalism was a characteristic of many different species of very early hominid and even some non-hominid ape species. So you don't think that it would be like people would go like, it's a man. He's standing up straight. We can't put him in a zero. Yeah. Well, I'm sure there'll be something that would say that. What do you think they would do? What is your honest opinion? Would they detain him? Would they have to let a hang out to him for a little while see if we could figure out his language? Or what if it's like killer whale? Like you just never figure out their language. Like you know they're smart, but like I don't know what you're saying, dude. And eventually just let him lose. Well, sure. There'll be all kinds of ethical questions if we come to that point. And what the outcome will be, you know, it's really hard to predict. I mean, because then you're not only dealing with the characteristics that you're dealing with human reaction, human attitudes, political agendas, whatever. Yeah, I'm sorry to what if you did death because it's what Duncan and I do all day. I think that's an important question. I think when you're out there looking for this thing, you do have to consider that your discovery of the thing might be the worst thing that ever happened to Sasquatch. The way your his enemy. Yeah. Well, you know, that's been been suggested to him brought up numerous times by various various people. I, you know, and one of my responses is simply the formal recognition, the discovery of the species. It's suddenly going to make it easy to go out and shoot a Sasquatch or to catch a Sasquatch. It's not going to change much at all. You know, there's a study underway now to examine extract and examine DNA from from hair. Samples attributed to Sasquatch. If that research or Dr. Brian Sykes, you know, from Oxford, if he discovers a novel sequence that confirms that there's a species out there, we don't recognize it's not going to change that situation. We still won't know anything else about them. DNA will only tell us so much and tell us about where it fits in the family tree, but not what it does on a daily basis or how intelligent it is or what I'm the president. Okay. And I come to you and I'm like, Dr. Melgerum, enough is enough. We need answers. We need a Sasquatch research team head up by you, sir. Will you accept this position? And you have unlimited resources to go find Sasquatch. What's your plan? Well, we've actually got an initiative. Thank you for the segue there. It's entitled the Falcon Project. And this is, uh, they're going to confuse people. They're going to think you're looking for birds. Well, why does it have to be thought? That's just badass. It doesn't matter. So bad. Falcon Falcon Project sounds like it's a comic book thing. Yeah, it does. Got it. Well, the person who is the originator of this notion, he picked that, he tells me just because Falcon's fly high and see far. And the premise of this approach is to use lighter than chips, helium filled dirigible. So drawn on mandrel. But with the capability of hovering, you know, and and going doing a grid search pattern using state of the art thermal imaging and high resolution videography. And then survey that way. Why a blimp though? Why a balloon aside from the fact that it's incredible. And I can't think of anything more psychedelic than to release a balloon into the forest to look for Bigfoot with zappling music playing. So that would be the move balloons. I think this is a not not entirely novel. These techniques are being used in wildlife survey studies already. I mean, there are companies that have popped up that that provide this service to government agencies, you know, fishing game and so forth. It's just the combination with this particular type of an airship. But I think it's the way to get at the daily behaviors and and ranging patterns and so forth of these creatures. On the ground, you're looking for that proverbial moving needle in the haystack. We're going to obviously combine the effort with ground insertion teams that will attempt to follow up to find trace and physical evidence. And how many people do you need? I'm the president member. Yeah. Well, not that limited budget. Not that many. We have doesn't do this. And we're going to need to take all these people out away from the DEA and give them real jobs. This is the move. Take the people from the DEA and put them in the the B.E.A. Now, the primal people though, we may have the problems with the Bigfoot enforcement. The commercial rights and so forth. If they are people, right? That that does become an issue. Right. Well, there's people that have said that they've shot them. And then of course, now they've passed laws saying in certain states, it's actually illegal to shoot a south branch. It is. Yeah. Not in all 50, right? No. It's usually by county. So, Bennett County, where I come from, we have a safe haven for some. Wow. Now, if someone did shoot a Sasquatch in your county, what's the what's the penalty? It's like a parking ticket. They were kind of egg on that. Yeah. What the penalty actually was. I guess we have to see. And that raises the question of their status. Right. Whether they're humans, non-human or human. Right. Why have there been no bodies? Why have there been no skulls? Why has there been no hair? Why why have there been lots of hair? Yeah. But none of it like substantiated as in fact by way of DNA. It's not a human by way of morphology. We've got hair that can't be attributed to any any commonly known wildlife that has consistent morphological characteristics. One of which is a hollow or a cellular medulla, the central core, which makes getting DNA from a hair that simply shed that doesn't have an actively dividing follicle. Very difficult. Very challenging. But it was proven to be actual real hair. Oh, yes. Definitely. Absolutely. So, it's an unknown animals hair. Right. Do you know whether what kind of animal is that known? Primate like. Primate. Well, definitely. Well, in the sense that non-primate mammals, fur-bearing mammals of North America have fur rather than simply hair. That means they have guard hairs, these long course tapering guard hairs that provide mechanical protection. And then the underlying differentiated layer of insulating hair. Very fine under fur. That's like down. Yeah. Like down on a bird. They have down in flight feathers. In mammals, it's guard hairs and under fur. Primates, though, don't have that differentiation. They have hair that's kind of like a modified guard hair. But it's untapered. It's long parallel tips, warm tips, no sign of ever been having been cut. Trimmed. Yeah. With a flowbie. That's okay. Sasquatch with flowwheel. What color is there? It ranges. We have, it correlates with the reported colors of Sasquatch, as seen by witnesses from almost quite, to John. Did you have almost why is it the Eddie or actual Sasquatch almost white? Well, Sasquatch is still talking about Sasquatch. So there have been white Sasquatch described by witnesses. Yeah. Rare. But that nevertheless seen all the way to black. The DNA on the hair comes up with nothing. Well, it's difficult to get DNA because there's, you know, the way hair is constructed, that you have a cuticle. And then you have layer called the cortex and then a central core. And in, in, if that core or medulla has cells stacked up in it, then that's usually where the DNA is extracted from. In animals that don't have a medulla present, a cellular medulla, then you have very little nuclear material of the cell left in that, in that shaft in that keratin shaft. And so getting any DNA in order to sequence, it is, is almost impossible. What are the party poopers say that that hair is? Well, they don't. They say, they say there's no evidence, you know, one way or the other. So it's basically, you've got this hair that hasn't been identified, but, you know, identifying hair is kind of more art than science because even on our bodies, we have hair that differs in appearance. Head, hair, beard hair, eyelashes, right. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Inside nose hairs, what the fuck are those all about? Those are ridiculous. Eyelashes for gods. Yeah. Eyebrows. No one's going to fit. Here's another thing. In the same way that I can't imagine someone taking the time to fake those footprints, no one's going to go through the woods with a bag of weird hair and scatter it through the forest. No, but you might pretend you found it. You don't have to go scatter it if you're pretending you found it yourself. But there's a lot of people that are full of poop, right? We know that. You know that. I know that. And this, this subject, particularly attracts a lot of them. I'm sure you're aware of the gentleman in Montana recently that was killed. Yeah. There's hilarious, but not hilarious because poor fellows just trying to hoax somebody. He had a Bigfoot suit on, got hit by one car driven by a 17 year old girl and then run over by another car driven by a 16 year old girl. He's a asshole. He's trying to scare kids. You know, well, that could cause a wreck anywhere. Yeah. Look, I have a 16 year old daughter. If he gets she got scared by an asshole and fake Bigfoot suit and got into a wreck, I'd be pissed. Yeah. Sure. So the world got a little lighter as Phil Hicks would say. We lost tomorrow on the this this phenomenon for whatever reason is well, I guess it's a bunch of reasons why people would want to hoax it. First of all, notoriety, second of all, because it's fun and third of all, because it's so similar to us. It's not like trying to we've tried to hoax the Loch Ness monster. That would be a pain in the ass. Yeah. But you know, you're a fairly big guy. We'll put you in a big monkey suit, put you at a distance. You know, have you wandering around, you know, as long as there's nothing we could line up for perspective, you look like a little, you know, we can get it off. Sure. Oh, yeah. There's lots of misidentifications. I mean, that's one of the problems of of eyewitness testimony is you're not only at the mercy of the witness's credibility, but honestly, even if they're sincere and genuine and what they think they saw, you have to evaluate their ability to evaluate their experience, to interpret what they like. Yeah, my memory is poop. My memory gets worse all the time, too. And especially because since we started doing the podcast and, you know, just having all this information, like rattle that me every day and dealing, having his long form three hour conversations. I don't remember who I said, what way is there when and I confuse stories. Sure. And you know what, also, and I don't know if there's any statistics for it, but I heard that there's a statistic that 40% of the people at Disneyland are on ecstasy at any given time. I heard that that's like a statistic, like the number of people on psychedelics there. And the same way in the forest, how many people camping are high? What's the person because I think it's 90% of the people who go camping are high. And I don't think that this discounts the fact that there's Bigfoot, but I would say that most of the people who see Bigfoot if they're out in the woods, they're probably stoned on top It's possible that they are, but I think another issue is that you may only be able to contact Bigfoot when you're high. I maybe that's it. Maybe it's the because the most important question we need to get on some mushrooms on the Pacific Northwest is overflowing with psilocybin mushrooms. I mean, they're everywhere. It's so rainy up there. It's just like the perdle perfect fertile ground for them. And a lot of people go up there to gather those things. Now, if you were up there and you were gathering those things, maybe that puts your mind into a certain frequency when Bigfoot's like, I know this guy's trippin. Let's go fuck with him. Yeah. And then Bigfoot shows himself, hey, dude. Plus those mushroom pickers are pretty territorial. So maybe they're just making up the stories to scare off the competition. Are they really? Well, they're mushroom people would be the least territorial. Oh, no, they're it's big. How do you you know, sir? I've run into a lot of my own run and go on. Yeah. I think I hasn't called them. Hey, meet me here with a bag. I've run into you and you run into my chat. My cash. I wonder if Bigfoot eats those mushrooms. I wonder if he does. Why wouldn't he's smart? The craziest trip is trippin with Bigfoot being Bigfoot. Oh, mushrooms. Yeah. Yeah. Trippin with Bigfoot is definitely a great kids, but I wonder if Bigfoot is pissed at all the wolves killing the elk. They have like serious issues with wolves killing elk and deer now because they reintroduced the, uh, they took a, a Canada wolf, which is a larger version the gray wolf and introduce them to Idaho and all these different areas. Now they have an problem. These things are running rampant and there's thousands of them. They're just in massive packs killing things. Well, they just opened a season in Idaho on wolves. That, that disturbs the shit out of people. Yeah. Yeah. And that's just a wolf. And it's because we see it as, you know, as a dog. I got to say, I think that you are a courageous person because you seem very level-headed. You seem completely logical and rational with all this stuff. And I think it must take an awful lot of patience to constantly end up in interviews with stoners asking you Bigfoot eats mushrooms. Yeah. Yeah. Well, there's, there's a lighter side. I've got, I've got a notebook with all the, uh, all the lighter stories that I'll publish one day. All right. Now here's something that you said, you'll be chapped. Unfortunately disturbs me. Here's something you said that unfortunately disturbs me. Okay. And that is, uh, you talked about the Patterson footage as if it wasn't BS. That Patterson footage to me looks like a blurry video of a dude in a monkey suit. Well, if it looks that blurry to you, then you haven't seen the best, uh, renditions, the best copies of the song. Are they online? Uh, there's one, there's one that's online. What's the best one? Well, I'm not sure if I can call it off top of my head, but the producer of the show just looked at me like, Oh, no, here we go. Yeah. Because you know, it's like, I got a thing for the Patterson footage. Well, one of the things we're fine. You got a lot of good stuff already. One of the things that's interesting is every time the film is a sailed by a critic or a pretender to be the man in, in, uh, in the suit, such as Bob or on a miss. Right. Um, the, uh, you know, it seems that the new technologies have become available in the intervening period and, and they're applied. One of those was, uh, the, uh, it was digital imagery by scanning that, uh, film digitally. The, uh, the image could be, uh, the color could be channel split. Uh, we know that the, the, the, um, lens that was used was not corrected for chromatic aberrations. So different colors, refracting different, uh, eventually through that lens. Well, you sure talked a good game, Mr. somatic aberrations. What would air you? When you split, you know, just, well, it's pop a mushroom and you'll understand what I'm talking about with these. Okay. Uh, rainbow colors. We split the colors. We can subtract away the least clear channels and just limit the image to the sharpest imagery. And boy, I, I tell you, you see that image as you've never seen it before. Um, and there are details. I, I've, you know, I'm, I'm working right now with a gentleman who is a former Hollywood makeup artist and, uh, and, costume fabricator, Bill Muns, he's also very good with, uh, with computer graphics, with photogrammetry and we're doing some really interesting work on the film. But, you know, when you stopped and think about the materials that were available in 1967, they didn't have four-way stretch for, they just had fur cloth, which when you make a costume out of it, even a, a padded costume, it looks like pajamas. It doesn't look like a fitted, a fitted costume. It doesn't look real to me that, that, that thing is not walk like a, a gorilla. It walks like somebody who's late for a meeting. Not only that, there's, there's not a girl. There's the context. There's something about, uh, human beings where when a human being is wearing a suit or you, you see a human being that's pretending to be something that they're not, it doesn't seem right. They walk like a human. You, you see that thing walk that to me feels like a human being. I've seen chimps walk on two legs. I've seen gorillas. I've seen primates move. They move differently than people do. They have a completely different anatomical structure. They feel different when you watch them. This feels like an asshole pretended to be Bigfoot. Well, also, here's a, let me just play Bigfoot advocate here. There is the possibility though. I mean, if you're, if you're shooting a Bigfoot hoax video, you're going to walk better than that. This, whoever did this is like, it's like he's in between takes going to use the bathroom or something. Well, this is just a dude. Is it with Bob Haranamest, the guy who like, says it's him. He's just a guy who is friends with Bob Patterson. And we've already been over the fact that Patterson like wrote a bad check to pay for the very camera that day. He's a shady character. He wasn't exactly the salt of the earth. But if you're going to look in, I'm sorry, but he went looking for Bigfoot and then found Bigfoot. That sounds so ridiculous. But if you're going to take the time to go on the forest with whatever that big suit is and to film yourself walking through the woods to make a hoax Bigfoot video, you're going to try to walk more like a gorilla or some supernatural thing. The stride of that thing is so bad and fake that it makes me believe that it's real. I got baked one night at the ice house and I was convincing myself for 20 minutes, I mind fuck myself and I completely convinced myself that it was real. And then I woke up. That's ridiculous. That's a kind of monkey suit. I'll just know what he was studying before Bigfoot because it's germane to his. Okay, we'll get to that. We'll get to that. But this, this film, have you ever looked at it and thought it was fake? Never. Well, I mean, I've questioned whether it was authentic or not, but I never come to a conclusion that it must have been faked. It's the holy grail of Bigfoot footage. Yeah, but that's not that's not the reason I that that no, I'm not. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, yeah, sure. It has set the bar. I guess that's what I would rather look at at that. It it sets the bar as high as it is for photographic evidence and anything that falls short of it since we're still debating it is certainly not going to tip the scales. But if it was fake, it would be devastating. No, no, it wouldn't because we still have this dozens and dozens, hundreds of footprints that fill my lab that that form the basis of of my conclusion. But I would think it would just be devastating just because people would be upset. They were claiming that it wasn't real. Or it was real. That would be ego wise. That would be a pressure. Especially to such a fringe belief anywhere, right? Sure, sure. But if all I had to go on was the correlated footprints were the correlated footprints from that film side. That would be enough to convince me that it's authentic. Really, the correlated filft footprints were very good. Well, yeah, this example that's so that one from Bluff Creek. That is. So that's from the Patterson footage. That is. Mm hmm. And that exhibits that whole mid-tarsal break you talk about. That's right. And you can see that kinematic that action in the foot of the film subject. So it's not. You know what it looks to mean when I watch it? It looks like a guy walking with ice gates on. You know when you have ice gates? Can you walk right? Well, that's what it looks like. That's that that effective the compliancy of the gate. They don't walk, you know, you said it doesn't look like a chimp. It doesn't look like a gorilla. And that's absolutely true because gorillas and chimps are quadrupeds. They're not bipeds. Well, actually, I said it looks like a person. That's what I said. When you watch a chimp move and you watch gorilla move, they don't look like human beings. This looks like a human being. Right. And that similarity is largely due to the fact that this is another biped that uses a mode of locomotion that's very similar, but not identical to our own. And one of those differences you point out with the ice skating is that effect of the compliant gate. You know, one of the things you notice, often notice in many of these footprints is compared to a human. There's not a real distinctive heel impression and a ball impression, which is the result of our arched foot that concentrates pressure under those ends of the arch. So we have a heel strike and a toe off when we walk. This creature, because of its great mass, has to distribute its weight over a larger surface area. So it walks more flat-footed without an arch. And then you've got the action that mid-tarsal break. You can see here's the deepest part of the footprint right there. And then the pressure ridge, the pressure release that's pushed up behind it. But in order to also reduce those reaction forces, though, that impact of the step, it walks with a slightly bent ankle knee and hip. And so instead of the head bobbing along, like we walk when Moroccan's briskly down, you know, the sidewalk, it smooths exactly. I've had eyewitnesses when they saw, they thought it was either levitating, floating through the air. One described it and said, look, it was on a bicycle because its head was just moving horizontally through space as it was walking so smoothly. So that's an interesting distinction. But to my eye, that confirms the credibility rather than refutes it. That's interesting. Still looks like a dude in a monkey seat, though. Well, it does. It's at the first glance, you know, but when you start looking at things like, you know, your bodybuilder, the attachment of the trapezius. Oh, yeah. I am. That's what you know. The attachment of the trapezius on the back of the head, you can see the traps come down to those massive shoulders. You can see the definition of the deltoids or you see a dude who has football pads on inside a girl. I don't know. I gotta tell you, you have such a smooth voice and such an easy way of talking about this. You could make me believe in leprechauns, unicorns. You mean you don't? That'd be fantastic. It's easy to get me to start believing, man. I start looking at it over and over again. I've been watching the video the entire time we're talking like, maybe, maybe, man, nobody would want it to be real more than me. That's why it disturbs me that I think it's fake because, man, I would want that to be real so bad. Almost as much as you first meet like, well, one of the interesting, you know, Rogers no longer here to defend himself, but Bob Gimlin, his partner is and Bob was kind of pulled in on this. He was, he was the friend who had the necessary horse trailer and equipment and so forth to make this kind of happen. And he got pulled in. He was interested. He, you know, heard the stories that Roger told when out riding with him, Mary, now and again, over by Mount St. Helens and Mount Adams, near the near where they lived in Yakima. But they had gone down there specifically because there had been footprints discovered a month earlier, a long line of tracks of three individuals, a 15-inch, which I'm convinced was her, and then a 13 and 11-inch, which probably were juvenile offspring of hers that were just in tow. They'd been down there for two weeks already. It was not like they just went down in two weeks. Wow, they put it in the time. They really deserve finding the first video footage ever of a giant ape-like man thing. Well, it's dumb luck. There's always a certain element of dumb luck in there. Or, yeah, of course. You can play it off either side of it, but you got away that, you know, even if, even if you dismiss it on the basis or if you hedge on the basis of those circumstantial evidences, then you got to account for the film. You know, that was the year that Planet of the Apes came out. Now, that was the state of the art in the industry for costumes. That has never been repeated in the industry. We quickly passed costumes, and if we were going to do it now, we'd do it with CGI. No one would even tackle that with a costume. All right, let me play devil's advocate real quick. Even the really good footage, let's be honest, it's blurry. If you went to see a movie and it looked like that, you'd be pissed. Sure. Well, it's a look at shit movie, are you making? I can't even see what's going on. It's a lot blurry. The trees, you can't see the leaves. Everything is like washed out. It's very difficult to distinguish really, really closely exactly what you're looking at. Well, there's enough detail that you can see the deep-set eyes. You can see the nose. You can see the split of the mouth. You can see the, see something. What about Bob Haranam? the you know the deep-set eyes you can see the nose you can see the split of the mouth you can see the well there see something yeah what about bob haranis the guy says that he was in the suit and the guy who when he walks looks like big foot well he doesn't actually want interesting not here's like a his lipper portions are completely off right you know what is not wearing a suit here's a funny little telltale tell tell tell sign okay you notice that when he tries to imitate the Patterson film he walks like any jibson he turns his his backhand back and far there was a there was a frame from the Patterson film that was widely published uh... sometime after it was actually a copy that was in the possession of uh... rina de hinden and it had a little blemish on the copy that made it look like there was a almost like a thumb and a forefinger making an okay sign that made it look like that hand was turned back like this uh... that's an artifact of the of the copy the hand is actually positioned like this it the palm doesn't face backwards but haranis trying to exemplify trying to emulate the posture exaggerates this egyptian hand posture based on that widely uh... published public side sounds to me like someone's got a little confirmation bias i don't look uh... that i don't want it to be real a little bit no no it's it's it's it sounds that way because i'm throwing out things that are based on very exhaustive evaluation of the film the exhaust evaluation of bob ro please do i just want to say look here's the thing if i'm going out in the woods and i've got this futuristic big foot suit and horses in the camera i'm gonna walk in a weird way i'm not gonna walk into you buddy right but me i would walk exactly like this kind of like you said you would walk like that yeah i would never know number one about the head movement thing i wouldn't know that this was some kind of primordial thing so these people seem to have deeply studied it to make something seem so fake or it's just walked straight and they filmed it all blurry and then we add all these things to her well yeah there's why is it exhibiting behavior that's so uncharacteristic of every other Sasquatch sighting every single Sasquatch sighting there like in the middle of the woods that don't come out in the open and stand there and when they walk while they walk that way why wouldn't go right back in the woods why is it walking diagonally when you have to give you a nice long view of itself as you got your camera it seems that way seems staged well one uh... there several possibilities just just give you an apologetic okay first one is this bullshit right first one of the book share this bullshit but the other is that one of them is that uh... first you have to know the lay of the land there and and we've been to the site we've surveyed the the line marks the trees the stumps and so forth this is a very deep canny with very steep walls at that point there's a wide girth there because of the flood that essentially scoured out that that creek bed and left that very convenient if you will uh... sandbar where those beautiful tracks could be laid down but it made a beeline uh... upstream some distance cross the creek and and once it was past that steep uh... narrow it opened up a bit and that's where it immediately went up up to higher elevation one explanations that's been offered is that it was no remember i i said that a month earlier there were actually three sets of tracks possibly to juveniles those aren't obvious here in in this footage and like i said i'm quite convinced that her tracks match those of the other fifteen inch set of tracks so she's obviously female if if it's real uh... and so she if she has some young and to one behavior of you know that exemplifies the material and stique is that broken wings syndrome where the mother walks off nonchalantly to lead the the intruders away from the sequestered offspring oh so the offspring over here so she's like straight making them follow her you know her offspring on that's uh... is not an odd thing to do in a place that's filled with predators and then he's seen two predators that's how they do it they would well you know what how much uh... uh... of a of a threat arguments you know i would think they're a huge threat which is why sasquatch is a hiding otherwise if they came down and got food from us we would feed him every day sure i mean i feed squirrels dude you tell me i wouldn't feed a sasquatch sasquatch showed up in the yard sure how they avoided trail cams well uh... there are a lot of animals that are capable of avoiding trail cams i mean there's actually growing literature showing everything from you know coyotes specifically especially uh... other predators like felids that uh... uh... exhibit avoidance behavior whether it's uh... electronic emissions whether it's light leakage whether it's sent whether it's just the novelty of something on that regular use trail that wasn't there the day before probably smells like yeah or something i had a i had a friend uh... he's uh... uh... wildlife biologist he's been working over in southeast asia and he said recently a bbc crew came over and they wanted to get uh... images of uh... elephants and they put out eighteen trail cams the elephants found and destroyed over half of them wow so elephants are very smart exactly kind of strange how smart they are exactly so so you know problem locking them up may well yeah again but it's uh... it's a question up in part of rarity of solitary and intelligence and behavior and and so on you know you know it isn't it possible that this creature has evolved the ability to hide wait let me ask that again isn't it possible that this creature has evolved beyond other beings when it comes to the ability to hide maybe whatever this is is super advanced and camouflaging itself in a way that we've never seen well it's possible i i i don't think that you we really have to resort to extraordinary explanations for it at hiding i mean other animals are very capable of remaining undetected it's just a matter of odds i mean how many times when you've gone out or you know people uh... i just drove through yelestine you know and and got caught up in these traffic jams where people who would um... uh... stopped to see the bear or the bison but there are hundreds of bison out there that are never seen you know but when you have that many scattered across lands gave the chances of bumping into one increase but if you're talking about a very rare animal you know something like a a world reen or a fisher or martin you know you can talk to people who spent lots of time in the woods who have never had a sighting of one of those animals so it's just you know for me it's it's a matter of uh... statistics just just probabilities of of encountering but gee you know if we don't see something move a vertical line especially is is very cryptic in the woods where we're used to be seeing things that are horizontally oriented like the back of a deer or a bear whatever but it's kind of like that uh... closing scene in uh... harry and the hennerson's when suddenly the how dare you quote harry in the hennerson's when you come on a show to talk to us about serious big quick big with so good science by the way that's a pretty obscure reference pal from most normal folks most normal folks are not like quoting harry in the hennerson's what what happened harry and well in the final scene when harry's sent baka in the woods then moment then out out from the landscape emerges his whole family and they were standing there right in front of you but just because they were still you didn't see them and as soon as they put cute when it's a movie well right but there's there's truth to that we we really pick up our our brain zero zen on a movement you know a movement in that but if it's absolutely still uh... we have a hard time sometimes like they like in predator yeah exactly how much credence do you give to uh... the idea that they're all over the country oh very little uh... they're they're their distribution again assuming they exist for a moment is very ecologically based so we don't find them in the middle of wheat fields of Kansas or or uh... you know west texas we find them where there's sufficient rainfall to support coniferous and understory that that's productive enough to support large omnivore so if you looked at a few got a guide to mammals and flipped open to american black bear for example looked at the distribution or better yet flip open to my field guide you have a Sasquatch field guide i have a Sasquatch field guide and laminated isn't it's yeah so water on some um... but there is a uh... if i can find it here there is a uh... distribution map of a hypothetical distribution where can i get one of those um... well i can give you a uh... address to send a check too and get one of the area you just you just got money out of you how much this is uh... well with the with postage it would be eleven fifty okay again the united by it for you american's buddy anyway but uh... there there's a distribution map and what's interesting is it's very similar to the distribution map for american black bears because there's another omnivore that needs a certain amount of uh... productive habitat and uh... you know there's lots of space on that map where there's no uh... there's no evidence of any of any Sasquatch existing so your your um... your belief is that you're dealing with a pacific northwest primarily and then possibly a few other spots like kennet kitt shit well the the backside of the apple a so if you go across the borel forest of canada right down the backside of the apple a show in new england states canada kitt canada kitt well could be that's really densely populated state yeah canada hide a high or jogging but down the backside of the apple a show even even eastern alhio it's pretty surprising really there's no there's some support for so you believe alhio maybe possibly pennsylvania uh... yeah western pennsylvania lorida florida skincare sure really some of that some that there's a lot of my experience has been uh... and for a long time i simply used the you know the uh... easy caveat that i didn't have the time resources to consider all the evidence east of the missus if he but my experience has been that the data that has come from those areas that might corroborate such sightings is pretty scanned and there's a lot of things that are just not credible what's like math like meth lot of math and for a i think it's a sense of it now i want to can you talk a little bit about the way that a big foot smells well yeah oftentimes in this the skunk a you know is a moniker that uh... drives from that suppose it's stench but uh... essentially when you look at the statistics uh... collated from lots and lots of sightings uh... a stench is only reported about ten percent of the of the certain of the sightings that suggests to me that they don't continually smell badly tard to our nose but that they're capable of executing the smell uh... great age like bike champs and gorillas have very well developed at slurry organs the uh... the uh... apocrine sweat glands right the things that that when we sweat when we're nervous as opposed to the watery sweat that is used in evaporative cooling and uh... when animals are wind like gorillas jing uh... dianfossi rather excuse me she describes the first time up silverback bluff charge to her came barrel and down at her she hunker down you know and averted her gaze and and it stopped just a foot short of her but she said she was nearly bold over by this locker room sent that it was emitting oh my god and uh... and she was probably a meeting one by that point that's some magic how horrifying that would be uh... you got a giant silverback charge you know exactly so close you can smell is stank so so whether it's fear or uh... attention or uh... intimidation uh... they're probably capable of exuding that kind of smell under those circumstances just like a skunk july skunk we're in on my backyard the other night and uh... i had explained to my daughter that you can't get too close to the skunk there's skunk wandering the backyard we have chickens and the skunk is found out we have chickens by the way skunk are murderers okay they're very carnivorous they're predators and they were looking to kill my chickens and they actually drink their blood that's what how they get they gank their neck and drink their blood so cute little skunks pebby le pew they're not so much they're the little monsters but you know i had explained to her like i go if it gets you the smell is unbelievably bad and you know she's five is only only you're talking about the smell at all i'm like it can smell it smells on purpose that's a weird thing the ability to spray that stuff on purpose and they can only do it i heard they can only do it ten times a year skunks yeah well they can't they only have a certain amount that they could spray so whenever they spray they have to mean it a rate of production it was fascinating is that smell that um... that we can recognize in just uh... small parts per million right that's how dogs smell us yeah but not so bad i'm sure but they can smell the of the ability to recognize us the way we can recognize skunks which is it really puts it in perspective because there's very few smells that are like that that are squirted out by a small animal that can spread for blocks and blocks you know that when you're driving you're in your car you smell it through your vents right you know it's super powerful so um mostly pacific northwest or anywhere where there's large desk for us right who's the most credible eyewitness that you've ever talked to all there been several what one that that always comes to mind when i mass that though is uh... uh... lady by the name of the julie devis who had a remarkable encounter in the south sandwands of uh... of cholorado she's a very avid uh... goat packer and she's hiked the entire uh... continental divide trail through cholorado and uh... her story was uh... was recounted in the denver post uh... in a big feature article but and i've i've spent uh... over a month uh... in the in the back country with her and a couple other researchers and got to know her very well and been in her home heard her recount her uh... recollections over campfire and uh... you know when when someone had a shares that kind of experience or well hers is worth retelling very quickly she was off trail uh... with her goats and a couple of dogs the dogs were acting up she suspected maybe that uh... she was being stalked by a bear and and there's still our grizzlies in the supposedly still our grizzlies is the area of the so-called ghost grizzlies where they they think they're extinct and then a hundred shoots one and it's a female and she's obviously obviously suckled cubs so there's still are some grizzlies out there perhaps well part of the where south uh... colorado rakis uh... the ymanage country in the south and ones but uh... at one point she um... her dogs were again acting up she was kind of on on the lookout she didn't want her dogs to tangle with the bear so she was taking the dogs towards the tent in stepped into the tent and got her pepper spray and uh... suddenly the goats approach the tent they weren't looking at her though they were looking up above the tent and so she stepped out thinking she was going to confront a bear and have to spray it and they're standing right behind her tent so about from me to you just a small dome tent is this eight foot tall hairy figure locking eyes with her and this is in the middle of the afternoon in broad daylight and i've had close quarters she said uh... she looked at her it looked at the goats it looked back at her it was apparently fascinated by these funny looking animals and encountered before perhaps and uh... she said she had a sort of a subliminal uh... impression suddenly that that i won't bother you if you want bother me and uh... she said that uh... when she had that wreck that that sense it's demeanor kind of softened the edge sort of went off and at that point a second one that was standing right behind it a slightly smaller one peered out from around the bigger one and they sat and kind of stared each other for you know probably what seemed like an eternity was just a few seconds and then they both turned and they headed off towards the tree line and disappear but we go yeah that's all i can see a candy ever and soda have a go she didn't uh... she didn't dare tell anyone for years about it because of the fear of the stigma god i would give about a thousand dollars and off that's true yeah exactly not even the experience myself just to know she was telling truth well and as i said it's one thing to you know in your position to have said well yeah you know it could be it could be it couldn't be but when when you when it's someone that you have come to know and you count as a friend as a closer point right then you know how all well you were mistaken you know it was just a bare standing upright from ten feet away you uh... you know you just imagined it or you've misinterpreted it you brain blue fuse or are you lying to me you know you're just making this up for attention we spoke to one woman who had barber who had an incredibly compelling story yep so we yeah i've i've talked to people that have stories and make it to go boy which i knew well yeah people are having experiences again you comes back to this issue of of how do you interpret those experiences how credible are they that's really gotta be where the madness is because you can't discount unique experiences you really can't you can't and but but i always kind of push for the corroboration you know i want to see an associate footprint i want to see a strand of hair that that matches that sort of uh... standard or that uh... archetype of the hair of sasquatch that that's kind of the the gold standard to see i guess uh... because then then there's another dimension to it that takes some of the subjectivity out of the evaluation of the experience for me anyway is this your full-time job do you know uh... no i mean i'm i teach i do research you know i i publish on uh... hominid evolution and bipedalism it it takes a significant amount but i see it as one facet a very complimentary facet to my my other research some of the insights that i've gained from studying carefully the sasquatch footprints have actually uh... fueled new interpretations of some of the hominid footprint evidence that have uh... that have uh... caused me to advocate some different alternate interpretations of some of that early evidence besides bigfoot what are the other bigfoot like creatures that you believe possibly exist right well there that you know there's the reports of all all around the globe of of different sorts of things not all related now interestingly there's reports of very sasquatch like creatures in eastern russia and uh... china and even down in southeast asia uh... in fact you've got from southeast asia cross mine amar northeast along the foothills of the Himalayas up around the premier and al-tyranges on the border in Mongolia even as far uh... west is the caucuses between the caspian of black seas there are these gigantic reports uh... evidence of gigantic footprints left by large bipedal creatures very similar to sasquatch they have the same mid-tarcel break in the footprints that well uh... we have a much scanner fossil record they they resemble i mean one of the tracks from the caucuses that a research in fact i'm going to the caucuses this august uh... to work with this researcher who came back with a footprint that was cast by a villager uh... from a long line of tracks that that most of the village witnessed of a big hairy creature that walked uh... walk through this uh... this uh... fallow field um... they they resemble remarkably the sasquatch footprints uh... so this might be the former range of you know jagged apithecus or giant parenthesis or some other hominid uh... there's there's the Himalayan yeti and uh... there is unfortunately scant evidence for it i've gone through as systematically as possible in the evaluated all the footprint evidence attributed yeti much of it's just unintelligible the snow you know the prince of melted out or sublimated nor the snowy evaporates at the high altitude uh... another significant fraction or bears absolutely bears and it kind of boils down to probably two specimens the famous uh... shipton photo from the meningl in glacier back in the fifties what's the name of that uh... eric shipton s-h-i-p-t-o-n and another one this i find even much more compelling is the michnili cronnie footprint the michnili cronnie expedition to the aaron valley in uh... in the Himalayas those suggested uh... a creature that's actually probably much more akin to this individual they exhibit a opposable or divergent big toe in fact the michnili cronnie particularly looked just like an oversized chimpanzee with short stout digits hold this up here so you feel like the yeti might possibly if it's real my possible be a different animal or another different undisclosed right probably probably one that's still our boreal that lives not up in the snow fields but down in the uh... subtropical to temperate uh... valleys of the high uh... mid-himillae as i guess you'd say like the aaron valley i mean that michnili jeff michnili and ed cronnie were were uh... biologists who were conducting a two-year biological survey of the wildlife in that area wildlife and the flora and so when they when they woke up one morning found a line of tracks that came up very steep slope through three feet of snow bipedally uh... on a ridge uh... leading to the past that they were just about to go over themselves made a detour meandered in amongst the brightly color tents and then continue down over the past and they lost the trail in a roated and thicket but here were these chimpanzee like very large chimpanzee like footprints do you are met do you but what's your take on aliens or extra trash drills do you believe in uf's well you know i was a shoe that that term believe it doesn't matter if i believe or not that uh... i i've not busy myself with the the evidence i mean i i saw it i uf o and an identified flying object myself one time we are out looking at stars with you know date do you think big foot possibly was in that you know i don't think so i don't think so you never know until you know you know you know you imagine that what a mind-fucked i would be been put from another planet and just lands and like to go for walks through the woods just like everybody else all i saw was it was a point of light you know when we were kids we would sleep out on the sundex and we count the satellites as they went over a very particular kind of oblique orbits this thing was going north to south and which would have been fine except that it executed to writing returns in succession i mean absolutely writing returns just as sharp as if you put a square up there in this guy and wow and and so i you know both our jaws dropped and did you see that maybe this the government because it's trying to throw you off this big foot thing by making you look even more this is a way before that this is back in college maybe they have a time machine and they knew that you were going to be one of the most prominent problem well that that's the thing about a big for research all all these conspiracy theories if there's men in black out there you know harassing and and intimidating these uh... bigfoot investigators either i'm a good uh... disseminator of disinformation or something that's no one's ever shown up at my lab they don't bother you at all never bother so you could yet so the ideas you probably work for the ci you trained underground as your hypnotic soothing voice you get around the stoneers convinced them bigfoot exists leave little breadcrumb trails you know right you're the one with that bag of hairs i knew you're right sit you're a government agent uh... the the possibility that sasquatch predated humans in north america uh... you brought that up what about the possibility that there's some sort of a hybrid between humans and sasquatch is that yeah i think it's very unlikely i mean i actually am aware of a couple of interesting stories from native american sources that suggested that uh... that there was the possibility of uh... inner so you feel like there's a yeti which m if may or may not exist but if it does is a completely different species and then there's a sasquatch there has been some talk about hybrids and including the melba ketchum dn a results which she reports to indicate some sort of a human and uh... primate unknown primate hybrid would you have you feel about the results of those uh... i don't hold those in in in very high regard uh... i don't think that her uh... results are that credible reliable and certainly her interpretation of the data is highly questionable also important note that when you say human sasquatch hybrid what you're saying is that someone wasn't just lucky enough to discover a big foot but they were also able to make love with the big for what we're talking about a long time ago and most likely they didn't even make love with the big foot they may love with another thing and created big foot right that's that's her her thesis yet it's not being looked at with uh... well it wrote color glasses i mean even setting the in any supposed data side for a moment just to think about the the the the feasibility of that scenario you have to have two populations that are least close enough that they're going to produce a viable and a fertile offspring and yet they're different enough that that offspring isn't subsumed into one or the other of the parental population and and just you know diluted back into the gene pool they they remain distinct and then the crosses have to be frequent enough the the you know the the hooking up at the yeah like that the book that there's that there's a substantial population then that that accrues and and that becomes sasquatch and somehow gets from Europe to north america and other parts of asia and relinquishes all material culture and and other accoutrements of humanity and i mean it just it kind of uh... not only that how big must that thing have been right people are our size and then there's sasquatch which is even bigger yeah this thing had to be even bigger than sasquatch that's actually a person made something in the middle right is it worked that way no it doesn't science does not work that way you know why it doesn't work that way lagers lagers are way bigger than tigers or lions yeah well yeah i mean there there are yeah you can you can point to examples that they do lions and tigers really aren't good biological species because they do when they when the opportunity presents they do cross and produce viable offspring but the viable offerings are sterile are they not no lagers my understanding is that lagers are not sterile really yeah that you can you could breed you can in fact uh... one of not pocatellos but eastern Idaho's claim to fame was liger town a couple of uh... unscrupulous individuals that that were were breeding and but not taking a care of them and all hek bros broke loose when they showed up outside of a school playground the lagers do yeah and no well they they found well beaten paths where they were getting out on a regular basis before they were finally discovered and yeah it was it was pretty but that that's an interesting interesting possible scenario now i i started to mention that there's a couple of native american uh... accounts that suggest you know there's always been this team of abduction of of the uh... you know that the sasquatch abducting uh... human females but the only to that i'm aware of upon which i can base any you know any evaluation reported that there was a pregnancy there was a birth but the individual grew very rapidly very sickly and died and was stunted mentally and died before the you know reaching teen years suggesting it wasn't viable and probably wouldn't have been fertile and this was an abduction yeah one big foot abducted in native american woman made love to her brought her back and she had a baby that died why do you bring her back or she got away or whatever i mean she was annoying happy big foot that would be really cool you know it's like a lot of hookups build it up in your mind you know and then you get together with her in the reality sets in yeah maybe she's an artist i think that with big foot i mean there they they sound like just so stories but you know we have uh... some precedent baruti galdicus the the rengatan lady researcher she and her book reflections of eden recounts uh... an instance where at a provisioning station her native assistant was accosted by a young male uh... a rengatan who completed the deed and uh... but he had been he was a her rehabilitated or a repatriated i guess you'd say rehabilitate i'm sure what the proper term is there one that had been confiscated and then raised and and trained to return to the wood so it had some contact with humans previously but the but the point simply being is that that scenario is not completely out of the question right the question is what's the probability of there being a successful impregnation between two different species now i've never i just stop you i i would wait for it seems like ability of there being a successful impregnation between two different species. Now, I've never, I just stopped being, I would, if it, it seems like if an orangutan had made love to a woman that I would have heard of that by now. And you would have too. I don't think so. There's that lady in Connecticut that was almost, almost definitely sleeping with her chimp. She was given it wine and Xanax slept in the bed with her. It was very jealous of her. I know that. Yeah, she's probably having sex with that thing. This is different from being on an expedition and having a rangutan barrel out of the forest and fuck you. Yeah, but I think it's probably pretty standard for rangantangs. They're bigger. We're smaller. They fuck us. I think that's what they do in their horny. I don't think they really think about it. There would be a blog dedicated to it at least. No, just not enough contact with people with cell phones that live. You tell us that this was a Pandora's box, wasn't it? So it shows a Pandora's box. Sorry, I apologize for that. The Jane Goodall quote, boy, when Jane Goodall came out and said that she believes 100 percent that Sasquatch is a real animal, did you go? Yes. You must have been so pumped. Well, I followed up and tried to see if she would read my book manuscript and possibly endorse it, which she did. So the cover of my book boasts an endorsement from Dr. Goodall. Oh, have you spoken with her? I have. Yes. What's her number one thing that she locks on to as far as the proof? One of the things that really impressed her was the accounts by Native Americans that she's come to become acquainted with and the fact that they've had these encounters and that they, that their oral traditions are so deep-rooted about interactions and, you know, encounters with these creatures, that they're part of the, of the real landscape, as well as, you know, as with so many animals, the Native American stories often have are very metaphorical, very like ESOPS fables, they, you know, convey, convey morals and so forth. And so they're oftentimes the animals are given anthropomorphic characteristics and or supernatural characteristics. But that doesn't change the fact that, you know, the clever and trickster coyote is based on a real species of animal. Yeah. So the wild man of the woods is probably the same. This Jane could all think of this footage. You know, I haven't, I haven't had that opportunity. Our conversations have always been very brief. Unfortunately, we haven't had the opportunity to sit down and speak at any great length. But so I don't know what she would say about the, about the footage. What was your background before you became intoxicated with the big foot legend? Right. Well, my, my training is in anatomical sciences with an emphasis in physical anthropology. So much of my days spent teaching human growth anatomy, full body dissection lab course to health professions programs. So, you know, I've been involved with the dissection of hundreds and hundreds of human bodies. Know that machinery inside and out, my research revolves around the evolution of human adaptations, particularly those for walking on two legs. And more specifically, the interpretation of foot form and function as it relates to, to bipedalism and arboreality and other other primates like the great apes and monkeys. You're, you're living in Washington state. Is that what you live? Idaho. Idaho. Idaho state. I see in woodsie out there, right? Well, Pocatella is kind of a plunk there on the edge of the sagebrush step. So we have to go a little ways to get to the woodsie. But there's lots of wild country. We're just two hours away from the T-tons and Yellowstone National Park and, uh, you went to the south of us. So there's, there's some rope prime territory. So you can go squash and pretty close to your house. Sure. Can you do, do you do that? I've, I've gone, I go out with a colleague, John Meinsinski is a wildlife consultant and ethnobotanist. And we've done a lot of work in Western Wyoming, together. And, uh, for a number of years, we've spent at least a month at a time in the field looking for trace evidence and trying to get DNA, uh, with various, by various means. Would you say that you spend more time dissecting human bodies or hunting for Bigfoot? You're dissecting human bodies, yeah. But Bigfoot's really fun and dissecting bodies get boring after a while, right? Well, I never lose that. Uh, it has a certain, uh, novelty to it every each and every year. I mean, everybody's a little different and, and sharing that experience, you know, there's a really unique opportunity for students to have that very intimate, uh, experience of dismantling that marvelous machine that's the human body. So it never, it never really gets old. So the record just, uh, for the show, would you look at me and tell me exactly who you are and what your, um, credentials are. Yeah. My name is Jeff Meldrum. I'm a professor of anatomy and anthropology at Idaho State University. Uh, I teach primarily anatomy and research, uh, the evolution of human bipedalism. I hope you're right. Me too. I, I, I'm seriously rooting for you. There's not a lot of subjects that I really hope are true, but Bigfoot, man. For me, it has always been the one UFOs. I'm pretty sure there's life out there whether or not it's videos, excuse me, whether or not it's visited us. I'm, I'm sort of, I'm just iffy on that. But Bigfoot, I'm all been for man. I'm caught. I want it to be real. Well, it's interesting. There was a recently, uh, the, the cover story of new scientists magazine this year was, uh, of one issue was what are the top 10 questions that face human evolution that students have researchers of human evolution today? And number nine was our other hominins alive today. So it's gaining some traction. This notion of relic hominoids. I've actually launched a, a nonline scholarly journal peer reviewed journal called the relic hominoid inquiry to provide a venue for discussion and publication of, uh, research on this topic. And so it's, it's making inroads. A homophoresiensis that you're so interested in that. That was really an interesting thing. Yeah, because here these, these discovers kind of scratch their heads and admit to the reporters. Well, yeah, actually the local people have been describing these little three foot tall hairy people that live up in the mountains and, and, uh, even some of the European colonists have described encounters with them all along. And that had been folklore for the longest time and thought to be nothing but just stories exactly until they found these bones. Was it like 2006 or something like that? Yeah, it's just been a few, a few years. Little tiny three foot tall non human people, right? Right. They say, good levity. No, no, no, they fly. They just fly. They don't love it. They'll like Superman. No. Superman levity. They walk through trees. Right. The, the rock right through the tree. They become one with the tree. From, from what I read, the little people can fly. Where are the little people? I mean, there's also the orang pandak, right? Right. Right. Where's that thing supposed to live? Asia. So, florès is a little island of Indonesia, but there are reports of these small hominids all throughout Southeast Asia. Recent reports, right? Oh, yes, contemporary reports, absolutely. As well as the native tradition. There's still a lot. Yeah, there's a little tiny thing for us. It's very smart, apparently. Well, yeah, I think people in very smart. Yeah. Past any stuff, never. Dr. Melchum, seriously, thank you so much. And thank you for all this work because if it wasn't for a guy like you, an actual intellectual smart dude who is obsessed with Bigfoot as well, it would be so sketchy because you're getting this information from all these various sources. Some of them highly doped up. You know, it's hard. It's hard to celebrate the week from the shaft. Don't we say the week from the shaft? Week from the shaft. Yeah, yeah. It's hard. I don't think it's shaft. It's shaft, I think it's the proper term. It's hard, you know, when you're a person like myself who is not educating an anthropology to dissect this stuff. And if it wasn't for people like you out there, I think the overall picture will be far muddier. So thank you, sir. Really, really appreciate it. And an honor having you on, really appreciate it. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. Awesome. Thank you.