The general gonna experience. Are you a big ghost guy? I believe it's possible. I'm obsessed. Are you? I'm so really weird side hobby of mine. I go ghost hunting. I've been like around the world. Yeah Incredible what have you experienced? Have you ever had like an absolute moment when you like oh my god I'm in the presence of a poltergeist Not Still not a thousand percent. I've definitely witnessed things that I cannot for the life of me explain That have creeped me out the timing has been impeccable I've seen things move that there's just no fucking way that they've moved. I've got an answer is back on EVPs But for me it is one of the things I do need to see it isn't the EVP like a radio though No, EVP is just a recorder. It's a record. What is not what's that radio? I'm sorry, but it's the one where they will they like listen There's a bunch of different my daughters heavily into this shit. What does she watch? Sam and Colby you had them on right yes, so I Met these other guys there's another channel called the overnight channel who are equally as popular as Sam and Colby And they actually used to work together and I believe they spit off into each of their own thing But that's who I started going with so I'm very familiar with those guys So these kids the the salmon Colby guys just went into the Conjuring house. I was just there Maybe a month and a half you went into the Conjuring house by myself Joe. Okay, do you believe that there's something going on in that house? The conjuring movies are fucking great. It's my favorite franchise. They're fun I'm so many of them. They really did it right. Like you want to be smart. They branched off with the none They branched off with them about and I love the way they tie in the store I want to make it all one chronological story. It's genius. Yeah, I Will say I wasn't I Wasn't as scared as I've been in a lot of places. We've been there is some kind of Solace to the house, but you get to know the history of it and it just it does make sense that there'd be something here I mean it's on some lay lines of water underground. It's there was war spot there. There's apparently bodies buried on on the property in the walls of The the property structures and stuff There's a lot of history that goes into it They just makes like kind of the perfect storm for some creepy shit, but I didn't witness anything That was that in saying some items move some some cars rolled off of the children's dressers a couple of times on cue and That's what that's the one thing I do pride ourselves in these videos is so often we get absolutely nothing because we don't fake anything So you only get to see the highlights like there's so many times We'll go to a place that is so notoriously haunted and we'll be there for ten hours and get absolutely nothing and it sucks But that makes when something does happen that much more valuable. It's so much more impressive What do you think? So do you think a ghost is like a The soul of a person that's left behind or do you think the ghost is almost like space and time? because of a horrible incident container memory and Like that memory is almost like it it like shows up in current times sometimes This is a kind of Rupert Sheldrake. I forget what his field of study is but he had this theory about Things and he believes that objects contain memories. Oh interesting. It's not he's not the only one of them in objects Yeah, that things contain memories and this is one of the reasons why like people kind of universally support this idea that if someone was murdered in a house You must tell the people and form the people that are about to buy it. You have to tell them hey Somebody got murdered in this house like maybe you don't maybe you don't want to buy this house Now does the maybe you should think about it? This is the potential owner have to ask that information. It's a good question I'd want to know. Yeah, I think it's a good question I think they should have to inform you because there's something about someone being murdered in a spot that freaks us out and This is my question How you knew the conjured house was haunted right so you go there with this feeling in this expectation That's what I always wonder about these things like how much of how much of and it this isn't just imagining things This is like the mind itself seems to have some Unmeasured effect on the world. Yeah I think the way you think has an Unmeasured effect in terms of like this there's energy that you put out There's connections you make with people. They're very very unmeasured And you don't manifest your own perception of things for sure. Yeah, so one my concern is is like if you go into a place with a pre-existing knowledge of ghosts like you think ghosts are here You think ghosts are real you have this thought in your mind that you you maybe experience a ghost in this place It's haunted you're at it this elevated level of anticipation You're probably really nervous and kind of freaked out and your imagination starts firing up And I'm not even saying that these people are lying or that they're seeing things that aren't there I'm saying maybe you make things show up maybe you see memories maybe you experience Some horrible energy that existed in this spot 50 years ago A hundred years ago that there's like ways you can tune into that I could see that being possible But to me that's what's so exciting about it is like you you go hoping for those solidified answers You're going to hoping to witness something that you couldn't have possibly made up But you know why I think that too is like you never see him in the daytime Ghosts don't exist on the street. Sometimes you have a not outside. They're never outside. That's a very good point That's my point is like you're always trapped So you're always in this like weird space like if you had a wolf in your house you'd be freaked out You get outside. Yeah, right? You don't a wolf in the far It's a fucking wolf in house. Yeah, anytime you're in a contained area your brain has this heightened sense of Like being trapped in awareness and how do you escape? I mean every horror movies are same when you gotta get to the door get to the door, right? Everybody's trying to fumble with the keys the monsters chasing them and they get it just in time right? That is a reoccurring theme in the human mind If you're trapped in a fucking house with a killer or a ghost or a wolf in a scare You know where that makes the most sense we did the USS Hornet up in the Bay area Yeah, and we had the whole ship to ourselves which I was so excited about because I love military stuff I love history I was so excited to go there and just witness it and they sent me by myself on a bit Basically a game of hide and seek where they had to go find them in the ship somewhere after I had to like count to a hundred by myself It was the most terrifying place that I've ever been because if you've never been in like the bowel of a ship It's so unfamiliar Like doorways don't look the same you know you have to step over and everything There's so many pipes and everything sticking out. It's such an unfamiliar environment especially in the dark It's terrifying you think I can't possibly run away from something in here. It's to there's too many obstacles You don't you don't know that's a wall or a pipe or something peeking around to like look at you It's fucking terrifying because of exactly that you feel so trapped