The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day How'd you make back? So we were doing some stupid TikTok stuff during the pandemic and we were all challenging each other to do like stupid stuff and for some reason That was a great idea to try to jump off of a second story balcony onto a bean bag But I missed I missed the bean bag. This will be back completely. Oh no. Yeah, so you broke your back Yeah, I was you know I did it a couple times the previous week And I was like I got this this is gonna be fine and then I missed the bean bag and so you know I think I only fractured a couple bones there But you definitely took that's a real problem though. Yeah. Is this your your oh jeez It's it's it's Carusum if you actually see it so what did you get? Oh? So do you have to get surgery? I didn't have to get surgery, but I was in a back brace for like six months. Wow So that was really bad. How do you ever wonder? That like you guys ring all these fucking haunted places Do you ever wonder if you're carrying any that shit around with you? Well Definitely what was crazy is a lot of people think that the sign of something being with you is like back pain But now that I've broken my back. I'm like I can't I can't That's a real back pain not like well. There's back pain where people just like there's psychosomatic back pain Like there's a guy named John's it wasn't John Sarnos Is that his name? He he had this weird theory about back pain that applied to some people not people with actual really injuries But some people that it's all in your head It's people that are like like deeply stressed out and fucked up and it manifests itself as back pain and Somehow or another through his teaching a lot of people including Howard Stern Didn't Howard Stern have a thing with his back where John Sarnos fixed it. There is a picture of him Yeah, America's most famous back pain doctor said pain is in your head Thousands think he's right. Well millions think he's wrong He's not right like sometimes you have fucking real back pain for sure That's it but for crazy people for some people like you know you just have something in your head and it's like My back, but it's really your psychology You're carrying around with you now speaking carrying things around a lot of people warn us that like because we go into so many haunted places They're like guys you should be careful like aren't you worried about bringing this home or bringing this to other people? Yeah I mean we walked in here obviously it's probably just like coincidence. We walked here immediately You know your curtain fellow not yet. That's a curve. That's not up for two years Never had a problem and then Jamie asked you a question you guys ever investigate anything that's bullshit You're like yeah, definitely and then boom the curtain falls. Yeah Like it's rigged Like they're listening Wonderin Jamie was that some you set up, you know definitely isn't I know Jamie he's a hundred percent Anti bullshit do you Do you feel like that's possible that you could carry something like that with you We have a lot of people that tell us that we don't necessarily buy into it all that much like there's definitely things that Reoccur place to place and it's not like You know the same it's not supposed to be the same haunting or whatever, but we get the same thing That we think has been following us from multiple places do we a hundred percent buy that? I don't know but what's really weird is when people will look you dead in the eye and they'll be like There is someone behind you and I've seen them for there for like an hour and I'm like I can't see that but I'm also not gonna like brush that off my shoulder and saying that's like not there So someone has said there's someone behind you, but there's no one behind you So who are those people that said there's someone behind you well? I mean a bunch of different people like for us We talked to a lot of people that are like mediums are like they like do tours or ghost hunts or anything like this But obviously people We can't see these sides of the thing so we got to take other people's word for it We're not saying part of the problem is there's like an incentive to Sense things and feel things. I'm not anti-ghost by any stretch of the imagination I am open-minded But I know that there's a lot of people that like to pretend They like to pretend they have psychic powers. They like to pretend they know things They like to pretend they've experienced things like I've talked to so many people that have experienced like UFOs and I've talked to Bigfoot people The yeah, they've met Bigfoot like it's there's people that pretend but then there's also The thing that freaks me out about ghosts is that it's been a reoccurring theme throughout human history and It's always it seems to be connected to some horrific death like whenever there's a horrific death. It's almost like like that horrible moment like Burns space and time and leaves a residue A lot of people think that's like trauma like built into the place or like energies there right Yeah, to your point though what's crazy about it is everybody Like has had experiences over over time like you walk into any room and Whether people believe or whether people don't someone's got a story It's almost like okay. I don't know if I believe but there's one time This happened and so the fact that like everyone like pretty much no matter where you go Like has some sort of story even if they're skeptical it makes you wonder like what if what else is out there? Yeah, there's been countless of times we'll go to these spots and like maybe we after hearing the story We don't think it's gonna be like special at all But the person who owns this spot is like I levitated last week Just staring us straight in the eyes. No hesitation like about it And like obviously we've never experienced something that intense with the paranormal but having Dozens of people like every place we go to say that. It's like how do you what's this? 11 day just say hey next time set up your life. Yeah, okay. I can't film yourself levitating Exactly Yeah, look at them and be like are you sure like how what kind of meds are you on? You're never doing yeah, how did this that if you guys have ever been in the comedy store No, but we were trying to yeah listen. I can set that up the commie store is without a doubt haunted There's a place that's haunted in the world It's the commie store because it used to be a mob nightclub and they've murdered people there 100% and was bugsy seagulls nightclub It was called seros and in the 1950s. It was at the 50s and the 60s What it was? But in the 40s actually in the 40s, yeah, but it there's it's a famous Old mob run nightclub that mitzi short took over in the 1970s So the the place has this feel to it like it's been run You know as an entertainment venue for you know 70 years or something crazy like that isn't there a bunch of like underground passageways around yeah, there's supposedly There was actually an article about this house on cress Hill here Whitney coming sent it to me so I'll send it to you Jamie But I almost bought this house in the 1990s in the 1990s They were selling this house that the commie store owned right above the club Yeah, that's it and that's the one that's connected to the yes There's supposedly a tunnel because that that's right above and to the left of the comedy club And that was also owned by Bugsy Siegel Stories from the comedians who inhabited cress till the house above the comedy store so that house was for sale The comedy store were selling it mitzi was gonna sell it and I'd but a problem is if you go back to that photo It's not like this tiny little bullshit yard like that's the yard and I have a dog I had a dog back then too and I was like yeah, I don't want me my dog in this bullshit yard I have a yard. Yeah, my dog needed a yard and Also, it's just too weird to be that close to the comedy store There were so many stalkers and freaks and have people just you know showing up at your house and you're just right on the boulevard, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah So the press to cress Hill's right off the boulevard, but it's right there. It's a two-minute walk from the from sunset I've heard like like comedians like Bobby Lee in the past say that they've had issues there But people won't even work with them just based on the fact that he's worked there for so long Really? Obviously. I don't know like too much about that but he's talked about that in other podcasts and stuff where it's haunted Yeah, where he says it's very haunted and like people don't want to work with him because he works there Really? It's like everybody like that's worked I might be an excuse for whether they don't want to work with But I could be a Bobby and my be able I've never heard anybody say that before. I can't work with you because you work at that haunted blaze that day Yeah, they just want to be like around that Well, there are 100% our people that have stories including multiple comedians Multiple managers of the place waitresses of the place So a lot of people that had stories of like seeing weird things and meeting people that weren't there and Have you ever had anything? No, I tried I went down the basement one day by myself Yeah, I've walked into the main room by myself Carl Labo who recently passed away Carl had the weirdest story He got kicked out of his house. He got in fight with his wife and he got kicked out of his house and he went to the comedy store and Decided he was gonna sleep on the stage in the main room And he's like man, you know, I'm gonna fucking make it. I'm gonna. I'm sleeping on this stage She's gonna kick me out of the house one day. I'll fucking show you So like he's drunk and he lays down the stage and then he hears a door shot and the comedy store main room is Pitch black right so see this what it looks like but that's only when the lights are on so he's He's laying down and he hears a door shut and he goes hey, it's Carl It's me Carl Who is that and then he doesn't hear shit and then he hears chairs moving here's like clink clink clink clink clink Oh, God, he's sitting there. He's going what the fuck is going on and something grabs his ankle and pulls him off the stage The floor and then he hears chairs moving again and bam the door shuts and slams and nothing else There's no one in the room He has no idea what the fuck happened, but he told that story on stage one night It's like he set the tone. It's like spooky lighting. It was really cool Wait, so he got pulled by his ankle off of the stage off the stage. Yeah, something grabbed him He didn't see anyone he could but something grabbed his ankle and pulled him off the stage Then onto the floor. That's when you want like security footage There's no cameras in that place Maybe there is now, but they definitely wasn't back then. Yeah When did you you guys started out you weren't exploring haunted things you just started out like Doing it was like abandoned things. Yeah. Yeah, we've had a long run at this I think we've been doing YouTube for like 10 years and it was abandoned and then before that it was like the trendy stuff And then even before that we started in public disturbance like the drinks and stuff so you started when you were in high school Yeah, I was 16 Like one month turning 17 so basically 17 we started and just for fun just for fun I mean like so a lot of it was also Because we wanted like we had a plan to become famous at the time because that's like 17 year olds It's a whole long story to it But like as 17 year olds like we we just really wanted to do that It was like a goal of ours because we had just like become like really really good friends at the time and After like learning how to be confident. We were very shy kids in high school And learning how to be confident together, which again we can get into that story if you'd like but how did you learn how to be confident? We're both originally from Kansas over the park Kansas. We met in band camp I mean we're feeling so bad. Yeah, that's where the story starts And you know that's like a whole story when you started off like that But it was so bad to the point like we were just like super socially awkward and very anxious people where a lot of people A hundred percent but like I had like it was so bad to the point where I had to like carry around these like thumbs the anti Pills to just like honestly pop before each time I would go into like a new classroom and just in case I got called on I just wanted to make sure I wasn't freaking out internally And so we bonded in band camp because we were both these like shy kids that didn't know how to talk to what did you play in band camp Well, we did we both did saxophone. I played marching band clarinet Yeah, and it was like something that our parents like made us do as well and so Together you decided you were gonna figure out how to be confident. Yeah, yeah Well, we were like okay both of us, you know, are sitting there awkwardly being like okay I like that girl you like that girl. We both can't talk to her. So how do we fix this problem? And that was the like a ton of you have our friends are analytical. Yeah Yeah, yeah, especially for being because at that time we were 15. This was like before social media and stuff and so We just decided one day. We were like why is Billy over there? Why can he talk like to the hottest girls in the grade and we're over here like Crying in front of people like trying to talk and stuff It's not fair Well, there's an important lesson there and it's a lesson of honesty because some people want to pretend that they don't feel that Way and if you pretend you don't feel that way, but you really do you're never gonna fix it So if you try to play cool and you're then you're just like setting yourself up and you're in a trap Because now you have to admit somehow down the line that you were full shit I'm facing the problem set a face the problem at 15 going hey Why can't we talk to people what do we do like let's work this out? Yeah, and so what would the steps you took to work it out Well, they're all your soul to the devil pretty much Actually No, it was really like there. I mean there wasn't that many things to do in Kansas Besides exploring abandoned places and then going to the mall so we decided okay What's gonna help us with confidence? Let's go to the mall and Colvin I would literally like have my dad like this is before I had a car So my dad would drop us off of the mall and I told him come pick us up at close and me and Colby would go back and forth And give me to other challenges. We're like all right I'm gonna tell you to go do this really horribly embarrassing thing out in front of other people and you either do it Or you do a hundred push-ups and then he said yes or no and I was like, okay And then vice versa and we go back and forth and basically the goal is just to put ourselves out of our Confizona as much as humanly possible and again I think the only reason we were able to like make this work is because we have like a brand new friendship And so there was part of me that I was like I can't let this guy think I can't do this You know what I mean by vice versa and so yeah like we were just looking up YouTube videos like Honestly like as embarrassing as it sounds like how to pick up girls how to talk to people like how to be more social and stuff like that And then we take the things that we learned and then we'd go to the mall and throw ourselves in like the most uncomfortable Situations just like get out of our comfort zone and like really take chances and like gross people That's actually very smart It's a that's the way to do it because the people were terrified of those interactions with people that make you uncomfortable But if you just like seek them out over and over again you eventually Get comfortable being uncomfortable. Yeah, you used to it. Yeah, really smart Yeah, speaking failure and stuff like that like if you are comfortable with failure Then you can do anything because then yeah You just keep failing keep failing keep failing until one day succeed The problem with failure is a lot of times it People let it define them like they think of themselves as a failure because of not succeeding Instead of thinking yourself as a human being was learning and growing you think of yourself like oh my god I'm the guy who dropped the ball. Yeah, I'm the guy who crashed the car I'm the guy who did these things. I'm the you know You think of yourself as a failure. I'm the guy who flunked out of school I'm the guy who you know the girl broke up with me you you start thinking of yourself as Like a person who fails you don't think of failure as like like if you're playing a game and you're learning a game You what you're doing is you're trying to figure out how to be successful But you're still you right? You're still the same thing But when you fail enough times it stains your brain and hurts your feeling so much that you can self define and then you put Parameters and boundaries up and you define yourself as a failure That's what's really dangerous for people. Yeah, that's why you got to get back on the horse That's why people say you fall off the horse get back on the horse You got it which is terrible advice by the way you fall off a horse you might fucking die Yeah, but that's good that you guys decided to do that because that's a that's a really clever way to deal with The inevitable awkwardness that everybody has when they're young especially in high school and especially being in Kansas like yeah When we we were in like the suburbs of Kansas City So we weren't in like total like cornfield type thing But we definitely were like probably two minutes away from like farmland and things like that So like Sam was saying all there was to do out in Kansas We're go to the mall in the weekends or we had like a bunch of abandoned places as well So that's like how that ties into later in life Getting into that luckily you guys had YouTube You know, I mean imagine growing up there in the 70s with no YouTube Right, right, you don't get exposed to the rest of the world You have to travel somewhere and find different cultures and different ways that people communicate and just different life experiences Exactly, I mean where we grew up was definitely like a bubble like us starting to travel was like the best thing ever for Our personality and like our understanding of the world like getting out of Kansas was like yeah, I talked for a living But when I was younger I was very awkward and I really had a heart down talking to people like the point where I get anxiety If I had to go to the bank because I knew that I had to go to the bank teller and you had to talk to the teller And I can remember going like what am I fucking scared of like why is this bother me so much? But I was just scared to just talk to someone who's in a position of power or someone who's you know position authority Which is weird now kind of think about it because I'm so comfortable talking to people. What's weird is I think so many people think that everyone cares But right spotlight effect like you are living your world everyone's living their own world and so I think everything is about them Everyone's looking at them but around you Focusing on themselves. I'm focusing on that people do care if you're weird like if you're weirded out And you weird them out like oh my god this guy's freaking out he can't even talk But if you're okay, they're okay. It's like people people feed off of other people's energy And it's also those situations where they might think you're like weird in the moment But first of all why would you want to be friends with that sort of person anyways? If you just don't match up and then secondly like you just don't think about it anymore Like if you were to see somebody do something embarrassing or weird It's not like you think about somebody else doing that all the time. It's like you take account of it and then move on Yeah, in your own head, you're like your biggest critique As you go on a sleeve like a hundred times people forget about it and you carry it around with you forever and that kill right Yeah, it does it really fuck it really fucks young people up like you could go the wrong way at an early age and have some bad experiences and Dills will define you for the rest of your life You'll be 35 years old thinking about something that went wrong when you're 16 and that's really common. Yeah So you guys start out you're doing these videos where you're just checking out abandoned places and like what was the motive? Like you'd want it to be famous and you're like well We'll start making YouTube videos and then like so how does this get going? Yeah, okay, so like backing up just a little bit like after we learned how to be confident like we probably went to the mall Like when we were 15 for like an entire year And it was literally like a year boot cap And we knew we were gonna be like best friends because this was like when we truly bonded like nobody in high school would be down To like go to the mall and be like hey you want to go talk to random people You're doing even like our family like at some points. We're like what like I don't understand this But once we learned how to become confident We felt like and especially being 16 like we felt like on top of the world like we could do anything We wanted to and so being a 16 mindset 16 year old mindset and like having like the social status of us being like the band kids and just always wanted to like fit in and be popular We were just like well, why don't we you know if you yellow you only live once as cheesy as that is It's like why don't we try to become famous and real-life and so we started with Vine We started with Vine actually at the six second videos for for a while until it died and then ended up transitioning over to Remember Vine. I do remember Vine. Didn't you on must it talk about doesn't like Twitter own Vine? Yeah, they talked about bringing it back, but I don't think they've worked on it in 10 years. So it's 10 year old technology Yeah, it's a talk took over. It's it's all took down now Tick-dox away by Chinese spyware literally Literally like getting your fucking passwords and your location 24 so yeah, it's terrifying what they can do It's weird. It's weird that everybody's just like whatever I can't give the stuff of my daily it's hugely addictive So you guys start out with these vines and what were the vines about so the vines were basically what we were doing as Like our experiments and challenges that we were doing like the last year So it was all public pranks and disturbances like we would get on top of like the food court lunch tables and do like a lightsaber battle Or like we get together and do like a flash mob in the whatever but then sadly we got kicked out of the mall Because and from the band from your training ground It was what you got banned from the wall. We can't even come back now. Yeah, like we're now 26. We are still banned Come back and they're like get out of here. We know that for life We took we took you know how like every school mall has like a seating area like every once in a while or whatever All like the dads like sit on there for a while We ended up like taking one of these couches and like putting it on an escalator and just like writing it up and then just we Put it back down. That's it and we were just And they yeah, they just thought we were like stealing the couch and so they sent us like super serious emails like you can never come back Sign this ever. Yeah. Well, this was like the 18th straw after like flash mobs and you know singing in the courtroom Stuff like that like they're like all right. You guys just got to get out of here. We're done with your shenanigans. Yeah Well, you it served as purpose. Yeah, it did it did and so we were like, okay Well now we can't go to the mall. What's the natural natural next step? And it's like we were about to graduate high school and so we heard about all the people out in LA All the collaborators and I don't know if you remember But there is this like massive apartment building with all the vineyards that we're all collabing together and we're like maybe we should go to LA So I took a trip out there just for like a week and said okay Is this the spot to go? And we got back and asked our parents like hey, can we just not go to college and you know pursue this thing full-time? And they were like Like why like no like probably once you do this But then you know after talking with them. They're okay main thing we want you guys to be Okay in the financial world or whatever So as long as you can prove to us that you can make money They set a goal of like I think it was like $20,000 if you guys can make 20 20 gram before you graduate You could move out and skivvy your college or like all right Let's hit the ground around and we just played like the whole like we're doing a gap year sort of thing Or then we were just like listen mom if I fail like I'll go to KU next year like already accepted So let's just try it or whatever and plus like they had seen this whole journey They saw like our friendship They saw that we had like something going on with like the way we were thinking about stuff And so I think they were just like we can't really control them again A mom just wants you to be financially secure And so like as soon as we were able to prove that They didn't care so this was you guys were still in high school So high school and how many followers did you have on social media 300 K? Yeah, like 300,000. Oh, 300,000's real. That's real number. Yeah, so you were getting some traction It was like on the cusp of like Like you know LA rent is a lot and so like when we were thinking about it $3,000 $5,000 to survive out in LA per month I don't know if it can actually make that on what you can make on fun How did you make money at all in fun? No fine didn't have a monetization platform so it's like so difficult to make money and so we do Things like live streaming or everyone wants to get brand deals But a lot of our income came from touring so we didn't really have a on-stage talent So but we knew like that was where the money was and so we're like all right. Let's Get one get our names out there by going on tour and two make some money to be able to move out to LA So it host shows we'd be like the MC and like in between acts we'd come out like you know Say a stupid story and then like introduce the next act like what kind of shows Like social media shows where it's just like like most talent there were like singers But it was honestly just like a meet and greet for guys like to be honest like a bunch of girls would come to literally The first one ever was called Magcon and it's just like all these girls will just come and like meet their favorite YouTubers meet their favorite Diviners whatever oh, so we post that these YouTubers and Viners would just Whatever they did where they played guitar or something They did something so they could do it publicly But people were just there to see them because they were the person from YouTube pretty much yeah and meet them and take pictures It's like that right and so you guys did that for money for a while. Yeah Luckily that ended up working out We didn't get our entire goal But our family was like all right you guys are making money Why not so three days after our high school graduation? We took the road out to Los Angeles without a plan. We didn't have we didn't know where we're gonna stay We didn't have an apartment. We didn't really have like one friend out there. We're just like let's make this happen However possible we're gonna make it I did you find the vine apartment building we ended up the next year Yeah, we ended up living there like the next year But it took a long time because that one was one of the most expensive Expensive apartment buildings in Hollywood so we spent a year like saving out like we were like the most stengy people ever like our friends we want to go out for pizza And we would eat before and like yeah We were down to go out But we'll just sit there with a couple water because we want to save it all for furniture was from the dumpster Like we just throw like covers over everything and just like we've just living very very like we can't spend any money What's right we only had one car out there So it was just grind mode as soon as we got out there like the difference between like us and a lot of social media kids That do try to make the journey to LA is we knew we had like prove ourselves We knew we had like a year tops and so we were doing everything we could to be like Entrepreneurs and start like side businesses and stuff like that come out with merch Like just anything we could do to generate revenue So it starts out with You start doing these vines and then you move to YouTube and was it immediately the abandoned building thing or did you do other stuff? We did YouTube like trendy stuff like challenges or or whatever The question I asked her stuff which we hated yeah for like two or three years It was actually when Vine died that we realized oh no like we need to figure something out Honey subscribers or followers did you have before it died On sign yeah 1.7. Oh it was happening. Yeah. It was a start over. Give me But no money no monetization So we were like we have to move this over to YouTube So you can set up ad sense and stuff But the difference between a six second video and a 10 minute long video is a whole different audience What about what you're doing now exactly right you guys are doing like little mini documentaries now Exactly so yeah The fact that we started on six second videos and now we do like 60 minute Yeah, it is very funny. It's so weird. Yeah, but it seems natural like like what when you guys do it It seems natural. I told you my daughters obsessed with you. That's how I found out about you forced me to watch these Forest you did you got to see you got to see she loves ghosts She's like fascinated by like horror movies and ghosts, which is I wonder if it's genetic I was in the right I was in it in a huge what I mean you see the American world have landed out there I'm always been in the horror movies and shit I'm like is this like that I like getting in her jeans Somehow or another because she's she's also an artist too, which I used to do when I was out of the sheet She's 12. Okay gotcha. So So she tells me about it and then she makes me watch a bunch of the videos and I'm like how do these guys get started? Like how does this how does this happen where you get to the point where now you're ghost investigators? What's crazy is like we never envisioned ourselves do that like we had a really like deep-seated interest in like the Abandoned and like you know, that was the only thing to do in Kansas So we like spent most of our friendship in high school exploring abandoned places our creepy buildings are haunted houses And so will you these abandoned buildings where you like going over the history of this place like this used to be a factory or this used to be a school or back in the Abandoned days it was different Again, we were trying to find ourselves on YouTube and so the best thing for us was just to be like genuinely excited about Something because we'd be doing these couch videos doing these challenges and just hating what we were filming And so just capturing like so a lot of like what was already existing on YouTube at that time with abandoned was Like more documentary style where people would like start their video inside the place And then just have like a very slow paced like this is what it's all about and then goodbye But what Sam and I wanted to do was like film the adrenaline side of it like film us running up to the place hiding from the guards Like hiding from police We don't break into these places. We don't like vandalize anything But like sneak again like all like the adventure part of it So we're yeah more adventure less like history of it. Yeah when we started Did you guys get in trouble for any of these? I mean a lot like Well, and even in Kansas like when we first started what we realized is A history of it. Yeah. When we started, did you guys get in trouble for any of these? I mean, a lot. Like, well, and even in Kansas, like when we first started, what we realized is, you know, being young looking kids are doing this and like, we kind of got better and better at it. Like, we figured out, okay, we can talk our way out of the cops like everyone wants to allow. And that definitely happened. And I think at that point, we were just like, we find it so much more interesting to have that sort of fear of we will get caught. Because no one else is doing that. Like, imagine seeing someone actually putting, you know, crime on the online. And like, trust, trust, trust, trust. Yeah. We're gonna trust peasants. Exactly. We got arrested. Of interest. So yeah. Where'd you guys get arrested? Tampa, Florida. Oh boy. Yeah. So our first mistake is just thrown into the hooch. Like into the lockdown with everybody. I did for 24 hours, Sam didn't it because this is so stupid. Like for 24 hours? Like a little less than that. Probably like 20 hours or so. But I had to stay overnight in the jail while Sam was able to like bail himself out. But pretty much we did a lot of like, you know, we did a lot of trust. But yeah, trust passing is not is usually like a fine like, you know, 75 bucks or something like that. Depending on the state. But sadly, this particular location was under construction and apparently construction properties are government properties in Florida. And so they charged us with a felony. A felony. Yeah. Boy. And it was really strange because when we got arrested, there was like eight cops that showed up to the scene with dogs and everything. That's why we got out of the place by the way. And they like the deputies were super nice to us. It was the sheriff that was like, oh, these are youtubers. We have to make an example of them. And I had two fake IDs from when I was 20 trying to get into the bars like still stuck in my wallet. Super stupid. Like no reason for that at all. Just a dumb move. And so I had three felonies and they would not able to be able to bail myself out. They cap it at like five, five thousand. And each felony is 2000 bail. And so I had 6000. So I had to wait for Sam to bail himself out so he could bail me out. So I got taken back. But hell in these. So how did it play out? I was going to say dropped. I ended up, you know, bailing myself out. So I think I was only in there for seven, eight hours. And then I went to go work on his bail outside. But you had a not a horrible time. Got a great time. And yeah, I did you have fun. It was sick. Really? I wasn't expecting it to be like a good experience. But yeah, it's funny because like we arrive and oh my gosh, all like our viewers and stuff make fun of us for this. But that day, like I decided randomly just to like rock like a Justin Bieber like merch shirt. So I'm like coming in here looking like a teeny bob like emo kid. Like just a viewer shirt, like peers, things and stuff like that. And like everybody's just like turning their heads and I'm like, oh, this is when I die. Like I'm tied here. But they took out like all my peers things and stuff like that. Say goodbye to Sam like we were in like a big waiting room. And so when they brought me to the back, the first night was, I only say there for one night, but like that night was super scary. But for the rest of the time, like long story short, like I got moved to another pod, like a fellan pod because I had 300 my name. And I asked the deputy he was super nice and he could like see that I was like uncomfortable being there of course. And I was just like, what should I do? And he said, dude, honestly, I would just go grab a book, go to your cell and just like, lay low Sam's going to bail you up very soon. I said, okay, that sounds like a plan. So I didn't talk to anybody. I was trying to like mean mug and like be like serious the entire time. Grabbed a book, went to like my cell and just stayed in there. And then like 20 minutes later, I'm like reading my book. I hear the door start to jiggle. And I'm like, okay, this is when I die. I mean, that's what my like so me. He comes in like super scary looking guy. I'm like freaked out at first, but he just turned out to be the nicest guy ever. Like he was like, what are you in for? He's like, this is what I'm doing. And like he asked about YouTube and told him like, why like we do what we do and all that stuff. And coming for murder. What was he in for? He said it was like, it was something with like drugs, muggling cocaine somewhere. Oh, geez. Something like that. Real, it was like, trust fast. I trust fast for YouTube. Yeah, it's like, I didn't want to say anything about it. Like some, these guys are going to become like the biggest pussy in the world. Oh my God. That's probably better though. That way, you know, they don't think you're a threat. Oh, for sure. For sure. Yeah. But we had a conversation for literally like an hour and like shot the shit and he, you know, broke down each other's walls and stuff and he was becoming like a friend actually. And then he was like, well, I'm going to go back out to the pod because there's like a main area where everybody can like hang out where there's like basketball and place you can watch TV and stuff like that. And I was like, okay, I'm probably just going to chill here. And he was like, no, no, you should really come with me. Like I have a lot of friends in here. I've been in here for like a few months. Okay. Well, I'm not. And so this guy, I just took a chance with this situation with this guy like took me under his wing, like introduced me to like all his friends and in jail and we played like basketball like one year. Like literally like they were all asking about like YouTube and all that stuff. And then Sam bailed me out like three hours later. Did you stay in touch with them at all? No, no, I told him to DM me afterwards, but of course like I'm just going to find it. I mean, I don't even know how long he was because we were in jail, not like prison. Right. So he was still awaiting his trial because he couldn't even like bail himself out. So who knows if he even got even more time? Like I don't even know. That sounds like it. Probably. It's selling cocaine. Yeah, or like carrying large amounts. I don't even know. But yeah, haven't heard from him. Absolutely crazy though is that morning like we had no idea. We're like, all right, this is just a casual day. We always do these like abandoned videos and then we'll just work on editing and whatever. Anyway, I walk out. I don't have my phone because they tick all that stuff. And our buddy who is going to help us drive us home or whatever, he comes in and he's like, do you know what's going on? Like no. And he's like for the past like 12 hours, you guys have been number one worldwide trending free salmon cold. You guys are everywhere. Huge. Yeah, walking out like he started interrupt, but like the deputies bringing me up, being like, Sam finally bailed you out. He was like, but what's your name by the way? And I was like, uh, cold Brock. And he was just like, I've had thousands of girls call this jail to try to bail you out. And it's like, what? And then as I'm leaving, there's fans outside. It's like a meet and greet like outside like fans waiting for me. And so many fans. It was like 34. So it wasn't like a huge thing, but like, it was people that figured out like where the jail was itself. Yeah, a lot of people were calling, but it was so interesting because we never would have thought that that was going to be the big start. But from that night and getting arrested, it completely blew up and changed our career. Yeah. It was so weird. And in terms of numbers, just so you know, like we were getting on the abandoned videos, like a little less than a million, so like 700, 800 K, which we were very happy with. But after we got arrested, we knew we couldn't do like the illegal stuff anymore. And so, um, while during the abandoned days, and we can get to the store in a second, but like we went to the Queen Mary and had our first haunted experience ever. And so it just made sense to us that like, well, this is a legal thing we could just do at hotels and stuff. Why not just do like the haunted haunted instead? Well, how much do the numbers change up to like, like three, like two million, three, three to four million, like the first one, and then they just kept growing from there. Yeah. So millions after. So tell me about the Queen Mary. That's the beginning for you guys. That's the number one origin. You went there to do what? So what was really interesting is we did a lot of the abandoned stuff, but every once in a while, we would do like a haunted thing because those creepy stories and, you know, the lore of everything is really interesting whether or not you believe in it or not. At that time, we didn't really believe in any of the, the ghost stuff. We're like, all right, but this is gonna be a great video because everyone knows telling the stories. But we just got, I don't know what it was, but someone forwarded us something saying that for the first time in 30 years, the Queen Mary and Long Beach, which is like one of the most haunted ships, like New York times, like top 10 most haunted places in the world. We filmed fear factor there once. Really? Yeah. That's great. It's a beautiful ship. They do a comedy show there sometimes. No way. They have a while. They had a regular comedy night there on the Queen Mary. Yeah, I didn't realize how like famous it was, but they have that. They have like haunted houses. They have a ton of different attractions there. But there's this one room, B340, that had been open for 30 years. And allegedly, they closed it down because there's multiple unexplained murders and or suicides in that room. And we're like, whoa, like, you know, if this is the first week, this is open after 30 years, this is gonna be an amazing, like, story to tell or, you know, video film. And so we went in there trying to make something or like trying to get something. We obviously didn't really believe that much. So we're like, all right, let's just see if it happens. If there's gonna be a haunted location, it will be this. We toured around, did the whole thing, weren't getting much. And we're kind of frustrated at that point because we're like, all right, this is supposed to be the cream of the crop. This is supposed to be the big wig. Like, why can't we get something to happen? And so it was four o'clock in the morning at this time. We've been trying for hours of just sitting in circles, like asking out. And we didn't have any equipment at this time. This is like the first place we ever went to. So we were just like meandering like the hallways being like, is there anything here? Yeah. Like just trying to get something happen on camera. And nothing was happening. And so we're like, fine, I guess. Let's do this. Let's just like leave like it's fun to tell the story. Let's just leave. And so we turn off the camera, start packing up. We'll walk, we'll start walking towards the door. As soon as we turn, like actually we're about to like get out of the room, the faucet turns on like full blast for four seconds and then turns back off. And we all like actually like, you know, freeze and freak out. Two of our roommates that were there at the time, like just immediately start like crying. We were like, we ran in and we're like, okay, how was that actually possible at all? Maybe that's the sign of like, it doesn't want to be filmed and it doesn't want us to leave. So maybe let's just not film this and try one more time just for the heck of it. And so that's what we did. It's time it worked. And to like the weirdest extent, we just like put away all of our cameras, we sat in the most serious tone saying like, okay guys, like before this didn't really believe. So like if this is happening, let's have something happen. And so we all sit in the dark together and we start calling out questions and we're like, okay, like is there anybody here and we hear a knock? And so we're like, okay, maybe that's something. Very faint though. It was like a tap. Like a tap. And so okay, let's just run with that. And you tap more than once and there's like three taps. Like, okay, this is really weird. Like can we start asking questions? And how loud are you saying this? Like is it possible that someone could have heard you from another room? That's what we thought. So going like we were talking probably like this, but then there was times where we talked like really quiet. And like we tested everything. But so what we did is we decided let's ask questions using these taps. So we said tap once for yes, tap anything more than once for no. We had a yes or no conversation for 35 minutes with something that we cannot explain. And we did everything because we were skeptical at the time. Did you film any of this? We didn't think so. But apparently one of our friends, he's like super religious was like, hey, no matter what, the entire night he was keeping an audio recording this. We had no idea. We had no idea that he was doing that. Nobody talked about it. So if there was something there, it didn't know either. Yeah, we had no idea he had pulled that out. Like we genuinely were like, okay, no one's filmed. We even say in this audio recording like no one's filming like this, no bullshit. Like everyone please like be serious about this. And so we had this conversation back and forth and we tried to trick it. You know, like we would ask questions in different manners like, okay, is there more than one of you? Yes. And then we'd say are you alone? And it would say no. Back and forth trying to get this thing and this, the story kept straight the entire time. And we were like, come on, there could be someone like screw him with us. It's like on, you know, the news of being like haunted place. Like what's going on? Well, what was crazy about it too is all the knocks they weren't just coming from one section. That would make sense if like maybe something outside was like tapping. These knocks would be like below us and then above us to our sides. Some would be louder than other ones. We went out to the hallway a couple times when we realized that we were like the last room besides like this utility room to our left. And obviously we had like basically that whole like floor to ourselves as well. So it was super late. Yeah. And then like sometime in the middle we were like, like, okay, like what's like ask a question or a breath like, okay, like this thing does not want us to leave. And at that moment the entire floor shook. Boom. Like we were like, oh my God, what was that? Or is it a few of the vibration in your feet crashing on the ship or something was huge. And so we're like, okay, so this thing doesn't want us to leave. Maybe we should just like ask questions under our breath for the rest of the time. Just so we know it's not some employees, not someone like screwing with us the entire time. So fast fast fast forward to the very end. We were like, okay, we've had a bunch of conversations at this point. We really believe if this is truly something, I want to know something about something deeper than just yes or no questions or or just like something silly of like how many people are here. So I decided let's ask about religion. And I ask out is there a heaven and it knocks three times meaning no. And at that point are two religious friends that were there like immediately jumped up and said we have to leave right now. We had no idea why. Why? What's going on? Like I'll tell you in the car like I do like just don't look back. Let's go. Let's leave. And so we walked out. We left. We got all the way to the car without anyone saying anything. As soon as we got in the car work, what's going on? Why do we have to leave? He's like, well, in the Christian religion, anything like demonic or evil is supposed to like basically disprove that there is a heaven. And so what they're saying is like we don't think this is some like spirit or something paranormal there. We think it was something that was trying to lead you away from her Christian. Well, demonic territory type thing. But that also just depends on what you believe in. Obviously like our roommates were very, very Christian, very religious. And so when they heard the knocks saying no, they thought it was just kind of like a sign from like a demon to like steer us away from from God and saying like this is not exist. And so they without question ran before we could leave like we kind of were wanting to stay there to ask more things. It was really interesting because this is your first experience, first experience paranormal. Well, first very believable one. There has been plenty of times where here things are like you know things are scary in like the abandoned places, but they're also decrepit old places that freak and stuff. Yeah, old dark places make you freak out. Exactly. This is the first conversation we should say that we've had. So up until that point, did you believe in ghosts before and like what is it? What is the feeling like when you have to sort of process the end of that day? So that was a monumental change not only like a career, but also like our at least my like thought process in life because yes, I had that idea that maybe something else, something else is out there. Like I had grown up with Christian, but at that time we'd gone to so many scary places. We, you know, tackled a bunch of like life questions, philosophical questions throughout our time together and we're like, okay, like after asking about it, like for me, I was like losing like faith and something else. Like, okay, maybe maybe we're just the only things out here. And after that moment, I had like a full on like breakdown the next day. Like I was like everything that I had thought was not real now becomes real. And I had like pretty much lost any sort of like faith at that point, but there is even a video in me online like sitting on a bedroom floor like crying to camera saying like I truly didn't believe in now this instance opens up this whole world like maybe I don't immediately believe 100% that the question of if there is something else out there is now back in my brain. And I want to chase that. And so after the whole rest and going to the Honda stuff that was like, it wasn't necessarily we were like a thousand percent believers. The second we like had this experience, but it was so intriguing because it was one of those things that we couldn't explain. We told this story so many times. And the audio of this actually happening, the knocks is online so many people don't believe it because they weren't there. We wouldn't believe it if we weren't there. And so we understand that people don't believe us when we talk about these things. Now however, just the idea that it could be real and the idea that could happen again is what someone's freaking and is why we got into it. We're like, okay, if we can just keep doing this and keep getting more and more proof like that, feeling of hope of like, okay, there is something else out there. And it is not just, okay, we're just going to live and die here on the planet. It's so special. I don't know what you believe in no matter what religion you have. It's like we realized that that experience for us, it taught us that there is something else. It's more spiritual than anything. And we wanted to spread that message as well to as many people as possible. Again, no matter what they believed in. But your roommates thought it was demonic. They were, they took like the Christian round. That's again, that's up to whoever is viewing this or experiencing it themselves. But yeah, they, they took it very much. How did you feel? Did you feel like it was a demon or did you feel like it was a ghost or dead people? Would you think it was? I don't know. At the time, I definitely thought it was like a demon because these two guys are like, you know, and that for example, dude, this is 100% without a shout of the doubt. Like a demon. And I'm like, well, I don't know exactly what I believe in. Like this is already like rattling my brain right now. But it was scary. And what was scary here is trying to go back into it and repeating the process. Like we didn't know what we were messing with. If it was a demon, like, hell, maybe if it is all real, are we just screwing ourselves over by like going and just finding that thing into your life? How many times you guys go to the Queen Mary? Three, four times? Yeah, three or four times. So you went back after that. We did. Did you leave the roommates at home? At that point. Yeah. We did. Like our final stunt, which was actually last year, we hadn't gone back in three years, but we wanted to like the Queen Mary actually shut down, which was sad. Really? Well, it was last year. They lost like funding and whatever. There must be opening up now. They're trying to raise money and like get it back up. Yeah. So we thought this was the last time we'd ever see the ship. So we're like, let's go say goodbye to the thing that literally started this whole adventure for us. And so COVID now went back alone. Same room. B-3-4-D. Same room alone. Do they rent that room out to anybody? They do now. They do now. 40 years they didn't. For 30 years. We were like the first people to get to it. That's so crazy. But again, that's all alleged as well. Like who knows if it's like a marketing ploy? And again, we were so skeptical that like Sam and I, when that was Knox first started to happen, like we were like looking under things, we were like, this room has to be bugged. See if you can find anything about that room. So finding anything about the Queen Mary. I thought about what they have. Room 340. Yeah, it's B-3-4-D. B-3-4-D. So they told you that there was multiple murders that took place in that room. Yeah. People keep just like an hour away from killing your roommates. Oh my God. Yeah, like if we kept going at it, like asking questions, he just turns on us. Sam, goodbye. He just started talking to you with the room. This is the room. Oh God, it gives a chills. So does it say on the wall? So you can scripture? Well, they have literally experiences of each like different family. Yeah, there's a ton of them. Oh my God. So it's like openly haunted. Yeah. So anytime someone has like a crazy experience that they deem notable, they'll write it on the wall. There's a thumbnail there. There's a bloody Mary wall. Yeah, and I have instructions to do. It's definitely cheesy a little bit. Like they have the Bloody Mary, like Bloody Mary. What does that mean? So Bloody Mary is like this challenge that a lot of people used to do, like as like children or whatever. You like go in front of a mirror, turn the light off, have one candle, spin around three times while saying Bloody Mary, Bloody Mary, Bloody Mary. Oh, so it's candy man. Exactly. The candy man. Yeah. Yeah. It's like a gimmick, obviously. But there's a lot of stories all over the. That's when it turned on. Yeah. And so this room, is there any documentation that people actually died in that room? Got it. Yeah, I was going to say I'm curious because like when we went there, again, like we were very different than where we're at now, like we didn't do like super extensive research. What we did is we like would, you know, we'd take the article that it says it is, but obviously we're not going back and fact checking that. And then we go and talk to the employees. And so most of our stories were all like firsthand encounters with the employees that were there, or things that they would tell us rather than, you know, and the employees seem to believe it. No, every employee like we've met pretty much at all these haunted places are true believers. Those are the ones that said like they can see stuff following us. Some people that work there like are super into like the paranormal and stuff. That's what's fucked, right? Because there's only a handful of those people that are there day in, day out. Right. And you can dismiss that or it's like, or it might be real. Right. That's the thing. It's just the thing that nozzled me. It's like it's so easy to dismiss ghosts. Oh, ghosts are bullshit. But the problem is there are so many people that say they've seen over so many years, literally hundreds and hundreds of years. It makes you wonder, because if there are multiple dimensions and if life is, if you there's a war, a physical body that's carrying around a soul, like where does that thing go? Yeah. Energy doesn't die. And what happens if something horrible takes place? Like there's something crazy traumatic moment gunshots and stab wounds and like where does that soul go? Is that what is it possible that things get trapped in between worlds and that these people that work in these places? Or you guys? Or an experience? Exactly. And who's to say, like, you know, we know, like, you know, whether or not maybe a lot of people believe the soul passes on, but what if that's just not true and also a stay here? I don't know. Well, it's so interesting. Yeah. It would be God if we knew, you know. It's just, it's a lot of guesswork. But the thing about the ghost stuff is there's so many people with experiences. My grandmother was, she would always say she was psychic, but she'd never guessed anything correctly. Oh, man. But she always like, but there was a guy that was staying with them for a while after my parents, my mom and my uncles moved out of the house. They took in like a board, a boarder, like a guy that my father knew and you know, he paid them to stay in one of the rooms. And he was up in the attic and they had like the attic set up as an apartment and he died. And my grandmother used to go up there and she said sometimes he would talk to her. Like she would have these experiences where she's like, I know he's still up there. Like he was talking to me and my grandfather got kind of fucking weirded out by it. But he was like, she told us, don't go up in that attic. No way. Yeah. She ever tell you like what you would talk about? On conversations or no. It was hard. I was very young at the time. So I don't think she wanted to freak me out. I was like five years old. So I think she wanted to keep it on the DL. Yeah. My grandmother was crazy. She had a monkey. She had a monkey named Chi Chi that would bite people. What? Wow. What? My grandmother was nuts. Yeah. She was a wild lady. Yeah. She went to jail for bookmaking. For bookmaking. Yeah. She was running numbers for the mob. And she wouldn't give up the mob until they put her in jail for six months. So it would always be like, where's grandma? And she was like, oh, grandma's staying with Aunt Lulu. She was not talking about her. She was in jail for numbers running. Yeah. Because they had like, that was like the neighborhood lottery. Was the numbers. And that's how you know that the numbers were. See me can find like a definition of the numbers, like how the mob used to run the numbers. But like basically they would have a number every day, you know, like 34 or 29, 16, whatever it was. Like I don't know how many digits it was. And people would guess whatever the number was. And you'd pay into that whatever it was. So you'd pay in, I don't know how much money it cost to for each individual thing. But it was very similar to the lottery. Like the lottery numbers, they picked the lottery numbers. You guess them. And you could buy as many lottery tickets as you want. It's similar to that. But it was all illegal. And it wasn't being taxed. And you know, you could get in real trouble if you were involved in it. And so my grandmother was involved in it. So they arrested her. But what they really wanted is her to ride out the mob. And she's like, I'm not ratting out nobody. So that's kind of awesome. Jail for six months. She trusts her other person. But she also talked to ghosts. So there we go. Same category. No, it's interesting. Like, you know, a lot of people dismiss that idea. But I think it's like 50% of the United States or something like that, like believes in ghosts and believes in the afterlife or something like that. It was like everybody you talked to, like we'll have something where maybe it's not paranormal, but they'll have like a situation that they can't explain. They don't know how like the great fell off, like in the beginning. You know, it's weird enough that we're here. That's weird enough. Right. The idea that like there's ghosts, somehow that that's weird or like just a human life is fucking bizarre. Yeah. Just the fact that we can look at each other and communicate and you sound express feelings and. Move without thinking about it. There's a lot of weirdness to life that we just take for granted because it's commonplace. But, but the ghost thing, you know, so you guys, you have this one experience and now you are you automatically a believer. Do you go through periods where you're like, well, maybe someone was messing with us. Maybe it's not real. Yeah. So that was probably a full year before we went full into haunted. So like throughout that, you know, you know, give faces of your career would full in the haunted. Yeah. Who had the musicals? Yeah. All the good stuff. That's the first day. It's been a fun dude Broadway. Yeah. Then we did haunted for a while. I'm gonna do it. So yeah, after the rest, we were like, all right, let's dive back into this and it was so interesting. And at that point again, like, we're no experts on this. Like we're honestly trying to do this to prove to ourselves because of the crazy experience we had a long time ago. So we had at least for the first year of us doing like, a haunted exclusively on our channel. We had like no equipment. Most of the time we'd go in like documentary style and just like interview people, walk around like these hotels or buildings and be like, why is it haunted? And then try to test that same theory. A lot of the times we would get stuff. Sometimes we wouldn't. But it's all been like a learning process, especially like as we go, there are some points that like, we'll go a stint with like, couple of months of that. I don't know. We haven't had anything actually like, below our minds in a while. And then boom, something else happens. It just like brings us right back into it. We're also just like coming up with more theories in our head of like what we actually do believe with the paranormal. Like for example, right now we 100% believe in energies and stuff like that. And there is no question that you can walk into some places. And it's like just a different vibe. Yeah. It feels heavier. But do we believe in like the Casper that goes sort of like figure goes, like not really, maybe we've seen like shadow figures before but have I ever levitated? No. Have I ever seen something like straight in front of my face where I like undeniable proof that that's a ghost in front of me? No. It's like been like just out of corner of the eyes and stuff. Yeah. There's some scientists that believe that things carry memory. There's a guy named Rupert Sheldrick and he has this theory of morphic resonance and part of his theory is that he thinks objects themselves contain some sort of memory. Whether or not you can access that memory, but that objects contain memory. And he cites that as one of the reasons why people can feel things like if you're going to a house where someone's been murdered in the house. Like this is the reason why they have to tell you. Yeah. They can't just sell you the house. They have to sell them. Well, by the way, you know, like if someone gets murdered in the house, I think I don't know like for how long after the, the fact, and it's probably varies by state to state. But I remember in California, like you would have to tell people, someone got murdered in the house. For sure. Like to this day, they can't sell that fucking John Benehaus, John Bene Ramsey, there was a house that that if she got murdered in Boulder, Colorado, she was a beauty pageant queen who was a tiny little girl. It was really creepy. Ever though those child beauty pageants? Yeah. Yeah. Well, she was murdered when she was very young. I don't know how old she was like eight, nine, something like that. And it was a national scandal because they couldn't figure out who murdered her or what happened. And some people thought that it was the parents and the Boulder Police Department botched the investigation because they weren't really, Boulder's pretty peaceful place. They're not used to murders, especially not murders of children. And also like there's, it exposed people to how weird these child beauty pageants are where you're taking a little girl and you're putting, you know, high-yield shoes on her and short skirts and sexy makeup. Like what the fuck are you doing, right? And so. taking a little girl and you're putting, you know, high-heeled shoes on her and short skirts and sexy makeup like what the fuck are you doing, right? And so it became this thing. So we lived in Boulder for a while and we were looking at real estate in Boulder and there was this one house, like this is a pretty nice house, like what, you know, why is this house so cheap? It was weird. It's like it seemed like it should be more expensive. And then I googled. I don't know if I thought that's the house where John Beney Ramsey had been killed. Oh man. Yeah, I don't know if it ever sold. But like the entire time we were there. It was for sale. It was for sale before then for years. I think they might have even changed the name of the street to try to sell the house. Some weird shit like that. I definitely heard of that happening before. I thought I was like, oh no one's selling, no one's buying this because of that. Well, it's a thing like people, no one wants a buy a house for a little girl's murder for sure. And might have been murdered by her parents. Like that was the the real, the scary part about it was that was the accusations that the mother did it. They brought in these handwriting experts and the handwriting experts compared the ransom note with the mother's handwriting and they were trying to say that the mother wrote the ransom note like, who fucking knows, but it's gross enough that no one wanted to have anything to do with a house. Yeah. No, it makes sense. There's this one time. Well, all the previous places we've ever been is kind of a story like that. Have you ever heard of the Veliska Axmars? No, so in Veliska, Iowa, there is this serial killer that came in apparently and small little town, a couple thousand people or whatever, a little house. And somehow this guy was able to come into the house, kill two parents and six kids all in one house with an ax tiny house without getting caught at all. And to this day, it's an unsolved murder. Jesus Christ. And it's just so so bizarre. And that was one of the places that like, yeah, oh, look at the fucking sign in front of it. Jesus Christ, he got Veliska Axmurd her house and it's dripping blood. If you were a neighbor, you'd be like, hey, bro, maybe take that fucking sign down. Yeah, a little insensitive for sure. Jesus Christ. So that was in 1912. That all happened. Yeah, over a hundred years, but that was like one of those things that we'd we'd researched and that was like interesting, but as soon as we stepped foot in that house, it was a whole different vibe. It was one of those things that like, it was one of the few times we actually had to leave. So halfway like after doing a little tour with the whole like with the tour guide, he was telling us all these stories and just like being in there was weird. Like our buddy was like feeling like he's going to throw up and it's just like really odd. Like that doesn't happen every time. But when it does, it's kind of like, ah, it might be because of how fucked up it was. There was a lot of things that went down. And this is also you know about it, right? It would have been interesting if you someone brought you into the house without telling you anything. Like how do you feel in this place? And then see how you feel that is it like a placebo effect. Maybe that because you know the story you're walking in there. I mean, that's a crazy placebo, right? Like just to know that that a whole family's murder with a fucking ax. Right. Right. And the most gruesome part about it is the killer use the blunt side of the ax. So you can still because we went there to investigate. You can still see like the ax markings in the ceiling when he was going back. Oh god. So go down. And again, it's so weird because there was like on the top floor, there was like the parents' room, but then right like five steps down a wooden creaky hallway was the children's room where there was four of them. And then there was two more of like the third daughter's friends that they were hanging out with that were downstairs that got murdered as well. So how is it possible that he was able to get to all of them with the blunt side and just and like broke like did he break in or was he hiding like in the attic? Like we don't know. Really creepy. Yeah. I think so that was the one that got to the most. For yeah, like that like that like true crime world is like really really messed up because like again, like the stories you hear too and the allegations of these people is like oh god because for that particular ax murder, the little girls downstairs apparently were the last ones getting killed and because of that the killer was apparently reported that he like would and this is like really disturbing. Like warning. Like would like unclo the little girls and he sat there and he pleasureed himself in front of these like it did with like a big like slab of bacon. It was like like those types of gruesome. Big slab of bacon. He like sexually pleasureed and into these like dead bodies. Yeah. Like girls under like 10 to I think or 15. And it never happened again and then they never found the guy. Do they have suspects? So they do have suspects and what's really interesting is the two main suspects that a lot of people talk about were not the ones that we ended up talking about in our video just because right before doing a research on this location, we saw this author that just came out with a book about a serial killer and she thinks she solved the list of ax murders because that same exact style of murder was actually this the serial killer that went from Midwest town to Midwest town on a train and he's called the man from the train and the same the same exact things. So like things like covering the mirrors after like the death and like the back of an ax, the fact that he was left-handed which he would eat. And meals like afterwards like he'd like make himself a meal and sit with all the dead bodies yeah cover up every like window because he was like ashamed that if he saw his reflection or something like that. And every single spot that this traveling serial killer went to would cover the windows and do do weird things like that. So how many different terms of this guy's supposedly do this? I think he was he did a lot like this specific serial killer that did like dozens of times but the two main aspects. Yeah with axes which is weird and then they explained to us why and this is a little gruesome too but if you do the sharp side of an ax, it'll get stuck in your skull. But if you destroy the skull with the backside, the blunt side, then you can pick up the ax faster and it was like oh my god like that's a little weird. And we thought like we were like maybe he you know, drug the family beforehand or like chloroform them or something and there was no sign of like any any drugs like used. So according to the book man on the train, they describe them for being responsible for up to let's see. They feel feeling certain that Mueller committed 14 family murders telling 59 victims less certain varying degrees of him was his involvement and another 25 family murders totaling additional 94 victims. Wow and there's even one in Germany they think might have been attached to. Do you have a photo of this guy? I don't think so. So what was his name? Mueller like Paul Mueller and why did they think it was him? Specifically. Did he get a rest? I'm just looking at the Wikipedia that breaks down the book. He just like the the style of the murders were so similar and the two other main suspects that they had hadn't murdered anybody previously. And so this guy is coming in train by train to all these different cities. Yeah, the other suspects were just like not as in intense I guess you could say where it was like there was like this one guy named like Jones I believe who was just a businessman that maybe had like rivalry within business with the family but wouldn't you know result to like murder for that and then there was also just like a creepy reverend who was like a peeping Tom sort of character that was just like the town creep that everybody thought it was. There's the main thing on why I guess they think that what they think. I don't know if you can read that my call is small. Yeah according to the James's a number of murders in the period were assumed by local police to be one off incidents were actually committed by a single person probably Mueller based on certain similarities among the crimes. The similarities include the same being within a few hundred feet of railroad junction. Okay, so that's the with the books title it says. The slaughter of entire families in small towns with little or no police force and the family's having a barn which the killer is believed to have hidden to observe the families. Oh which for this guy had. Oh yeah. That's so fucking the imagine this guy like waiting in the bar and watching the family go to sleep for how many days you know before you do. And they were all at church service before it all happened as well which is horrible. Yeah. So that one particular you felt something when you're in that place. I mean you just walk in and just feels it's hard to explain but you can feel the negativity in the air where it's almost like it's craziest. It sounds like the air feels thicker in a way. My stepfather who's like a very like sober thinking like rational person went to Gettysburg and he said you can feel the sadness because it just feels horrible like you're there and you just you feel death because I've never felt anything like that like you're at a battleground and you know even though it's 200 years ago or whatever it was like less than 200 years ago you feel it because you feel it. You go to feel it. You go to one. I had to get out of there. Yeah. That's the thing with some of these places it's it's not necessarily like oh like you know immediately just like oh yeah this is very true on a dream or whatever like that but it's just heavy or it's just like you feel off when you go into these like as soon as you stepped into the the conjuring house. Have you ever seen the conjuring movies? Yes. So they're actually based on a real house in Rhode Island and that was one of those places that we walked into and you're like almost getting nice. I almost threw up and I'm not so what's interesting about the paranormal and what we've learned the past four years is that it affects people differently. Some people can see stuff. Some people claim their mediums and can communicate more. I feel like I have more of like an in-pathic like almost like I just feel worse like whenever there's something around and so when we first walked into the conjuring house like there was a point where I thought I was going to throw up and I was looking for exits. What's the real story behind the conjuring house? What's the actual story? So yeah the movie story is like this witch best you or whatever but the actual story here's a bunch of different things that they say are haunted but it's actually built on the grounds of the house. Yeah it's crazy. It's an amazing house. You state that launched the conjuring universe. Yeah like what is it like the Marvel Comics universe? What does that mean? The conjuring universe? How weird it is. That's a problem. When you start making an industry out of something. It turns out business. Yeah so what's the original story? So the most famous we'll get to but like as built on the same grounds the Kingfilks' war was fought on like right at the beginning of the United States everything. So the main people that haunt that are seven dead soldiers that this little girl always kept seeing in the walls and thus it started manifesting more to the entire family. So this family called the parent family bought to the place in like 1972 and for 10 years they said they would see you know these figures, these soldiers walking around like their beds would shake, they would get scratches like and it kept getting worse over the 10 years and the crazy part is it got to become famous because of like the final day that like changed it all. They wanted to do like an exorcism on the house because I think who's the mom parent? What a Carolina or some kind of parent? Yeah, Carolyn Parent was getting like really bad like she would have things happen to her every single day. You know furniture would move all these sort of things. she was getting like really rash with everything. So she brought in these demonologists to her and in the rain warren. If you've heard of them before, they're like the demonologists, the paranormal investigators, they are like the fathers of you know. Maybe I have heard of them. Are they featured in the Zach, uh, bacon? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. That's where I've heard of them. Yeah. Which is also a crazy place to talk about that. But yeah, so anyway, you really? You just want a couple weeks ago. No way. Yeah, my daughter dragged me to that too. Hey, there we go. Vegas. Yeah. So they were doing this like exorcism and that's them. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's so slow. So I do an exorcism there. They were doing an exorcism and I don't know exactly prior to whatever it happened or why they called it. She was just having a bad time just like you know over the last couple years and they wanted to end. Um, and to her claim, she was actually thrown like across the entire like room and smashed into a wall to where she had inner injuries. And they were so angry about that that they actually kicked out the demonologist punched at in the face. Punch that guy in the face because they thought he was the guy that was like making it worse. But I think it was just like pissed him off. And so that thing when you say they punched him in the face, you mean the ghost punched Oh, no, the parent. The dad did. Oh, that was parent family. It was like getting assaulted. The parent family. Yeah, was like really punched him in the face because he thought that he threw the wife across the room. He was responsible for it. They made it or he was there and like the exorcism that he was conducting made it more angry which in turn hurt his wife. Oh, so he got an angry. He was like, stop doing this. Yeah, exactly. It's like hiring a priest and a Punch him. Right. Right. Move. Yeah, exactly. You're throwing him down the street. Punch him. People. Come on. So the parent family actually wrote a book about that. And they say the conjuring movies actually don't do it justice of all the things that happened and all the the movements and the craziness that happened and that 10 years that they lived there. They were like in the real life actually experiencing it and the trauma that they went through, they say it's like 10 times worse. Yeah. And so they feel like it was dead soldiers like murdered soldiers in on the battlefield. Somehow another that's well here's where it gets interesting is they don't know what it is but they believe it is something more evil or demonic whatever you believe in. That is like controlling all of these like soldiers and stuff and trapping them. Move. He goes with that person named Basti Beh who was like a neighbor who everybody just thought was a witch. But in real life it was just known as a demonic possession but no trace back. Yeah. Like whatever. That's that's an interesting thing right. Like because that's in a lot of these cases they feel like it's not just ghosts but it's ghosts that are being controlled by some sort of a demonic entity. Right. And the demonic entity keeps these ghosts there which is like another layer of belief. Yeah. Right. Exactly. Just not don't just believe that maybe when people die their energy gets left behind and then maybe that energy gets controlled by demons. Exactly. Oh my god. That's like another level. So into crazy now. I don't know if I'm willing to go there. It gets mad at it. It gets very mad at it. But if you did encounter a demon nobody would fucking believe you. And then you'd be trapped. You would be this person who for the rest of your life was bomb and it's fucking demon stories. Yeah. Like no one would buy it. Exactly. Same thing with aliens or anything. Anything you see that are outside of this like logical physical world. Physical world. Normal daily encounters. Yeah. Anything outside of that. Big foot. Anything. Anything where you see things. And there's been many times that people have seen things that they swear were real and you go, God that poor fuck. I would rather not see those things and then just have everybody just looking at you. Oh, here comes Mike when his wife, yeah. Right. You know, because like if you did like there's a gentleman, where's this little, where's the Travis Walton's little thing? We left used to have it on the desk here. Oh, it's over there. That guy right there. This guy is Travis Walton and he's got his own bobble head now. Man, it's got to make a living. Let's go. He was in. He was in this movie called Fire in the Sky. I don't know if you ever heard of it. It's a hefoe abduction story. But it's a very famous abduction story because there was a bunch of eyewitnesses and there was witnesses that saw the spacecraft that were in the town. He was a logger in Arizona. And he had, including people that hated him, who backed up his story. So they saw something and this area where they were logging, there had been sightings like multiple sightings of UFOs in the past. And they saw something go through the sky and into the trees. And they pulled the truck over. This guy, Travis Walton, was a young guy at the time. And it's early twenties. Jump's out of the car, runs over to this thing. And there's a flying saucer, like a classic flying saucer that's hovering over the ground. It was like a flying saucer, right? Is that how he described it? I believe. Anyway, he runs up, gets too close this thing. A burst of energy hits him. Like he got too close to it or something, gets knocked down. The other guys run. They're terrified now. They run. They get in the car. They drive off. And then they're screaming and yelling at each other as they're driving off. Like, we got to go back and get them. We can't fucking leave him there. So they go back, they go back to the same spot he's gone. He disappeared for five days. And it was like five days? I hope I'm not fucking this up. So five days later, he shows up in town, calls someone on the cell phone, calls the police, tells them his story. These recordings of him calling the police and telling them his story. No one knows what happened to him. He five days, no food, no water, and his story was that they took him aboard this spaceship and repaired him, that he got damaged by this burst of energy that came off of this spaceship. And that they repaired him and that he communicated with these beings. And these beings are what everybody describes as these classic gray aliens, these things, these big heads and these large eyes and there was different types of creatures that were on this spaceship too. But that poor fucking guy for the rest of his life. Now he's like in his 60s, maybe 70s. And that's him. He came on the podcast, very nice guy. But now he's the fucking wacky UFO guy for the rest of his life. Like Travis Walton could have been a normal guy and had a normal life and never experienced that. Like would you rather be the person who has the unique experience that nobody believes or never have that experience where you could just live a normal life? I wouldn't 100% rather have the experience, I think, because maybe not the UFO experience. But the reason I think deep down that I'm so intrigued with the paranormal and these experiences is because in a way, it gives me hope of something like further than this. Like I'd rather like instead of like not believing anything and just being like, all right, I'm just going to die and sitting around for the rest of my life or for us eternity. I want to, even if it's a little notch of faith that there's something else out there, I'd much rather have that experience. But that's my opinion. I mean, I would agree too. I think there's going to be people that judge you for what you believe no matter if it is in ghosts or like even talking religion and stuff like that. So you might as well just stay true to the things you actually experience. And I would love to find out. It's answers. It's kind of like giving, like you said, like a little bit more hope of what comes next. Do you guys feel that with your experiences that you've had, they're limited in terms of like you haven't had anything like the conjuring house happen to you. But you've had enough happen where you've been around enough that you have questions? Yeah. I mean, that's the thing is that's where we like draw the line with like what we believe in or if we don't. Like I don't think if I keep doing this, I'm going to start levitating. If I do, that would be the straw. That would be the final thing. If I levitate to our- I saw the Sally House video today. Yeah. I watched the Sally House video today where I was working out and those people were telling me that telling you rather than they levitated. Yes, the medium. But they're so like dead seer and they're so normal. They seem so normal. Other than the fact they said they levitate to. But if I levitate tomorrow, then that's that's it. I don't have to do it again because I would believe oh yeah. This is awesome. I don't think it's going to happen to me now. But there are things, there's so many things that we've seen that are like, okay, that makes me want to inch a little closer or try to do it again. You know, there's that like, you know, spark of like, oh, I cannot explain how that happens. What's the most profound one that you guys have experienced? I mean, there's size queen Mary. There's both like in like individual experiences that have been insane. Like for me, for example, I went in Texas actually there was a spot called Bowers Mansion. I don't know what city it was in. It was a small town in Texas. And this was one of these spots where nobody has ever investigated or it was just like a handful of people. So we were going to be like the first YouTubers to really investigate and like put it on the map. And it had to deal with like, I think it was like a murder suicide. Some guy like killed his wife and then shot himself. And we're trying to like, especially this year and in the future, try to just put ourselves in more scary situations so it never, you know, it's always like exciting and stuff like that. So we're trying to do like more like alone challenges and stuff. And just things that like give us more fear. And so for this specific one, I had the challenge of like staying in the entire like mansion by myself. And I was on the top floor in like a room which was deemed to be like the most haunted. Apparently a guy named like Bernard had lived there like in the past and basically was like stuck in a wheelchair his entire life and stayed in that room and would like only look out the window and that's it. And he died and apparently still in the room. And so I'm up there and Sam is not even in the house. I think you were actually in the cellar. And then one of our other buddies is like across the street. And earlier before we all did like the alone investigation, the door as we were walking down the stairs of the Bernard room, close shut. And we were all like, wait, did you guys hear that too? Was that just my imagination? We run up there. It's completely shut. And so we obviously propped it back open. But since I knew that had happened before, I was just up there like asking questions to Bernard. And I was just like, all right, Bernard, if you're really up here, why don't you slam this door right behind me like you did for us earlier? It's just me and you do it. And sure enough, like the door slammed right behind me. It's like right when I turn. So you're alone in this mansion. Yeah. And you're talking to ghosts. Yeah. And you're asking the ghost to slam the door and he slams the door and he slams the door and he slams right behind me. And you're sitting there going to what it's not sitting there. And he's sitting there. Like I went into tears. Like in it's all on camera, like I've never like gotten super emotional. Like from going to these like haunted places. But it brought me to tears where I just immediately started walking. And of course, like this is our job. Like we want this stuff to happen. Right. But I've never had it was almost more of like a jump scare that was startling than anything. What's right behind me? What technology exists? Like what do ghost hunters use? Like what's the cream of the crop? What's like the Tesla of ghost hunting technology? Like what's the iPhone of ghost property? The emce is like the most standard boss. Yeah. What does that stand for? It's like magnetic frequencies. Yeah. The older something. You have to detect her. So basically just detects changes in EMF energy. So like, you know, if nothing's changing at all, it won't do anything. But if there's something like movement or like, you know, new energy energy in the room or something like that, it will spike. And so that's like what a lot of equipment is based off of. What's really interesting and the stuff that we do now is we try to integrate just more normal like everyday objects into our investigation because of the fact that a lot of people are skeptical. So for example, one of the pieces of equipment that we use a lot is like a cat toy that lights up when you touch it. So we put cat balls around and, you know, we've seen them sit there for hours and nothing happens. And then like one time we'll be like, all right, if they're someone in the room, can you go touch that cat ball 20 feet? Good for us. Well, I saw the episode that you guys filmed at that sanitarium. I don't know, you probably some film many of them in a sanitarium, but you had a cat toy. And you also had this little box with an antenna that comes out of it, like a circle. It's like a flat disc with an antenna and it was going off. You did it. You set it in a room and you walked away and you let the camera run. Yeah. Oh, wait really. That is a crazy scene. Yeah, that's nuts. That's so what is so this device, explain what this device is. This device with the antenna looks like a giant hockey puck. Yeah. So the rim pod is what they call it. I don't know what that stands for. But it does the same thing. So that antenna emits an electromagnetic field. That's probably like two feet wide. And so if there's something right there, right there. So something enters that electromagnet field, it'll change the frequency. And that would mean that would actually go on. When it lights up like that, that means something is literally right next to it. So what was crazy is I think Kobe set there for, I don't know, you put it down and it was two or three minutes until it actually went off. To give context a little bit, it was, the challenge was to go put the rim pod downstairs by like this ball or whatever. And everybody else was upstairs and we had to go alone and do it. And so I went down here and I put this rim pod down, set up the camera and then we're all upstairs. We have no idea this is going on at all. We should explain why the ball because there was a video of a ball sitting there by itself. And you're watching his ball and it's not moving forever. And then also just rolled by itself. Yeah. So that was really crazy. We that was that ball like where was that ball and who sent the camera out for that? So that was our video. But the people that we went with who are our friends, that was their video. They had been to that place like three or four times. And one of the times they had set that ball down because the story goes that the person, the spirit or whatever that is moving that ball is like a little kid. And you know, it's a sanitarium. It was like really sad. But you know, the kids were allowed to like play on that level. And so if you put a ball down, it's supposedly if there's someone there, it will move. And they put that little rope there specifically so that no wind would get it. Like you'd have to actually put like an immense force to push it. And so our buddies who had been there before filmed, I think they said it was like a three hour clip. Three hours of this ball sitting in that same area. And that's why we put the ball there of just nothingness. And then like you said, it didn't seem like it was wind or like slow. It was like immediate push. It's a boom. And then like when that sort of looks like on the video, it's a little the videos bizarre. It was a video because I don't know technical challenges or whatever. He was filming his YouTube video. I don't know why he was filming the video. That's why it looks so bad. But yeah, basically he witnessed this ball after three hours randomly just getting how does it get that kinetic energy to move? And it's not wind. So you guys decided to set this up. So you put the ball down there and this box what is this box calling on? The rim pot. Rim pot. Yeah. And so does that detect wind? No, it's so does wind set it off? Like if you set it up outside and it's windy, that one set it off. No, it's only like coming in contact with it pretty much. Yeah. So something has to touch it. Either touch it in the field. So if you put your hand within a foot, it'll change. But if you're not like he was standing next to it for like a minute talking what he's doing and it wasn't going off. And then he leaves the room completely. He's probably 600 feet away. We went up two floors and not down the hall. And then it started going off, which was so monumental to us because it's like why for the entire time that you were there, nothing's happening. But as soon as you leave, you are, as soon as I leave, like, is there any conventional explanation that anybody's ever given you why that thing would just go off like that? Well, that's again, we're no like expert in all this stuff. There probably might be for half the time. Like there's definitely coincidences that happen in our videos. And there's a lot of things that we debunk and write up to be coincidences. It's the coincidences that happen so like leaning into our questions. Our perfect questions that make us believe more. So it's not like we believe everything that happens. And we're like, maybe equipment will get triggered by other things. Just like anything has not gone through. So battery operated. So some skeptics out there could say like maybe the battery is almost dead in the same functioning. Who knows? Do you think that maybe the more you do this stuff, the more things happen to you? I think that's what has happened. And we're just learning that too. That's what's weird about it. Like I'm trying to look at this as a skeptic. And I'm also trying to look at this as a belief. I'm trying to be agnostic. I'm trying to be open-minded. I'm trying to watch these things. And I'm like, what if you guys are opening up some fucking doorway to interact? I'm trying to be agnostic, I'm trying to be open-minded, I'm trying to watch these things. I'm like, what if you guys are opening up some fucking doorway to interactions with something or some kind of energy or some kind of life forms that exist in some weird dimension? And the more you interact with them, the more they're accessible to you. Exactly. That's what seems where if you're not full of shit, you don't seem full of shit. It seemed like very nice gentleman. Thank you. Thanks. If you're not full of shit, then something's happening. So what is that? Why do you guys keep having these experiences? Well, first of all, you're going to these places that are known either people have been murdered there or fucking, I mean, imagine that the craziness of a sanitarium, you're in a mental health institution where people die thousands. Who knows? And so there's fucking creepy energy exists in that building already. Now that Waverly house that was called Waverly Hills. Waverly Hills, how long had that been abandoned when you guys got there? I think that closed down in the 60s or 70s. I'm not a hundred percent share, but definitely in like decades. And is it hard for you to get access to these places that just let you go? Yeah. So to that point, we've actually like up the bar a lot since we started, like when we started at just like places in Kansas, yeah, like not as much, not as many things would happen. But we think part of the reason why more things are happening is because we have access to bigger and better things. That Waverly Hills place, we wanted to go for six years. We couldn't get access to it. Cells out in 20 minutes for the entire year to just gain access to it. Really? It's crazy. What do people do have raves in there? I guess. Some people parties, some people like have like little kids like birthday, so stuff. So people rent that fucking creepy place out? It's terrifying. But they rent that Jamie. We need to have the fucking JRE party. There we go. It's a festival. Louisville. So like have a very good room. Derby weekend. Have a festival. A mental health institution. So people rented out and do stuff there. Yeah. I mean, mostly it's like it's known for its haunted nature. So like almost everyone who's renting out is going there because they want to explore it. They want to see the history or they want to go as ton. But yeah, it's been a blessing because as we've gotten bigger with this more and more locations have been open to having us there. And a lot of people will reach out and be like, hey, this is like this crazier story that we had never had access to before. And now we get to have those. Yeah. I'm curious. Have you ever heard of something called an eager gore and egg or gore before? So we had just learned about this too like recently. But basically, the theory is that if there's enough people believing in something by just manifesting it in their minds, it becomes real. And so for example, like with this spot, it's like there's been so many people that have heard the dark history of Waverly Hills that maybe they're believing it into existence. Like there's so many people going there to ghost on. So many people hearing about the trauma of it every single day that all that energy, that's just a theory, it's like trapped there as well. Yeah, who knows. That's what's weird about thoughts. Like who knows what what it can cause. Do you believe in manifestation at all? Like do you believe in where like if you think positively or think about something you want to happen in your life? Like it eventually turns out. The problem with those thoughts are the people that tell you that have had positive experiences. So like if someone is a rock star and they said, I dreamed it into existence, like, okay, great, but you also had talent. You worked hard. That's true. How many people tried to dream it into existence, but it didn't happen? Right. I think it's a combination of stuff. I think that visualization and it's possible that there's something more to thoughts than just here's a thing that I have in my head. And I put it out there and you know, it's just a thought. Maybe there's some sort of creative energy that's attached to thoughts that maybe we're not aware of. But I think the problem with like things like the secret and the law of attraction is that it's those very esoteric and fascinating concepts are they're they're hijacked by hucksters and then assholes come along and tell you, Sam, I've got the secret to you living a happy successful life. And they sell you products. Everything you need by following my 12 step course. Right. And then, you know, someone pretends that they have this sort of attachment to this to the point where they've they've docked you, bent it and they know exactly how it works. And they know, no, it's a feeling. There's a thing to it. There's it might be real. There might be something to it. But there's a lot of other stuff that has to be in place too. I give you want the perfect life. You want like to manifest this incredible existence. It also requires an immense amount of work. It's not only you just fucking think it and dream it into being. Maybe even a bit of luck. A lot of luck. But what is luck? Maybe you're manifest here is luck already doesn't we? Working hard to put yourself in good situations. Yes, but also luck because you can get hit by a fucking meteor. That is true. You know, and has nothing to do to be a child and you're killed in a drive by like luck is real. This bad luck. There's good luck. Shit, shit happens. That's real too. So it's hard to say because it's all it's all discussed by the winners. You know, like I had a photo of a house that I put on my wall and that was my vision board and I made that a reality and I built this business from the ground up with my own thoughts. Did you really did you work too? Did you, you know, like it's good to have this belief because that also gets you up in the morning and it fuels your discipline, right? Because you have this firm belief that you're going to make it happen. And then when you do make it happen, you're like, I dreamed it into existence. But that wasn't the only piece of the puzzle. Exactly. Exactly. But I think it is an important part of the piece of puzzle to see what you're focusing on just like, you know, be magic. Maybe something to it. There might be something too, but it might be just an ingredient that along with discipline and along with a plan and along with talent. But there might be something to dreaming things into existence. It's also whatever you focus on will be what you work on. You know, like if you're, whatever you focus on, you know, like as an accountant, if you're always looking for errors, you're going to see all the wrongdoings in your life because you're looking for errors. But if you're optimistic and you're always looking for positives, you're going to find more positives. Well, this speaks to what we're talking about earlier about being young and failing a lot. Like if you concentrate on those failures, then you think of yourself as a failure. It's very dangerous for people because I've seen it with people where they have a few bad experiences like in high school, like they fall apart a few times and, you know, they lose jobs, they lose this, they lose that and then they're a loser. And then in their mind, they're a loser because they're concentrating only on those negative experiences that they've had. Instead of like getting past that and growing and say that was a valuable life experience and that's caused me to reevaluate and reassess the way I communicate and change the way I think and it caused me to like get up earlier and work harder and that made me a winner because bad experiences are very valuable. Like failing is very valuable because it sucks. And when you're in jail, you're probably like bro, this can't keep happening. Right? You just switch up the content. Let's go. That's the good aspect of bad experiences is that it gives you like an incredibly powerful motivating tool. You know, so I don't know whether or not you can manifest things into existence. But I'm not opposed to the idea totally. I am opposed to the idea that it's the only thing. I'm opposed to the idea like the secret. You know, like I'm getting it. You know, the documentary, the secret. Yeah. Yeah. There was like a bunch of people that really believed that they were just going to think things into existence. Yeah. That's the saddest thing. There was this girl who was friends with a friend of mine and she was at the comedy store one night and she's like, I am, you know, I am so happy because I found the secret and I'm going to meet the man of my dreams and I'm going to have the career that I've always wanted. I'm like, how are you going to do that? She's like, well, I just started following the secret and like Oprah was, you know, talking about it on her show and all these people believe in this year. Like, hey, Oprah, you're already fucking you have the secret. Alright, you're already Oprah. You can't just fucking start selling dreams. So, uh, so I didn't see this lady for like a couple of years and then I ran into her at another comedy show. I'm like, hey, how you doing? I'm seeing forever. She's like, yeah, things aren't working like I really thought that I was going to be able to control my life with the secret. But, you know, my father is still a fucking loser and you know, every guy, dates and idiot and and you know, I don't have the career that I want and I was like, oh, God, it's not that simple. It's so sad too because that's what I always like think about when someone asks like, oh my God, like, I want to be YouTube. Everyone wants to be YouTube right now wants to be on social media or TikTok and I'm like, oh, yeah, it's just, you know, easy post a video or something like that, but you don't realize how much work goes into it or how much you have to try and be able to accept failure for months on months on months before you see anything. You could take some certain type of person to put themselves out there, which is a whole nother topic, but it's so sad that like this new generation is kind of like being born into where everybody has followers now. Like when Sam and I were in high school and we started popping off on Vine, like it was like frowned upon, like we were not popular in high school whatsoever. But now it seems like, yeah, kids just are born into that where they have, you know, iPads at a super young age. Well, it's also in TikTok. TikTok is weird because they just make you have large following so that you'll be addicted to it. Right. Right. You know, I've heard kids talk about I have 2000 followers like they're fucking you. All right, they're lying to you. Yeah. And think about making you get more followers so that you get addicted smart. And think about like after you do get those followers. Let's say you do have a one viral video and then you never get it again. So you have, like you had this one success and you're addicted to it and you fail and fail and fail and fail and fail and fail. How hard is that on the psyche to just be like, oh, I did it. And now I can never do it again. That's why I like this viral concept nowadays with TikTok because I feel like even worse. It's definitely weird. Like how about that do with cranberry juice that skateboarding. Yeah. Yeah. It's like he's like, change for like a month and then now he's like, now it's back to normal. Like he hit magic in a bottle with that one video. It's like winning the lottery and then realizing your real life later on. And it's like, it's like winning the lottery for a hundred grand. It's great to have a hundred grand. But then like, you know, can't retire off of that. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you got to do something else. Like something has to happen. Right. That guy was like on a television show, right? Show. I just am looking at an article right now from a couple Yeah, but the thing is like how long ago was that was that a year and a half ago or so? It was during the pandemic. So 2020. Okay. So two years ago. So two plus years ago, this dude does that three years ago now, I guess. So yeah, man, it just goes away. Yeah. I mean, there's been so many occurrences of that like throughout all time of social media. Four 20 dog faces. Oh, million from that. He's got tons of followers. Oh my God. It's got 7.4 million followers and 122.6 million likes management never show. So he has parlated. But looking at his new video is 11,000 views. Like that's bullshit. Bro, we got to do better. Come on, man. Some of these videos, look at that. 2000 views. 2.7 mill here. Oh, that one there. I wouldn't killed it. So he's got just a fucking wiggle. Oh my God. See, but he's got you got to keep trying. Yeah. So he keeps trying. That's good. Well, that's the thing. Well, obviously that guy got a taste. Right. How many people watch that Fleetwood Mac video? Oh, I don't speak. It was a super virtual. Wasn't a super virtual. Oh, really? Oh, my God. But that's also like one hit wonders with music, right? Yeah. Yeah. Like imagine you're at the top of the charts with one song and then it fucking never happens again. Never again. How's that ton of those out there? Tons. Yeah. Like your rock star for one song. And like they get conceded about it too. Like they're all like sitting on a high horse for like a year then you're just like just it's same with social media kids. We met so many kids without saying names of course where they're like on this TikTok wave of like, oh yeah, I'm awesome now or like whatever. Like I'm in the social media world and then like a year later and there's just nothing. That's the trap. This morning I saw this article of a girl who did, I think it was musical or something. She had three plus million followers on Instagram and tried to call it the merch line and only sold like 10 or 15 t-shirts. And it was like, so yeah, you got all these people to follow you but like they're not fans of you. Are you? What are you doing with this following? And it's just so weird because a lot of people think that as soon as like they have this one blow up video, their life has changed forever, but it's a lot of work to continue on. Yeah. But at least you got some spark. The question is like, what do you do with that spark? How do you turn those embers into a roaring fire? Yeah. And some people figured out and some people don't, but that's the beauty of what's happening now is that folks like you who don't have any experience in Hollywood. You don't even have backgrounds in doing musicals and plays. Like all of a sudden you're in show business, right? You guys are in show business, right? You guys are in show business, right? But it's like self created show business, but it's massively successful. You guys have like, I've seen videos. You have like, what's the most views one of your videos has? Isn't it the country or the family like 30 million or so? That is fucking bonkers crazy. Stop and think about that. Like if a movie has 30 million people going to see it, holy shit is that huge. That's gigantic. Can't even imagine that in television show, but television show has 30 million views. That's gigantic. I'll show you guys just by yourself. And we do all the editing ourselves as well. We shoot everything ourselves. So it's literally just us with the camera. That's why we're not we always claim like we're not trying to force any information down anybody's throws. We're not like a TV show. We're like two kids from Kansas with the camera trying to but it's not so bad. It resonates. Right. That's why people are into it because it's seen it doesn't seem like there's other people involved. It seems like it's all you guys. Like it feels like it's you guys. So people who become fans of your show, they actually become fans of you because they're like hanging out with you guys to like hanging out with you guys where you freak out in the scenario. Exactly. That's like what we based our entire like YouTube channel on is we have yeah like the crazy adventures that we go on maybe are like you know, spectacle. But like the reason why people are watching and what we're doing is 80% of that video is just jokes. Just hanging out with friends. Our thing that we're promoting is like shared experience with our friends. Like we take all these different groups of friends all around the world, have a good time. And if something happens, it might be a life changing experience. Yeah. It's like and when those things do happen, you bond with those friends so much deeper than if you just you know went to a coffee shop. I watched one last night with my daughter where you guys went to Romania. Oh wow. So this is Vlad Tapest. That's is that we really where he supposedly lived or is one of his castles. Is that what it was? Yeah. One of I think his main castle was different but he fuddled like some battle there and we also went to his death place. But yeah, how many people had died on that ground? Probably thousands and thousands. Yeah for sure. Right. Yeah. The the bottle of Dracula piss that you got. I like the whole world. You carry it around with you. When when you're in that guy's area like this guy for people don't know Dracula, the book by Bram Stoker and all the movies were based on this man named Vlad the Impaler who used to eat lunch while he had his enemies like writhing on spikes in front of him. Yeah. He was notoriously a ruse which by the way someone sent me that Matt Stax sent me that that he had been captured when he was younger. He had been imprisoned when he was younger and probably had been raped and tortured. That's one of the reasons why he was such a ruthless person. Like he when he was a very young man I believe. See if you can find that. Like as a monster. Oh my god. There's so many people like that from history where you you hear about what they did and you just imagine like this is the gentleman. Oh yeah. Your career did I guess. It's when Vlad was called to a diplomatic meeting in 1442 with Sultan Morad II and he brought his young sons Vlad III and Radhu but the meeting was actually a trap. All three were arrested and held hostage. The elder Vlad was released under the condition that he leave his sons behind. Oh god. Years of captivity under the Ottomans Vlad and his younger brothers were tortured. Oh, two did rather. In science philosophy in the arts Vlad also became a skilled horseman and warrior according to some accounts however. He may have been imprisoned and tortured for part of that time during which he would have witnessed the impalement of his the Ottomans enemies. Scary. There's even rumors that like he would drink the blood of his enemies. Such as why he gets compared to Dracula so much. Yeah Jesus Christ. The road go back down a little bit. The rest of Vlad's family however failed even worse. His father was ousted as the ruler of how they say that word. Wallachia. Wallachia. By local warlords and was killed in the swamps near Balteni. Wallachia in 1447 Vlad's older brother Mercia was tortured blinded and buried alive. Cheers. People were fucking ruse. Oh yeah. Does that, does that drag them in son of the dragon? Well in Romania they say it means devil now. They call it Dracula. They use that term like they, they, but he used to. It's been interchangeable with devil. That's what it used to means. Son of dragon was what it originally was but nowadays they say it's devil. Yeah. Amazing that that that guy then became what's everybody thinks of as the guy with the slick back air that's a vampire in the character. You know like did you guys watch the Bram Stoker movie? Bram with the trailer. Yeah. With Gary Oldman. Fucking great movie. Yeah. That's wild. You literally created the character I believe of the vampire. And like well there was films like Have You Ever Seen Noss for R2? Sure. That is honestly probably the scariest figure in my like. And I would say that was what year was Noss for Rado? 1922. Wow. Damn. Because that was the silent movie as well I believe. Yeah. I was silent. I saw that movie at the public library when I was seven years old. Hate this guy. Yeah. Oh my god. What a great monster movie though. Like what a great character. And he lived in coffins and shit and he was on a boat. Oh. Yeah. That was the original vampire. Yeah. I mean one of the best original of the scary movies. What was that one? It's a remake. A different one? Warner, her jewelry maker. Oh really? Warner her sock? Remade it? No shit. When did you do that? I don't know. That's what it says. No kidding. 1922 remake. 2019. I never heard a people about this. Did you? Wow. Sure have that. Okay. Yeah. On that same trip we went out to Romania but I think right after Romania into the Ukraine and that was probably one of our most terrifying experiences because in Odessa there is this giant like labyrinth of catacombs underneath the city. It is basically like a mine. They used all the limestone from underneath to build the entire city of Odessa in Ukraine. But we had some near and run-ins of like almost dying down there. I mean obviously you shouldn't go into the catacombs alone but this is like one of our like exploring videos. And oh my god. This story is crazy. We met this random guy who is going to take us in because our original guide like broke his hand the night before and he was like oh trust this dude. He's done it before. You should just go in the catacombs with this guy. We're like so stupid. He spoke broken English like we did it. We're like all right. I mean we need to get a video. Let's go. Why not? Oh my god. So we're diving deep into this place and he turns to us at one point and he said do you guys know how to get out? And I was like I mean maybe he's like no you don't. If I leave you right now you would die. And he just looks at us and we're like oh please don't. And he's like I want to test something. I'm going to go over there. This is a circle. You guys got to find your way back over to me but I'm going to leave you alone. And so we're like this is like a labyrinth. This is a giant labyrinth. I don't know if you've ever seen like catacombs. So this guy has this shit on memorized. Yeah. Yeah. So we're going in things that look at that the entire time. And he asks us to go in like a place with a figure eight. That's that guy. And he's like find me. And if you don't find me like if I wanted to I could leave him. He was a nice guy. He wouldn't do it. But at the point we realized that that boy oh god like we could die right now. It is just absolutely terrifying. All those markings on a wall was apparently a story of a guy that got trapped in there and kept seeing that like figure that little shadow figure on the wall. And so he went crazy and wrote a ton of different things. Oh Jesus. But what was really really insane. I don't know exactly where this is in the video. So I'd show you. But he turns to us as we go and says hey let me walk ahead of you for this section. All right. Why? And he was like um because last week I almost got bombed here. And I was like what does that mean? He was like yeah. So me and the other guys that take people down here in this catacombs. We we don't like each other. And we don't like sharing clients. So if I got a if I was able to you know like kill off all the other people that were down here then I'd get all the clientele. And I was like what what are we in here like we've already been in this guy for two hours. And he turns he's like let me show you something. He goes behind this rock. Pulls out a bomb. A pipe bomb. A pipe bomb. A little thing. With like a fuse on it. And it was like I found this because I almost triggered this four days ago. And this would have killed me instantly. And if this would have got that thing. That thing. And it was booby trapped up there. And he said if if you guys trigger those the walls are caving in and we're all going to die. Like and he was being a hundred and serious. And we were like we thought we were like no way that you're just joking with us. He's like no if that goes off and you see another one like don't move at all. I will try to disarm it and we'll keep going. But the level of intensity for that night was like so beyond anything because like okay this is not like to scare you or get lost whatever we could die. Yeah. And we're murdering people for the guide business for the guide business. It's crazy. Makes no sense. So what is the most danger you feel like you've ever been in? Was it then? Maybe then there was maybe like okay there's this one time. We got held at gun point. Yeah. That was probably messed. And that was really really really really. This was four days before our rest too. So it's on the same. Usually when we did the explore videos of random videos we would go and film like four to five like in one stint. So this was like our Florida trip. We land. It's like 8am 9am and we're hitting like our first spot which is this giant hotel giant like hospital something like that right next to the highway. And so basically we stared film our video of course. One of our main things back in the day was we had these explore stickers that we go put at the top of each one of these buildings. And so we made our way to the roof and probably spent a little bit too much time on top of the building where everybody could see us. And so we knew we already had to you know lay low as we were like leaving and we're leaving this building and as we go out we see a lady on the property with an orange vest and she's walking towards us. So before you know we can do anything we just decided to run. And so we ran the opposite direction and there was like a little fence that we could hop behind us and so we hopped it into what we thought was like a private property of like an office building space or there was like building big buildings and like a big parking lot and stuff. Literally this like that's what we're at. And as we're trying to leave this like office building what we've got we had four officers run up to us right here where this is like the front gate with guns saying like get on the ground like you guys are so fucked like all this stuff that we we were like whoa whoa we've been doing a bandit forever we've been caught before but like never ever been held at gunpoint and then like two or three more cops come in and circle serious. And like the one guy standing far because I don't know he's point or whatever and then two other guys rush us they both take our heads and like or like you guys are absolutely fucked they put me in like just shove my face up against this fence and like grind it up against us I don't care who you are you guys are fucking good to do I got you. What is going on like what like we were filming our daily videos they always do like what's going on and like why are you at the school and we're like what what school and like you just walked out of an elementary school two backpacks all black clothing and cameras on and like gloves and stuff like that and I was like no no no we're at this like a band in place he's like oh yeah yeah right because our fuck you guys are going on trailer terrorists and we're like what yo no no no this is not what I'm like he's like a kid on the ground and the like two or three mark cops come and show up to tell them we've got video footage. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah exactly it is crazy so yeah after like you know getting screamed at our faces and like guns point it was the first time I looked down the barrel of a gun for sure and I was like oh okay this is serious I need to not do this and they thought you were terrorists they thought we were terrorists because if you're gonna buy school or something yeah oh my god so was there someone else that was at the school no I mean the school part was on the other other property and it was in session it was like an elementary school that was fine we were in an abandoned hospital on the other a lot so was there just some crossed wires in terms of like how someone was reporting what was going on yeah I guess I think what they were just saw is like two random guys you know protect you know like you know they have to protect their elementary school they're seeing two guys that are like oh they're with black clothing on backpacks and they're like assume the worse immediately it makes sense it's a code red for sure we were in the wrong but we just didn't know we were in the wrong god and they're gonna go to the guys so then they called so we learned that they were just school officers that honestly I don't know how they had even weapons on them doesn't make any sense but they ended up calling like the deputies in the sheriff of like the actual police and then the sheriff came over and was like what's the situation boys we're just like we explained we're just exploring that not the school or that fair and here's just like you're free to go who the two days they were got arrested so if we didn't take that it's like a bad sign like no not even two days later so like after that we were like hearts pump and it's going crazy we hop in the car go to our next baddest spot film that one wow 45 minutes after it's gone to the next we were like this ain't gonna stop us oh my god okay but what about in terms of like being in an haunted environment when have you felt like you're the most in danger oh devil's chair is a crazy story yeah a bunch I like okay so since we've been doing this a long time it takes more and more for us to feel like we're in danger a lot of the times when we're getting these things like I said at the beginning it's more exciting it's more like if I can somehow prove to myself that this exists then I'm like intrigued but this time it was definitely not intrigued you said you went to Zach Vegas music yes how did you like that well the museum's amazing it's incredible that it's two hours long like when I heard it was a house in Vegas and then it's a two hour tour I'm like how yeah how's it to our tour there's so much shit there right and there's so many things from serial killers and so many different like haunted pieces of memorabilia and there's the bed where Lamar Odom yeah we had over to fucking over it which is weird like why is this here we ended up laying in that we were the first to lay in that ever which never startled the first time I do it no after like sitting in it we're like what are we sitting out of like what time a liquid's it there a lot but imagine like gathering all that stuff and putting it at one place right right you know I wonder how that's affected Zach What type of liquids are there? A lot. Yeah. But imagine like gathering all that stuff and putting it in one place. Right. Right. You know, I wonder how that's affected Zach. Because like what is that box in the center? The dinner box. Yeah. What is that? What's the story behind that? So the Dibbic and like Jewish, Jewish folklore is apparently like a wandering spirit. A lot of people say it's a demon. Uh, that's me. Yeah. Okay. The talking about the Dibbic box. Maybe a little picture of it. But yeah. So anyway, so apparently this, this Dibbic box is said to be able to trap a spirit inside of it. And that way it's not going to be haunting a location. Um, I don't know exactly because a lot of these Dibbic boxes are now like just fake random things that people put around. Um, this one in particular, I think was like the most rare or like the original one. like where the idea came from. And that's why people say it's like the most haunted box in the world. And whether or not you believe that there has been so many people that have touched that box and immediately passed out or excited as soon as they walked in. They had bad luck for the next week, even like, uh, I know post Malone always talks about his story. Like touch talked about it on this podcast. Oh, yeah. Yeah. If you go to the Zach's museum, it's him on the podcast. They played a video of. Oh, yeah. Talk about his experience. Oh, I remember seeing that. Oh, yeah. Yeah. There it is. So when you were what when I was there, there, there's a feeling when you go in that room that I'm saying to myself, okay, my mind fucking myself, like is this this me going. Oh, this box is haunted. So you should feel weird. Like this is this bullshit. Like, but it didn't feel good. It felt like I just probably get a fucking, that's what I felt like when I was around that box. I was like, I don't think I want to be here. But was that because it's, I mean, the setting is really cool. Like what he's done with that museum is really fun. I recommend it. If you're in Vegas and you got some time during the day and you don't feel like blowing all your money at the slot machines, go there because it's really entertaining. Super cool. And the the the tours are very cool. They do a great job with the tour. But there's so much stuff there. There's so much haunted shit and so much memorabilia. Even if you don't believe in ghosts, I mean, they have memorabilia from Telly to head Bundy and Charles Manson and Ed gain and all celebrities. I have like past not even from like serial killers, but just they have the bus where the fucking doctor death was killing people in it. What's his name? No, what is his name? We're just the two. I got a guy. Working. Yeah, Jack of working. Yeah, they have his his fucking van. They have his van. There's Volkswagen bus, which is bizarre. There's so much weird shit in that museum that you walk out of there. Like, yeah, you get out of there. And you saw the clips they play, they literally play clips there of people fainting and project out vomiting and stuff. So puts in your mind. Yes. First five minutes that this is good horrible. No, there's legit footage of people that are patrons that are just customers who go there and faint. And they do. Often too. Yeah. The day that we rolled up someone was being wheeled out on a stretcher. I was like, what is going on? Well, it's the mind fuck, right? Because like if you're someone is a fragile mind and then you're in that room alone. You know, with that box, it's just that alone. And what's the doll the haunted doll? Yeah, Peggy. Peggy. Peggy. You can't look her in the eye. Peggy's creeping. Peggy's very creepy. Peggy's creepy. But all that, but they're just the way they set it up. How it's all the music and the dark rooms and the weird lighting. It's flickering. It's a great job. It's really, it's fun. It's a good time. But you know, it's like you're the whole time you're saying like how much of this is just my mind playing tricks on me. Right. Yeah. And there's definitely a part of that. Every haunted location you go into is like, you know, when getting yourself into. And so you kind of expecting and or opening yourself up to having those types of experiences. Well, has there ever been a time where you knew that you were opening yourself up to these things, but it's still shocked you. I think that was great. Yeah. At that location, just, you know, for example, so in Zach Bingen's museum, one of the most, if not the most haunted object in the whole museum, I don't know if you saw it probably did. The devil's rocking chair. Yes. So we actually were able to see. We gave us permission. We were the first people besides him and his team to sit in this chair. Yeah. So basically, that was that was the only exhibit that he's ever had to close. So, like, why did you bring us here? What did you guys get? Oh, my God. Yeah. That like, he had to shut down of that museum, because or that exhibit specifically because a lot of people were like complaining about, you know, getting nauseous or throwing up or something like that. Apparently, the only artifact that he had to close off in that museum. But for some reason, he was like super nice to us. And it was like guys, besides me, no one sat in that sense, the exorcism that had occurred on that chair. So if you guys want to, you guys can sit in it for the first time ever. And that was one of those times like we're down to push the limit and stuff like that. But that was one of those times that I actually like gather myself and be like, we can do it. Let's figure this out. Let's like not actually overthink about it. So what is, what are you talking to? Like when you're saying you've gone too far like you have headphones on and you have your blindfold on. Yeah. So what's going on? So this is one of like our favorite experiments. It's called the SDS method. It relies on the theory that if you take away certain senses, other ones are enhanced. And so there's this thing called a spirit box that like shuffles through different radio frequencies. And what I'm doing is I'm like focusing on like whatever it says. And I can't hear the questions that Colby and you're hearing something in your ears. Yeah. We're hearing radio static basically going, shh, shh, shh, shh. Really, really. Every once in a while we'll break into a radio station where we'll be like a song or something that like will be something saying or like just a word will pop out. But mostly you just hear static. And these are like noise canceling headphones. And I can't see what they're saying. So your blindfolded, you have this thing on its static and occasionally sounds come through their words. Correct. And so you're just repeating those words. Well, so I'm out. I'm like watching him and I'm asking questions out. And whatever's there is supposed to use the SDS method or like you Sam basically asked the vessel to speak on the way of the first example. I'd be like, are you here right now? And then he'd be like, yes, over there or something like that. And so you're in a haunted rock and chair and you're using this method with blindfold on and the earplugs. Yeah, basically to sensory to proud myself so that no matter what, I couldn't be just faking an answer and hearing what he said and sending random. So the theory is yes, there will be other random words that happen because it's radio frequencies. However, but down to the coincidence theory, if things make sense over and over and over again to the questions that he's asking, then that is said to be more paranormal. So what did it feel like for you to be sitting in that creepy chair? So during that it was a whole different world. But what was really, really interesting is like what Kobe said, after doing this a lot, like it takes a lot for us to have a physical reaction. Although yes, I was definitely terrified because of all the the lore and the stories that were being told all up into this point, the guy is telling us a hundred times no one has ever done this before. You're about to be the first terrifying. But sitting down on that chair for the first time, I think ever gave me a feeling of almost being paralyzed. I don't know if you've ever been hypnotized. Have you ever been hypnotized? Yes. So the feeling of being in hypnosis was almost immediate as soon as I sat down there, not when I was in the doing that experiment, but prior to that, where I couldn't necessarily feel my legs as much. And yes, like if you gave me you know, like ultimatum, if you have to stand up right now or you're going to die, I could stand up. But like if you've been under hypnosis, it's like this pressure that you probably shouldn't do this or that your your mind is being swayed to do something else. And to me, that pressure was don't stand up. So you felt like you're in your spell? Yeah. And like the same thing with hypnosis, I've been hypnotized before. And like I said, if everything in my being wanted to stand up, yeah, I can stand up or I cannot listen to like what's happening. However, if you allow yourself to like feel that, the feeling was paralyzing. And like I like run a lot. So I always like use this as an example. It felt as though within seconds of sitting down on that chair, I had run five, 10 miles. Like it felt like I was sore and like my legs were like real, you know, like that, like almost like sluggish feeling to like your your muscles after like a big workout, that's what I felt almost immediately. It was like so bizarre. And I'd never felt like that before. And still to this day, since that chair, I had never felt like that either. So when it comes to all of your paranormal experiences, that chair was the freakiest to you? That chair was the most physically changing. Again, I think the most the freakiest moments are always at the beginning because it's the first time you ever hear anything. So that queen Mary story was what changed my psyche the most. That one was the most physical you don't forget about the Robert the doll location though. There was a tie I've never seen Sam like almost like throw up from and that was a huge physical reaction. That just happened. That just happened. I've never seen this is a new one. This is a newer one. We just came out with it last month. Apparently Robert the doll. If you don't know the story, have you ever heard of Annabelle? Yes. So Annabelle's a movie movie franchise is based on a real doll. So the real doll is like apparently the second most haunted in the world and Robert is the number one most haunted in the world. And so when it's more haunted than Annabelle? Apparently that's a big one. Once he gets his movie. He's got plenty of movies about him. He's just going to plain face. He means better. I look on. We blurt it for purposes, but if you want to google an edgy. But because you're not supposed to take pictures or film it, that's like the biggest no-no and we're obviously there filming a YouTube video. And funny enough, like going back to Zachary. It's creepy. If you stay a little hoe-y in the eyes, like you get cursed. And so it's the same thing with this, this doll. And so we blurt it for like our fans. So your fans don't get cursed? Yeah. We get it first right now. I think we go to the first. What the fuck Jamie, don't curse me. You want me to show it on the show? Look it up yourself. Dies. No, what's interesting obviously there's all those stories. Whatever. So what really gets us is when people have like their own personal experiences that they come and talk about. Well, we didn't realize this how many people had experiences with this doll. They calculated to more than 10,000 people have written in apology letters to Robert to ask for forgiveness because of the curse that he put on them. 10,000 individuals, like maybe even if 50% of those are bullshit. There are 5,000 people out there that genuinely believe they have been cursed by this doll by taking a picture of it. Including Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, Aussie, born. What? Aussie, Roto, letter? Yeah. Well, it wasn't a letter. So he is parking since I think he has parking since right now. I believe when he blames that on Robert the doll because the story is he, there's like a big like touristy shop at the end. And he bought like one of the little Robert the doll plushies and like put it in a microwave and like just make fun of it and stuff. And then claims that he got Parkinson's because of that. Well, a lot of people get Parkinson's without that Aussie house bar blames year of hell on Ponte doll. Holy shit. Look at him. Oh my God. The black Sabbath rocker was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease last year. And underwent spinal surgery following a fall of this home makes the claim. This family's new really, really TV show reality TV show, I guess it should have said. The Osborne's want to believe the show sees his son Jack 34 trying to persuade Aussie, 71 mom Sharon 68 and sister Kelly 35 to believe in the paranormal, including ghosts, UFOs, fairies and werewolves. I want to episode sees Jack produce a doll named Robert that he reveals is the original doll that inspired the Chuckie horror movie franchise. Jack says so the actual story Robert the doll is that it's cursed by the spirit of his owner. If you disrespect him, make fun of him. Take a picture without asking or even handle him. You'll be cursed in terrible things. We'll begin to happen in your life. Aussie throws the doll the floor saying, you think he's a fucking joke. It's bad luck. I keep telling you you keep taking his fucking daughter. But just look at what I'm saying. Just look at what's going on with me. You think it's a joke. Just look at me. It ain't bad luck. Yeah. I'll say that spot off. Well, fuck that doll. Yeah. No, I don't need that doll in my life. Thank you. But that's what we blur. Blur. Blur. Blur. So you were in the presence of this doll. Yeah. And what is it like to be around this doll? It's definitely weird because like we've been in a lot of haunted places. But it's different when you're doing the haunted objects. It's not like, oh, this the building and the vibe we're in is haunted. It's more like this specific thing that's in front of me. And what is the story behind this doll? Like, why is it supposedly haunted? So this guy gave it's like a three and a half foot tall doll. It's like a life size type of doll. It's really weird. He gave it to his son. And this this son's name was Robert Otto. It was like Jean Robert Otto. A Robert Jean Otto. And he gave his first name and his clothes to this doll. And so the kid in the doll became best friends for years and years and years. And he basically embodied this guy and just became Robert himself. But over the course of his childhood and all the way up until I think he left his parents house to go to college, he would have horrible things happen to him because of this doll. And this doll was allegedly taken from like Germany at this the shop. The company was like a sti it was called the sti. The same company that created like the original teddy bear created this doll. So from the original teddy bear company brought this doll from Germany to give this guy in Florida. And throughout the his entire childhood, like things were like chairs were moved like all these horrible bad luck things would happen. Like he would almost, to the parents, it would seem like he was arguing someone in the room and they'd hear two voices. And then when the parents would run into the room, it was just him and the doll. And so- Just creepy because the parents would say that they heard like their little kids voice and then like an older deep black man's voice. Talking back and forth. And apparently I was Robert. But the big theory about Robert is that he was also one of these like e-vrigor in an object sort of like I don't know creatures. I guess Papa's I guess you could say because Jean would always blame everything that he did wrong on the doll. So like if he was like if you know furniture would be like all around his room or whatever his parents would come try to ground him, he'd be like no Robert did it. And so all that negativity going towards this doll for his entire life, like this is why people believe that it has like a evil to it. Like a manifest of this evil. It's supposed to be bad. And being outside your child's room and you hear your kid talking or someone responding. Like an old man. Just like a low voice. No, that's not what we're going to do, Billy. I would cry. And then you open up the door and it's just the doll sitting there with your kid. And it looks like that. Yeah. That's a dead face doll too. It's something creepy about the lack of expression that the whole story. And the crazy thing too is like our guides there were saying that it will like swallow every once in a while or you could see a lot of link in stuff. Yeah. Oh no. That's crazy. It's like the same guy he went off to be an artist and he did his whole career. And when he was like in his older age, he came back to the house and for like 10 or 15 years, he kept this doll upstairs in his attic and put a whole like you know three foot version of his house upstairs to look a short couch and a short desk. All for Robert. And have conversations for hours and hours on end. So this old man is having this conversation with the doll in a like a smaller version of a living room. So terrifying. As rumor would have it, the autos and their servants would often hear Jean in his bedroom having conversations with himself in two entirely different voices. Furthermore, the autos would wake up in the middle of the night to Jean screaming only to find the frightened boy in bed surrounded by overturned furniture. Jean would blame Robert the doll for messing up the bedroom while Robert would glare at Jean from the foot of the bed. Soon after mutilated toys and mysterious happenings would appear in the home only to have Jean proclaim each time Robert did it. Here's the thing. Imagine if that's real. Like what if like a demon can manifest itself inside of a doll occasionally? Just every now and then little fucking opening in the dimensions pops out. This thing manages to in it can't assume a physical form, but it can sort of embody itself in some sort of an object like a doll something cute. Which is a terrifying too because when it's a little doll or something cute or whatever or like a lot of these things that you say is like a little girl spirit or something. It's like cute. It's like, oh, it's innocent. Like I want to open up to that. But then boom, like maybe it's not. So that's a fucking great movie. Yeah. You know, they have that thing. I mean, well, this doll I think is what said to have been inspired or like Chuckie inspired got inspired from an Annabelle movie is about a real doll too. Yeah. So that's a real doll that's in Edner and Warren's museum that they've kept like a way for many years. They even have a priest once a day coming bless the doll because they're scared of what it does to people. One time every day. I think every single day. Maybe the priest's got a racket going on. I gotta keep coming back. Can we see if you're Annabelle the doll? Would it really looks like the real haunted Annabelle doll? It looks like a rag doll. A rag. It's something really. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's it. Yeah. So that's not nearly as creepy as Annabelle in the movies. Like, yeah, that seems pretty normal. Yeah, exactly. And so they made up terrifying movies. It's fucking horrible. Look at the real Annabelle doll. Now look at Annabelle in the movie. Jesus Christ. They're so terrifying. So they did a great job in making her creepier. Very much. There's a very good job. There's a few of those Annabelle movies, right? If they made the whole movie with that thing. That would be creepy too. Oh, man. It would have been a weird one. I wouldn't be scared of that bitch ass ragged in. I'm gonna say that they're saying it all the same. I'm gonna be like, sit down, shut up before I let you on fire. I thought I'd like to. Yeah, but Annabelle, the one on left, freaked me out. Yeah, that's freaky. When we're by the Robert the doll just to finish that story. So we all split up like Kobe saying like recently we've been splitting up a lot. Just to scare each other more. Just to scare each other more. But part of the museum, so the entire museum is kind of like Zach Bates Museum. It has a bunch of different artifacts and it was a fort actually for a warm, what new name is? It's called Fort East Martello and like it's mainly just filled with a bunch of haunted objects. And where's that at? It's in the keys. Yeah, Fort. Yeah. Yeah. Key West. So there's a section of this fort that used to store all the bodies that like had died during whatever said war it was. And I was walking down through this corridor and we were there for probably like 30 minutes or something like that. Definitely hearing sounds. A lot of like, weird creepy things. Again, sometimes the equipment goes off and that's definitely interesting. It was definitely putting me on edge. But I had a feeling that I'd never gotten before. And out of actually like nowhere. I hadn't like felt nauseous or anything like that. I don't know why I just turned the corner and I'm looking down this hallway and I just immediately start driving. Like I'm like gagging throwing up or whatever like that. And I've just like, well, it wasn't even for, I don't know. I wasn't even thinking about the video. I just immediately left the area. I didn't even think about it. And I walk outside and the guy is the tour guy wherever it is on the outside of the premise. And he's like, sees me and he's like, dude, your your face is white. Like what went on. I was like, I truly don't know. I've never had a reaction, like nauseousness or anything like that. And I genuinely just like out of nowhere gagged probably like 10 times. I hear you. If you're not thinking up, it was just like weirdly dry heaving. Yeah, it was like disgusting. But what was scary is like, so it was me and my buddy Nate that who we know since high school. He's been one of our best friends forever. So we've known Sam since he was 15 type thing. We've both never seen Sam ever act like that. It got so bad that Nate and I were doing like our own like individual investigations and the guide came and got me and was like, yo, you should go check on your buddy outside. Like he's like throwing up outside. And I run out there and yeah, people don't like always forget about it. It doesn't just affect us in the moment, but we get done filming and we have these things called paranormal hangovers where it affects us for a long time like days after. But this is yeah, the moment. Paranormal hangover. The world's most haunted doll. It's just Gagan. So this is after being in Roberts presence. Yeah, we this is the end of the night. So they unfortunately wouldn't let us touch it. But unfortunately unfortunately, they put like a plexiglass. Yeah, right there. So it's probably about it. So it's probably not that glass. Yeah. And this is all in the keys. Is that place as cool as Zach's museum? I would say that specific doll is super super famous, but Zach is definitely put on a cooler environment. Zach has more way more to hours of stuff that you walk through in a house. It's pretty impressive. But this seems pretty creepy too. Yeah, you got to see this place too. It's super awesome. This would you say it used to be a fort. Yeah, it looks like a fort. It looks pretty dope. And so you encounter Robert and then you start, what is the feeling? Was it immediate? No. So I left Robert and I went off my own and that was probably 30 minutes from the time like I was even near Robert to the other area. So we don't know. But the theory goes after afterwards we talked into the tour guide and we're like, what could have that ban? Like, was that Robert? He's like, maybe. But the people that were buried there in that corridor died of yellow fever. And so are most of them dead. And the last little part of yellow fever is that you're throwing up blood over an over-gan black blood. And go with whatever like that in the entire house. So like you're, you're experiencing their last moments? Yeah. So it's the traumatic energy of the last breaths and the last times of all these people's lives was then reflected onto me. That might even be more fucked than Robert. Yeah. I definitely think so because the the yellow fever, if you dive into that like it's gross. I love how it's telling you about my step down having that experience at Gettysburg. I would imagine that like if enough people will die in an area, there's, I mean, if that's real, if there, if things can have a memory, you would think that there'd be something that just lingers on. Right. The last moments of your life, you're throwing up blood and realizing this is the end. You're an agony. And you don't want to leave. That's the thing. Like if you're last moment alive, it's like, I don't want to die, then what if you accidentally like trap yourself? Oh, right. If you can't relax and say I'm ready, I'm ready to go. You're not ready for the next breath. Yeah. It gets so meta and confusing because then yeah, it's like if you're religious, it's like, well, you were going to heaven, but it's like, how do you know? Like spirits don't have the opportunity to walk around earth for a little bit before they move on to the light. I don't know. I mean, God, if I knew, right, maybe there's like a consciousness to being a spirit and maybe you got to get you shit together as a spirit before they like, hey, come on, and maybe some spirits are just losers. They just can't. They just can't figure it out. There's no promotion involved. Did you, what did it feel like to look at Robert? That was really where, because when we came into the museum, they had it covered. So they had like a cloth over it and they offered us like, do you want it to see it? Like, no, we want to wait till we're on camera first. And, you know, again, back to this, that's hype up. We had been researching this for the last like week. We'd heard all the horror stories. We just heard about the 10,000 apology letters and they even had to like read some of them. And then we get to look at it. It was like definitely like, we shouldn't be here. It wasn't like, I didn't think immediately we were in danger. However, you know, our dumbass is trying to get content. We immediately were like, all right, as soon as we see him, let's take a picture of him. And that's the one thing that you're not supposed to do. And so our. Disrespector take pictures. Disrespectful. Our entire concept of the video was like, you know, you hear that if you take a picture of this doll, you're going to cursed. What's test that theory? We didn't know. And so we were like, all right, as soon as we see this doll, let's take a picture and throughout the night, we'll see what happens. There were definitely most things that have happened, but the main gist of it do we feel cursed after we took this picture? It's so easy for someone to dismiss that, right? But if there was just one doll, one doll that was haunted, all the other dolls are fine. Dolls are fine. What's wrong with you? Come on, Sam. Double three. But then one fucking doll, just one doll, you look at that doll and there's something inside of that doll. Very safe, wink. And how do you you explain that to somebody? You have crazy way and it's just cool. Oh, God. Oh, you see, you go. Yeah, swallow. Then you're the crazy one. Did you guys ever go to the Amityville horror house? They don't let you let you in there. We've been trying to contact the owners for like years. Really? Yeah. If they're if they're going to invite, let's do it. People live in that house. I think so I think it's just not even a business. It's just people live there and are like fuck off. I think that's one of the places that they change the address in the street so that people can find it. Because that's very like recognizable because of the window pattern. It's sad. It's like the windows look that movie scared the shit out of me. When I was a kid, how much of that is like the movie is based on the truth or is it just made up member like he broke through the wall he went into the other side and there was like a demon behind the wall or some shits. I saw that movie when I was like 10 years old. Yeah, it was a long time. It was a very vague recollection. How old does that movie? Amityville Horror? The book 77 movie 79. Okay. So I was like murders happened in 12 or yeah, quick after the movies. The murders rather like we need to fucking moving. This is a six story. I mean they really capitalized pretty quick. They did. That's all I remember as the murder part of it. I don't remember if there was alleged demons during the real life version. Yeah, it was like a normal guy and then he lived in this house and killed his old family. Right? And then there was a thing you broke through the wall. I remember, see we could find the scene. There's like a scene where he breaks through the wall. And I remember that freakin' me out as a 12 year old going, baaaah! Like this idea of like, you know, your dad breaking through this hole in the wall. What's it? What's the axis? Apparently every time I just do axis. Well, it's just a scary way to diamond. Oh, that is a scary way. I think we're actually not even sitting in the shine. Yeah, literally. Oh, speaking of the shining, I'm home. Have you ever been to the Stan way hotel? No, I have not. That's how our most few videos make magnificent hotel. Yeah. Oh my God. So the Stanley was the inspiration for the shining. Right? Yeah. And is that the upstate New York hotel or is it the Colorado? Colorado. That's how Colorado is just part of it. It's an S. just part which created the S. This is the method that we were just telling you. Which is the experience. Yeah. So one of our episodes we went to the Stanley Hotel and interviewed the guy that created that experiment for the paranormal. But the Stanley Hotel is pretty widely known as the most haunted place in the United States. Hotel Wise Hotel Wise. Yeah. What'd you guys experience there? That was one of our first experiences ever. I think that was like the- Before we had equipment, really? Before we had equipment, that video is our most viewed video of we, I think it was right after our arrest. And it wasn't like we got crazy equipment type of things, but we heard like scratching sounds and like different knocks on like doors and stuff. And I think even our- One of our cameras like flipped over or something. But that was four years ago or five years ago. What's interesting about the Stanley is- tons and different knocks on doors and stuff. And I think even one of our cameras flipped over or something. But that was four years ago or five years ago. What's interesting about the Stanley is there's this part that's literally in the front room called the Vortex, where there's just a bunch of mirrors on each side that are pointed towards each other and the there is in the paranormal world that that can that create a portal, mirrors facing each other, or like, spirits can become trapped through mirrors and stuff. And so that was like the coolest part of the entire place. It's known to be a Disneyland resort for ghosts. And so anything could like pass in there. It's like a giant portal. There's one of the most famous paranormal pictures ever taken at the Stanley. If you just type in like, Stanley Hotel, like Ghost Photo. This is all over the news. There's like staircase ghosts. There case ghosts is huge. But yeah, we just went recently back this last year. We still haven't been able to get to the main room, which was what the shining was inspired by. It was back. Yeah, go to. That was just when it was right then. It was yeah, that one. There it is. Yeah, that one. What am I looking at? And then if you scroll down a little bit, there's a second picture right there. Oh, no, no, no, no. I guess I go to back the first one. That one, yeah, and then scroll down that middle one. Oh, yeah, all the people in that. And then right there, see right on the stairs. Yeah, that one hit the news because there's so many people that were right there. And then for some reason, little girl looks like. But everything's blurry. Look, that lady coming down this terrace is blurry. The people in a little bit of movement, whatever in front of her is blurry. Right. Right. And there's a picture sucks that kids are going to talk to his moms ago. She's a ghost. Everybody's a fucking ghost. Yeah, that picture sucks. There's a ghost. Go back to the first one. That's a good boy. Yeah, that's that picture sucks. But that that one's weird. So what is happening in this one? I think it's the same, it's supposed to just resemble the same area two times in a row, having like a translucent figure. Again, like pictures, you know, I always like hit or miss and there's a lot of times that like people be like, oh, like an orb or something. Well, there are a million phony Bigfoot pictures. What they call them, the blobs, watches, see shadows like, okay, go through your face and hers is armpit. You know, because people want to see things in still photos. And there's some like psychology behind like we're searching, always searching for faces. So we'll figure out a face on anything. Sure, on Mars. Yeah. Yeah, people find faces and shadows on planets. You ever see the face on Mars? No, it's not the, see the face on the moon, but not on Mars. Yeah, there was a guy named, um, Hogland, Richard Hogland. Oh, yeah. But with this kind of terrifying. Yeah, but what it really is is just shadows on, you know, a piece of rock. Right. It's just in one image though. And I feel like this was one of the very early explorations of Mars, Sidonia Viking one. So in Sidonia, there was this guy though that was, see if it is, that guy's still alive, Hogland. I think his name is Richard Hogland, but he would like milk this for all its worth. And he made a series of videos talking about the geometry that you could find in Sidonia is impossible to, to create a nature or this only me. There has to have been an advanced civilization that existed on Mars and the government's hiding this from us. It was one of those things. And of course it seemed at least a little out of his fucking mind. Yeah. And you smoke a lot of pot and watch documentaries. Those are ones that will get you. And his, his one got me a couple of times. I was like, is this guy right? Because like, I'm one of those people like I was convinced that the original Bigfoot footage, do you ever see the, the Patterson Bigfoot footage? No. It's so fake. It's so fake. It's so fake. But I remember one time being barbecued looking at that thinking it was real. I was like, maybe that's real. Oh my God, maybe I'm an asshole. Maybe I've been mocking Bigfoot this whole time, but it's real. It's coming after you next. Yeah. Oh, what? It's stabilized. This is, this is people have worked on it. Yeah. So you know that, but they stabilized the image because the real image of the guy was on a horse. And by the way, the guy was a con man, all these cooks that want to believe this. There's a whole series of things to go to it. First of all, there's the guy who took this footage was arrested for fraud, for not paying for the very camera that he used to film this footage. Then there was, there's a guy who looks just like, silly, you could see the thing. That's the statement. Oh, it looks over it. It's creepy. The real version of it. That's the dude though. What is the dude's name? Bob Haran. Bob Haran. Bob Haran is this guy who claims that it was him and the suit. And that's him. He walks like Bigfoot. And he's a big giant dude too, big old cowboy. And not only that, there was a, there was an actual gorilla suit that this guy, Patterson had bought. Like there was a person who sold him a gorilla suit. And then there's another named, guy named Gimlin, Bob Gimlin, I believe, Gimlet or Gimlin, who was also involved in this, who also said that it was a hoax. So. It's horses. But if you believe enough, if you get Looney in one time, I got Looney for like five minutes of thought it was real. I'm sorry, I think it might be real. We've taken a lot of pictures. And again, like we said, I don't think we're really on that wave of like believing that I'm going to just video the corner and there's going to be someone that there's one time that we ever got something that was convincing of us being like, maybe this is something. When I, our first time at the Conjuring House, if you just type in like Sam and Colby Conjuring thermal photo, we've ever captured hands down for pictures. Yeah. So like our buddy was pointing down like a thermal camera and you can take a picture of it. And through this like gap, she sees like, you know, there's a window at the end of the hall. She sees like a face. She was a medium by the way. Yeah, she sees a face herself. But then she's like, no, I see something on the camera too. Click the photo and then she shows us this picture. And to us, okay, so the left side of the screen doesn't like that's not part of it. That's like a different. Yeah, it's only on the right. But like that right side is apparently like what we think is like a child's face with you can see a hair swoop, eyes, nose, two eyes, mouth, like our hair corner of your shoulder right there as well. Or it could be a squash. Or it could be a deer heart. Maybe a lot of things. Yeah, a thermal resonance though. Yeah. Of some sort. Yeah. Right. And we were inside. So don't like ignore the thing on the left. We were inside pointed at a window and this is something peak on the second floor too. So it's not someone that's just a kid looking at it. I thought ghosts are supposed to be cold. Yeah, I don't know. That's interesting. I don't know actually. Wouldn't you imagine it goes to cold? Like if you're in a room, you're like, oh, something cold just walk past me. Right. It's good. Yeah. You can go either way. Like is a pocket of energy always going to be cold or. Right. Maybe it's a demon. Maybe it's a hot coming from hell. Right. That would make sense. How long do you guys think you could do this? Do you think you just keep going to all these little haunted spots all over the world and keep doing this? Like have you thought about it? I mean, that's the thing is we've just scratched the surface. We've been doing this for four years, but like we've been international twice to do haunted. I can't imagine all the countries we haven't been to just explore these places. So we could essentially like if we really wanted to do this for a very, very long time. But who knows? We're taking it year by year. Our plan right now, like obviously we love the haunted stuff and there's endless amount of spots and there's always more interesting things we can do and experiments we can get into or more alone investigations. Well, also it's wildly successful. I mean, you guys have millions of followers on YouTube. Your videos are massive. So it's like you're, it's obviously working. So like if you wanted to do something else, it'd be really risky. Yeah. Well, we also just want to kind of make our haunted empire, I guess you could say like into like a bigger thing. Like we've been in talks of maybe creating our own haunted house in the future. Like in our real haunted house or like side businesses like that. We're getting into other parts of the mystery stuff. So like we love, you know, we love the haunted, but there's so many other avenues of mystery that are so easily talked about in the like what other stuff you guys interested in? Like true crime like all these unsolved mysteries are so interesting. We love the Veliska like shooting that video because Sam and I went like super hard with the research and we like fell in love with that process of telling the story. And so why not create like a story time true crime channel? That's almost more fucked up to me because those are real stories that 100% people were killed by other people and just like, oh, you have to sit with that. Yeah. And so that's why harsh that in conspiracy theories and all these other things. So there's millions of things in this like mystery realm that aren't just haunted, which is exciting to us as well as like you said, other other business ventures and part of it. But again, most of this recently has been much more about other people's experiences rather than just ours. So the majority of our content is taking other influencers or other other people like that. Maybe even sometimes they don't even believe and giving them experience that will like change the way they think like we started out with our friends. Like you said, like our hometown friends and that was great now. But now we love taking people that may not even believe or maybe all in the fence, they're interested in this stuff. But then when they see these things like two or three times this last year, we took someone that had never had an experience before and they come on an adventure with us and they see us like a full on shadow figure more than us and their lives are changed. They're sitting there crying for us. Which you got scratch. We went to the wash o club, which was kind of fun. It was like literally what created Zach Bagan's like in his ghost adventures and stuff. So we went to go investigate and we brought like a YouTube friend there and we were just like, did you scratch yourself on the back and it was like in the dead center of her back? Almost to where it looked like it was bleeding to be honest. And she started freaking out and of course it wasn't her. And this is like a guess. This is not us. Don't viewers out there don't believe us because we do it all the time. It's like believe the guests that we have on at least. And this one guy we had on was like a complete skeptic. He's like, there's no way any of this is real. Like three, four, three, three, the night. He's like, come over here. Come over here. Come over right now. I've seen someone right in front of my eyes. Like I see a shadow figure and he's freaking out. He's like, I want to get out on a walk away. I do not want to be in this building anymore. This is freaking me out. He's a non-believer. And those are the certain circumstances that we're like, okay see this is why we bring other people on here. Like it's not just us saying this, not this us like having this experience as anybody. Yeah. That's what freaks me out. Like I wonder how much you can mind fuck yourself and whether or not that's how you can see things. Like not saying that they're not real, but like if you can mind fuck yourself into a place of real fear. And that maybe that opens up doors. For sure. But it's also more interesting when you want things to happen. Because at the end of the day, like the reason why we do this is because if we were to prove on either way, we would rather prove that it's real because that means there's something else out there. It's more fun. And it's not really fun. Like, you know, how many stories are you going to tell 3 am with your friends that you're like, yeah, this isn't real. It's just good to sleep. Or if it is real. Like all these other things. It's just so interesting and so much more of a bonding experience with your friends when you do capture things. And we're open to these things to happen. If it turns out, Ozzie got Parkinson's just because he's like a 71 year old dude who did a ton of coke. It's not as fun as so. It's likely. It's way more exciting. Yeah. The doll got him. Exactly. 100% is fucking dull. It's way more exciting. Yeah. But listen, gentlemen, it's been really fun talking to you. I really enjoyed this. I like what I was thinking about. Congratulations on all you success and don't get killed by any demons or ghosts. We'll try that. And if anything crazy happens, let me know. We'll come back and do it again. Thanks for having me. Thanks so much. My pleasure. Thank you.