If you hear those clicks, that's me typing ladies and gentlemen. I'm not the fastest type of in the world. I get it done. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Blue Apron. Blue Apron is one of my newest and most favoriteest. That's not a real word. Sponsors because what essentially is is they send you all the ingredients for healthy meals and you cook them yourself by their directions with their recipes. All the portions are measured out perfectly along with spices and detailed photographs that show you what to do and all the various parts of the recipe. It's really interesting and it's kind of fun too. Because cooking, if you get like a recipe book and then you have to go to the store, you have to buy the individual ingredients, you have to measure them and weigh them and all that stuff. That's a lot of extra work that Blue Apron sort of cuts out. They also provide you with a wide variety of different meals to choose from, which makes it interesting. It becomes like a little bit of a project which I think is fun. But really, really yummy foods like coconut, curry, salmon, steaks, Swedish meatballs with braise, kale, stuffed cabbage rolls. I've eaten several meals from them so far. There are the amount of calories that you get from these meals also. It's pretty surprising. It's 500 or 700 calories. It's just very low for really yummy delicious foods. But they're all prepared and designed by people who really know how to make yummy delicious food. It's not hard to do. I'm not a great chef, obviously. Did I say that? I think I'm not a doctor. I'm not a great cook. I know how to cook a few things. But with this Blue Apron thing, I find it fun. I find it like a little bit of a project. You know, it's a lot cheaper than ordering out. You can get everything is $9.99 per meal. That's all the ingredients and the exact right proportions with simple recipe instructions right to your door. And like I said, there's a wide variety of things that they're going to send you and things to choose from. It's really delicious. It's very healthy for you. You know, I think you'll be blown away by the quality and the freshness. All of it comes in like this styrofoam container. I'll seal up with ice bags. It's whatever they use, ice packs, frozen things, dry ice. So whatever it is, yeah, all that shit. Whatever stuff they use to keep it from rotting. That's what it really is. But it's delicious. Go to blueapren.com slash rogan. And get your first two meals for free. that is blueapren.com slash Rogan and get your first two meals for free. Really delicious. I'm really happy with it. I use it all the time now and I recommend you give it a shot. Especially when you get your first two meals for free. We're also brought to you by LegalZoom. LegalZoom.com is a way where you can handle a lot of stuff that you would ordinarily have to go to a law office for. You can handle it all online and everybody knows that any time you have to deal with any office where you have to make an appointment and go there. That's a huge pain in the ass. You have to take time off work. You have to figure out how to get there during normal business hours. There's a lot of things that people take care of in law offices that you can take care of with LegalZoom. Self help is the way to go with all these different like for the longest time like there's so many different parts of our society of our civilized world that you would have to go and talk to and expert make an appointment spend an exorbitant amount of money paying this expert to deal with shit. You could do with all sorts of legal things on your own like a power of attorney get a will living trust forming an LLC. All that stuff is super easy to do on LegalZoom. LegalZoom also has an A plus from the better business pure. Which is it's a huge relief if you're dealing with some sort of like what are they doing? They're fucking what are they doing? They're legal help online. What? It sounds like it could be shady. LegalZoom has helped tons of people. We know so many people that have used it. It was originally used to start on it. Brian used it to form deskwad.tv the LLC for that. Tom Seger and Christina Pazitsky I think they use it too. It's really easy to do. Any moron who knows how to just fill out forms can do it. And if you get into a panic while you're doing it, they can connect you with a third party attorney. LegalZoom is not a law firm, but they provide you with self-help legal services at your specific direction. And like I said, if things feel like they're going horribly wrong, LegalZoom can connect you with a third party attorney. It's super easy to deal with ladies and gentlemen and very very economical as well. And for a special savings, be sure to enter Rogan in the referral box at checkout. So go to LegalZoom.com. You can even get divorced. How about then apples? Probably not though, let's be honest. Most of the time when people get divorced, there's like, there's little games in my ship going on. But if you're amicable, if you both look at each other and go, let's just fucking end this, you go to LegalZoom.com and take care of it. Anyway, go there, use the code word Rogan in the referral box to check out and save yourself some money. That's LegalZoom.com. Do you like my new song? It's very good. Thank you. Yeah, don't use that LegalZoom. I'll write a better one for you. Anyway, Emily and Vincent are here from Buddhist geeks. And let's just get cracking. Why fuck around, LegalZoom.com. Use code word Rogan. Put your Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast my night all day. I got to figure out a better way to do commercial because it's always weird with two people out of three are just sitting there and one person is talking, doing a bunch of money. It creates an uncomfortable air in the room. I'm all right. A little bit, right? It's a little odd. Buddhist geeks, somebody sent me a link, I guess it was probably a couple weeks ago, on Twitter to you guys. And right away I went, oh, this could be interesting. A convergence of would you say spirituality, Buddhism and technology? That's because, and geeks, which always is somehow connected with impairment and vision, which is very strange, right? Like being very studious and intelligent is connected to your eyes are fucked. Like every, you know, I mean, you're staring at screens all day, I think. Is that what it must be, right? Because as I've spent more time from a computer, my eyes have steadily gotten worse, but your image, the logo is the Buddha with glasses on. So even the divine are not immune to the perils of LCD screens. True enough. Is there a better way around this to do something where it doesn't completely destroy your vision? Maybe clear of way and it could develop that capacity. That's the only way. But reading does it too, right? Could we've always associated reading with, or is it just getting old and we're just blaming it on a bunch of other shit? Could be that, but I think it's staring at things up close, you know, there's just, I think the eyes just get used to staring at things up close and then they just can't see far away anymore. That's my theory. With me, it's the opposite though. My up close vision is starting to suck. But my vision like looking at you guys this distance is fine. It's perfect. That might be H then. Yeah, I'm thinking this H because also because when I put on reading glasses, things just get sharper. I'm like, oh, that's what things really look like. You know, like I could read everything without the glasses, but then when I put them on, I see like the like if you know, you know, you look at pages, you can see the actual detail, the texture and the paper itself, that's all gone to me. That's all gone in the real world. What is Buddhist geeks? What are you guys doing? Well, we started several years ago as a podcast doing this kind of thing, talking to people, and really in the beginning, it was just my sort of early 20s rebellion against the Buddhist tradition. And I wanted to talk to people that weren't part of the mainstream Buddhist world, but had something cool to say, I thought. So we've just basically started by talking to some different rebels, a lot of gen Xers who are kind of coming up as teachers and meditation, you know, experts or masters. And it sort of started there just as a kind of whim project with a couple of friends and then people responded. So we kept doing it and we felt this sort of obligation to continue exploring Buddhism, technology, culture, the way it's globalizing. And we just sort of from there have just been on a sort of eight year odyssey and Emily recently, about four years ago kind of joined the team and we have been doing the mom and pop things. A lot of that Buddhism has rebels. Absolutely. What is the main thing that people fight, not fight against, but rebel against with Buddhism? I think it's like most religions, you know, there's some aspect of just rebelling against people telling you what to do or the feeling that you know, this system of beliefs is telling you how to live, what to do with your life. I think that's part of it is just kind of breaking apart dogmatic structures and sort of saying, hey, actually, we can make this our own and figure out how to do it ourselves because we're the ones that are interested in it. So we have to sort of take ownership of that. And so there's a bit of like, I guess generational pushback, you know, and saying, actually, we don't want to meditate like the hippies did. You know, we don't want lotus flowers and incense. You know, we want like our computer screens and meditation apps. You know, we want to do it the way it makes sense to us. What is that an effective way to do it? Like meditation apps? Is that real? Is that legit? Are there like some recommended meditation apps? They're better than traditional forms of an alternative, I should say, to traditional forms of meditation? I think there are. There's some good ones. I think they're good to start. I mean, as soon as you start really getting into it, though, then it's useful to, I think still meat space has the upper hand over the app's pace. Interesting. Yeah. But I'd recommend bootify. That was one that Emily and I contributed to. And it's it's a modern mindfulness on the go app. So it sort of teaches you how to meditate in different contexts. Like if you're at the gym or if you're on the tube, you wrote one for working on the computer. Yeah. I wrote a couple for working on the computer. So it's really just about trying to bridge like what we're doing already in our lives with meditation practice and these ancient traditions that have come down. What do you, what is the app for working on the computer? What is it entail? The bootify is the app. And then the couple of meditations that are wrote. It's just simple things like bringing your attention to different kind of anchor points. For example, you know, we all usually have some sort of touchscreen mobile device. And so, you know, you can use use it to bring your attention back as you swipe it, you know, back and forth with your finger. So it's just something, you know, very simple to return to so that, you know, consciousness and the mind can start to just kind of settle so that you know, you're more aware. And by being more aware, it makes a lot of difference. When you say more aware, you mean, because a lot of people kind of scattered, they're all over place and think about the past. Because we're about Facebook one minute, they weren't on, you know, all kinds of different apps. You name one. Is Facebook the devil? No. Sometimes. There's no meditation in Facebook though, correct? Not yet. Not yet. But what I think Facebook into it. It's a fascination with social interaction, right? That's what it is. It's this thing where, you know, I read this piece was talking about the origins of gossip. And what it would gossip is all about why so many people are into celebrities and celebrity gossip, the Kim Kardashian stuff and that kind of thing. And the big thing being that our culture doesn't have the same sort of communities that it once had. These tribal bonds that expanded from 50 to 150 people to cities of 30 million, they're very confusing for our biology apparently. Absolutely. And so that's why people gravitate towards what seems to be really a name like this, this, this, this pulled towards, oh my God, she left him and he went up with her and oh goodness, you see those magazine covers, you just want to grab them. And people who have no part of your life at all, you shouldn't be caring about them even remotely. But for whatever reason, you're compelled to do it. Just a little bit of that with the Facebook thing, right? I totally agree. I mean, I read a great article that said in some sense, Facebook brought that experience of living in a tribal village back as a technology kind of, Allah, Marsha McLuhan and his whole sort of theory about every technology brings something back from the past. Yeah. McLuhan has one of my favorite all-time quotes is that human beings are the sex organs for the machine world. Yeah, that's the greatest ever, right? That is one of the all-time greatest, jbs, hall danes, not only does the universe queer, then you suppose it's queer, then you can suppose that's my number one favorite. But number two, right up there. Nice. Because it is, I mean, McLuhan was right. What are we doing? We're making, we're making computers and we keep making better ones and we keep, we're essentially the evolutionary device that causes the things that we've created to accelerate far quicker and innovate far quicker than biology ever has a chance to. And in the process, we're also, it's seemingly at least on the verge of creating some sort of an artificial biological life. So whether it's biological, I mean, I don't know what you call artificially created cells that interact with each other the same way human cells do. But we're pretty, pretty goddamn close. Whether it's 100 years or 200 years, pretty close to making artificial people. And where's that coming from? It's coming from people. I mean, we really, if they are machines, biological machines, McLuhan will be right. And then a new life form will be birthed out of our greasy little hands, not ours, obviously. Yeah. I think that's right. I I saw Elon Musk on Twitter a couple days ago said, uh, increasingly looks like we're going to be the biological bootloaders for digital super intelligence. Yeah, most likely there's a bunch of people that don't believe that's happening. I read this interesting article on Kurzweil, the guy was very critical of Kurzweil. And he was, I think this guy's like sort of, he's a kermajan a bit. He's an intelligent guy, but his criticism of Kurzweil was basically a biological criticism of that our understanding of the human mind is already, it's fairly limited in terms of like how the human mind processes various hormones and neurotransmitters and proteins. And that are there's no way we'll be able to recreate that because our ideas of human of the human mind, the biological mind are still constantly evolving and changing and growing. And then we're not really ready yet to duplicate the human mind. But my take on that was that we don't have to duplicate the biological functions of it to duplicate the actual functions of it. As if they figured out a way to make something that not only mimics the memory banks or the memory access of the human mind, but it's much better than it. It does it in a completely different way, a non-biological way. And they can figure out a way to download intelligence or download consciousness or memories into that bank. Well, we're not going to really need this whole idea of cells and proteins. And that is, those are the components of the biological machine. But if we can make a better version of that and do it like some sort of a synthetic version or some sort of an artificially created doesn't seem to me that we're going to need to know everything about the human mind or to recreate its processes. Right? Does that make sense? I mean, it makes sense. I feel like I'm not enough of a specialist on artificial general intelligence to really know the different. The problem is I don't think anybody is. I mean, there's a bunch of people that are working really hard at it, but no one's ever done it. So if you haven't done it, who's it? How the fuck are you an expert? I mean, if there's not an artificial human being that is, you know, state of the art version 7.0, capable of compassion, understands its actions. Hopefully it will be. It has to be, right? Otherwise, we're going Terminator style. That's right. That's the real question, though. Sort of like the way we did nuclear power before we learned how to shut off nuclear power plants. Like I hope they don't do that with artificial intelligence. Like, well, let's just get this thing up and running and then we'll figure out a way to give it emotions. Yeah. No. I mean, that's what scares me a little with the AI stuff is that it's so much focused on the rational thought process. And yet, you know, my experience of being human is that that's barely part of my human experience. Occasionally, I'm rational. I have thoughts. But mostly, I'm just like reacting to things and emotional. And, you know, I don't even know what's running most of my processes. Yeah, that is an issue, right? Yeah. And I think it's also interesting to see just bring a little bit of the feminine perspective. And it's like, I'm very conscious of like, you know, child birth and some of these, you know, natural things that are on my mind a lot. And so thinking about merging the technology or creating some sort of artificial intelligence, it seems to me that a lot of these conversations start to navigate really quickly towards getting out of the body. And so I, you know, wonder if there is some sort of bridge between, you know, we're going to create something new. And at the same time, like you were saying, like, infusing that with wisdom and compassion. And some of these biological processes, are we ever really going to get out of that? I don't know that it's just an underlying assumption a lot in these conversations that I think is interesting. Yeah, it's fascinating because the general idea of the human body and the needs of the body, whether they're the needs for food or the need for the human touch or the need for the need to breed, all these different things will be completely unnecessary if we're no longer biological. And what is causing war? What is causing greed? What is causing jealousy? Are these ancient monkey ideas that are stuck in our genetics, these mechanisms that have sort of forced us into the future? They forced competition, they forced us to cope and adapt. They forced us to learn to interact with each other. And along the way, we've sort of developed these methods for managing the biology and meditation being one of them. Meditation and mindfulness and trying to be centered and being the present has sort of emerged because so many people are like, my fucking heads all over the place. This is, hey, this is what I've learned. If you just do this and say, this is where I am, this is what I'm doing. All out of this stuff is nonsense. I concentrate on this and this I can get things done with. But if I live in the past and worry about all the mistakes that I've made and allow them to define them, allow them to define me rather, they can be very limiting and they can really ruin your perceptions in a sense or flavor your perceptions in a very unsatisfactory or a very unwelcome way or your day can be burdened by the past or you could be in the pre, like these, all these things are sort of designed to allow us to navigate the biological waters, right, to figure out what is the push and pull of this machine? Like why is this machine jealous? Like what's going on here? Why does this want me to be upset at someone else's success? Why does this want me to be upset that someone is attracted to someone else other than me? Why does this want me to be upset at someone else's house or someone else's family or whatever it is that is tweaking you? What's going on in here? Well, the machine wants competition because the machine has gotten you to 2014 where a million years ago a monkey crawled out of a hole and figured out a way to draw an arrow, the points towards where the food is, the other monkeys of that, oh that way you could be like, oh I said what you're doing and then then those ideas compiled and they piled on to other ideas and before you know it a million years later we have a civilization, a complex civilization that has all these different influences that have led us to this point. But a lot of them are biological, a lot of the very motivations for doing most of what people do on a daily basis are very biological. When those are eliminated, it becomes a real question of like what's life? What exactly are we? And if we reproduce through test tubes or whatever the hell it's going to be, when we become or 3D printers or whatever it's going to be when we become biological copies or artificial biology, what are we and what is life? Yeah. Those are really important questions. I guess, I guess. I think one thing I thought was interesting is I got into the transhumanist stuff, you know while back was that they used this term mind uploading to kind of predict, you know we'd be able to upload our consciousness into the cloud and stuff like that. But I thought it was interesting that later I realized they never then used the term body downloading. So why is it that you can upload your mind to the cloud but you can't then download your consciousness back into different kinds of bodies? And I think it speaks a little bit to what Emily's saying that there's a lot of the shadow of the geek culture is a disdain for the physical body and a disdain for limitations, which I totally understand because you know I think there's part of us that wants to transcend the limits of being human. And it's the same thing that drives the Buddhist meditators to seek it for enlightenment. You know it's to realize this thing which is beyond in some sense the limitations of the human experience. And yet you know the real mature expression or realization in the Buddhist tradition is to realize that and then to return back into your incarnated physical form and to fully inhabit it. So I hope that the transhumanists and the folks that are building these you know seeds of digital super intelligence realize that even if we're able to upload our patterns into the cloud we still if if there's still beings who have a sense of of themselves and have some sort of physical substrate whether it's carbon or silicon that they're still going to have to deal with certain issues of incarnation of being in a form, a physical form of some sort even if it's a very loose digital you know very fast flickering form. Like it's still there's still something there and there's still some sort of reference point. And I think that's where the Buddhist tradition has something to say even about super intelligence and what that experience would be like because as long as there's a form and as long as there's an identity right like a reference point of me then there's going to be certain kinds of issues that we can't get rid of like then I have to deal with you and I have to deal with these other use and then there's things are objects outside of me and some of them I want and some of them I don't want and some of them are just going to ignore and so even if I were a super intelligent consciousness which I can't imagine because my imagination is so limited I still think there will be some amount of fundamental dissatisfaction that's built into the experience of being an individual who has a reference point and I think that's in some sense what the Buddhist path is about seeing clearly is that most of our existential suffering and despair comes from this fundamental experience of being a separate being who exists on this side of my body. But isn't the experiment I mean if you really stop to think about true enlightenment and being completely in the moment, doesn't that exist in the animal kingdom exclusively? I mean that's the only way they exist. They exist completely in the moment and in a sense that is the most biological of all creatures and that's a creature that has no existential issues. They don't have any angst in terms of their future, their past, they live and exist completely in the moment. So isn't it just our awareness of the futility of this existence that's part of the problem because along the way we're innovating, we're expanding, we're growing, we're doing all these different things, we're going to biohacking conferences and whatever the hell you're doing but at the end of the day you live and you die you have a very short window here and it's like what are you supposed to be doing? Are you supposed to be enjoying it? Are you supposed to be leaving it better for the people that come after you and what's their purpose? Like why leave it better for them and what are they doing? They're just leaving it better for the next. At the end of the day, what are we doing? We're just enhancing this giant super organism known as the human race and for what purpose? Because we're helping it pollute because we want more planes in the sky, we want better cell phones like what? The existential angst of being conscious, of being able to recognize that this is kind of like at the end of the day, this is just a weird little trip you're on. You're on a birth to death trip and if you become something that's not human, if you become something that's not burdened by biology, it's not burdened by sexual urges or the petty urges of modern human life that we all struggle with, what exactly are you here for? What exactly is going on? Motivation might be the number one problem with artificial intelligence. It might not even be compassion. It might be that artificial intelligence becomes so intelligence that it's like we're not doing shit. I'm not doing nothing. Why would I do anything? Why would I expand? Why would I move on? Why would I make more of me? Why would I do anything? Why would I explore galaxies? I don't even have ovaries. I don't have a mind. I don't have a sense of futility. I don't have a beginning and an end. I can make another one of me with a button. What am I doing? Am I going to go see the top of the Grand Canyon? For what? For what purpose? What am I going to get flying a plane and go to Paris? Why? What are your shit? I don't have any desire to learn. There's no urge to improve and innovate. I'm not biological anymore. Like what is it created? Everything that we have. Everything that we have, every building that we've ever made, every work of art that we've ever created is essentially this thing inside human beings that wants us to innovate and create this thing that has allowed us to radically reshape our environment that has allowed us to design cities and pieces of art and pieces of architecture. And all these different things that we've created has all come from that same desire, the desire to continually improve. But if the human body, if we transcend it with some sort of an artificial creation and we become far more enlightened and intelligent, the ultimate question will be why? Well, I would say the ultimate question for me would be who are we? Yeah, what are we? What? Yeah, or what? Because when I'm listening to you talk about this and I'm like, huh, there's a part of me that's like, no, like, we're not doing that. And then there's this other part of me that's like, yeah, that desire to create and that desire to move forward in the evolutionary like, um, impulse and us all is so strong. And that's what makes us so beautiful. And so when I really touch into the mystery of it all and the beauty and the wonder and what you're talking about with the art, to me, it's like not such a question of trying to get out of this anymore. It's more like a question of how can we use these technologies and the things that we are learning through science and the natural laws of things. Because honestly, if we start to violate much more of our natural laws, our oceans are going to rebel in like our earth is going to become unstable and we're seeing some of that. So we do have to balance the biological component with the evolutionary impulse. And one thing that comes to my mind is a philosopher, Ken Wilber, talks about transcendent and include a lot. So what if, you know, part of what we're doing is learning how to transcend some of our limitations as human beings and at the same time include some of those limitations. That keeps us grounded. I think that's really important as well, transcendent and include. Yeah, I just wonder what would happen if we eliminated all of our biological as well, transcendent include. Yeah, I just wonder what would happen if we eliminated all of our biological urges, and would things just completely stop? Why would anybody create art if we don't want to impress other folks? Well, I think if we have a choice, maybe some individuals would choose to eliminate those things, and maybe some would choose not to, right? Right, yeah. Well, if there's like a huge diversity, it's not just one thing that we become. What if it's like many things, and people just kind of decide to go off and reprogram their consciousness in various ways? Well, I've always been fascinated by this idea of constant improvement, and it's sort of what fuels modern corporations, this idea of constant growth. It fuels human beings like no one is happy with where they are. They want a bigger house, they want a better car, they want, you know, if they're an artist, they want to create their latest, greatest masterpiece. They don't want to sit on their laurels, they want to consistently constantly improve. Where's the iPhone 6? I'm still waiting on that. I'm waiting. Yeah, we have this consistent constant need for improvement, and that is essentially designed into the evolutionary process itself. Like that's what led single-cell organisms to divide, become multi-cell organisms to get out of the ocean, to seek land, to seek shelter, to seek improvements in, you know, altering its environment in order to protect itself from predators, which led us to the 21st century, to where we are today, having this conversation. That's somehow, I don't know if you understand it, but I don't understand how my voice is being processed down into ones and zeros, and pumped through the sky, and people are getting it on their phone right now. Is there driving in their car? This is madness. This is a mad, mad, mad world. And what is the urge behind all of it? Well, it's this biological need for innovation, this biological need for constant improvement, and it's designed in the evolutionary process itself. I mean, it's a part of the evolutionary process. I mean, why do animals evolve? Why don't they just say, fuck it, if these fish keep grabbing us, let's just stay the same color and go extinct. No, bugs, you know, they start, look, like you've seen caterpillars that look like predators, they have developed eyes on their backs, so they can look scary, so that less animals eat them, or at least they have gotten to that point where that design. I mean, I don't know how you can ever really, truly, completely explain some of these butterflies that have these elaborate images that have sort of emerged throughout, I mean, how many hundreds of thousands or millions of years of evolution, but it's incredibly fascinating that they've developed this need to figure out how to trick animals so they can continue to breed. They've improved, they've innovative, and that's that if you could really talk to a butterfly and go listen, dude, you only live a week. Why fucker, what do you care? Like if you die or your relatives die, what kind of a bullshit life is this? You know, you live a week, you fly around, people go, oh, look at the butterfly, and then it's over. Like let a bunch of lizard geos, let's just get this over with. Let's, you know, come back as a better bug. Figure out how to exist as a microbe inside the body of the animals that are eating you and then develop, from its poop into some magical plant that enlightens the people that eat it or something. But living as a butterfly is bullshit, but they don't think that way. There's just this, it's part of this process, this continue to innovate, constantly push forward, make things better. If we stop being biological, does everything just stop? Does everything just end it? And did, you know, what, what is the conversation then? If you don't have a motivation, if you don't have an expiration date, if you don't have people's sexual choices to appeal to, if you don't have people's social choices to appeal to, if you don't want people to like you, if you don't have any desire biologically, what's the motivation? Well, I mean, obviously this is highly speculative in a ways, but maybe I'd just throw in one piece and kind of bring it back down to the analog version of intelligence, which is these human bodies sitting here having this conversation. If that's okay with you. I'd say there's another piece that's really important in what you're saying. There is the drive to innovate and to transcend. But then I think there's also a very powerful force that moves in the other direction. And I would call it compassion or care or love. And it's that part of us that wants to include everything like Emily mentioned transcending and including. You know, we can become better and better and better, but what good is it if everyone else is left behind? You know, what good is it if we're, you know, living, living the high life and there are millions of people who are struggling to feed themselves. You know, at some level when we get in touch with the reality of that, there's part of us if our hearts are open, you know, that really resonates with the pain of that and wants to include and wants to respond to that suffering and to that difficulty. And I think that's part of the reason life exists as well. It's one of the primary reasons. It's not just to transcend, but it's also to care for and to respond to the needs of others because we realized it's not just about us. Like it's not just this experience that's important. There are the all these others, you know, that are also having an experience and they're not unlike me. Why compassion can can exist because I realize like your experience is not unlike my experience. There's a way in which we have this common hardware, where this common sense of consciousness. I assume this, you know, common hopes and fears desires. And so in that sense, you know, I think compassion is a really powerful force that also holds life together and keeps it from flinging apart into the into the ethers. But the cynical objective amongst us would look at that and say, well, that's just a mechanism in order to keep society together to allow this consistent innovation. You need people to stay together in order to get people to work together in order to get the maximum amount of productivity out of the human mind and creativity. I mean, there's only one way they have to love each other. If they don't love each other, they're not going to build shit. They're not going to go live like Ted Kuzinski and hide up in the woods in a little shack and try to stay away from each other as much as possible. Part of the reason why we do so well is because we have compassion. So it could certainly be considered an evolutionary device to ensure innovation and constant growth. And it has. I mean, every society that has done well has been a society that cherished its members. If you don't give a fuck about your members, you get a North Korea type situation where there's no innovation, the country's stagnant, everyone lives in fear. The lights are off at night. And that's a worst case scenario for a modern culture. And that is based almost entirely on those same ideas. The lack of compassion for your fellow beings exhibited, like if you looked at the one thing or you asked me, what's the one thing that troubles you most about brutal dictatorship like North Korea? Well, the poor people that live there, the poor people that are suffering that live there are compassion as a part of what makes it a component, a critical component which makes it successful. Yeah, and I think you know, you can look at it from that perspective. But I think there's other ways to look at it, which is that compassion in and of itself is a good, you know, that there's something inherent in the experience of compassion of the open heart that's responding to suffering, which is in itself good. And that, you know, when you experience and touch into that space, which completely dissolves cynicism in the moment of it. There is a feeling of this is right, like this is right to respond to the difficulty of other beings because on some fundamental level we aren't separate from each other. And in some fundamental way, the level of the universe itself, you know, everything arose out of this momentary big bang, right? That's our current story about it. Like, okay, what the fuck was that? Where did that? What was that that it all came from? This nothing, this infinitely small point in space. Actually, you know, the big bang isn't something that happened in the past. It's something that is happening right now. It's something that the, that which was prior to the universe is still here. And that is also our nature. And that nature is naturally compassionate. It naturally responds. It naturally includes everything. So I think there's something in us that also wants to reunite with our own deepest heart and our own deepest mind. But does it really? Because if that's the case and how do you factor in predators? How do you factor in the constant competition and the wild that exists everywhere? Compassion really only exists when there's safety. It's the only time it exists when, you know, when you worry about your own existence constantly. It's like this rabid sort of primal struggle. When all that has put the rest and you build up walls and you have a fire and you can hold each other and everyone's together and find then there's the room and need for compassion. But with the evil and the fish, there's no compassion. I think you're speaking to our habitual patterns that get ingrained in us as we grow up. And with the Buddhist training that I've been through, it really does teach us how to start to deconstruct some of that training. I mean, compassion naturally arises in a moment's notice without there being this strong sense of contraction around our small sense of self. You know, when your child reaches for the stove, you're going to try to jerk it back because you don't want it to burn itself, right? That's the level of compassion that's naturally arising. So, well, that's also being, you're in a mentor role. You're teaching this human being about things that it doesn't understand yet. I would think of more of compassion as someone you have no biological connection to at all and you see them in need of help and you help. And there's something that's inherently satisfying about that when you do help someone. It's very strange, like me and my friend Todd were driving, we were in North Carolina, we were driving on the road and we saw this car. It had like, it's a hazard zone, but they were like really, really dim and it was on the side of the road. And as we passed the car, maybe a couple hundred yards later we saw a guy lying on his back. And we went, oh shit, something happened. So we stopped the car we got out, we helped the guy we called 911. We got the guy up, he had a severe asthma, his car ran out of gas and he had an asthmatic attack and fell and we spent a bunch of time with this guy in the cops. And after it was over, we had this like feeling, the guy was safe, the guy was, you know, the guy in the hospital in an ambulance, they took him to the hospital, the whole thing was resolved. And we had this like, elation, this like light feeling of happiness that we did something. Yeah, we were tired and we just flown in and we would rather just go to our hotel, but instead we spent an hour or so and we felt way better, you know. It's like this feeling of elevation, you've helped your fellow being. Right, so it's naturally programmed in us. And so therefore we can continue to cultivate that and so it's more of a consistent state that's present. That's what I've learned. Yeah, that's where the cynic would say that the whole reason for that is so that these humans can breed and make more humans figure out a way to make a better electric car who figure out a way to remember whole. It also reminds me of science and the mirror neurons too, because we're learning that we're mirroring each other and what you're doing is affecting me and what I'm doing is affecting you. And it's rewiring our brains as we're talking. So I mean in that sense, like we really are so connected that we don't even realize how connected we are. So in a sense, yeah, it is one of the most important things. That connection is undeniable. And it's fascinating when you see people change the people that they hang around with and they all of a sudden improve or regress. And that's a consistent pattern with human beings. You find a really good group of friends are super healthy and like to do a lot of exciting fun things and they're compassionate to each other. And you start mimicking that behavior or at least mirroring that behavior or when you're around people that are just complete messes. So we don't have to be ruled by our biological desires. So when you're saying I agreed and hatred and competition and all that, then I mean maybe that is where we are at a certain point. And some of us are with evolutionary drive to continue to create and open and really deepen into what some of the wisdom traditions have been talking about. Then it's possible to evolve ourselves as we're even talking here. Yeah, but my question remains like when you remove all these biological urges, what is the purpose of this thing? Because it doesn't seem to me that there would be any reason to go on. If you removed everything by a logic. And that's just something. I mean you can think like that. But what would be the purpose? I think it's hard to know. I mean this is my point of view. It's hard to know because we don't know what it would be like to be that, to be whatever that is. So their minds go and try to construct it all. So it's sort of like if we can only imagine what it would be like not to be like we are. But it's hard to imagine what it would be like to be something that has yet not yet emerged. So maybe we could have a follow-up interview and we've all attained super intelligence and we can- We'll be no need for podcasts. Well we can get together in the instantaneous mind meld which is intelligence and riff on that. That to me seems more likely than any of those other scenarios. I wonder like what the next step is. I've stopped many times and I've spent like entire days thinking about a thousand years from today to a thousand years from now. Like what is the difference? And what is the difference going to be? And how radical is it going to be? How radical is the shift? And I really have a feeling that it's going to have nothing to do with the body. And all to do with the mind. And I think that this idea of transcending the human body and I have a feeling they're going to figure out some way that the human mind can access other states, dimensions, levels of consciousness that literally the human body will be irrelevant. Well it already can. Oh yeah we already can access all kinds of crazy things. You know that's for some of the things that I've learned in meditation. Or psychedelics. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right but what's going on there? What is that? Do we know? What is that? Is that you're opening up the flood gates for human neurotransmitters and the body's ability to process them, get skewed. And it presents you with all sorts of delusional beliefs and crazy visions because your visual cortex can't process all these chemicals correctly. So you have this wild fantastic ride that gives you the sense of euphoria and this elated sense of being. Disillusion with it huh? No not at all. No just completely offering the devil's advocate point of view. Yeah yeah no I appreciate that. I mean I think that point of view is coming at it from the biological physical perspective. Yeah. But then there's also the perspective of consciousness itself, you know of the experiential aspect of it. Which is I think also part of the challenge of our moment in time I think is starting to recognize that both of these perspectives are valid. The perspective of consciousness of experience is also valid. So from the perspective of consciousness you know those altered states of experience reveal something valid. Now whether or not you know we can from that point of view describe the biology of it I think it's clear we can't. And so it's useful to have a description of like this is what's happening in the brain. These you know areas are de-afferentiating and then these areas are lighting up and all that stuff. But that's not who we that's not all of who we are we're not just brains. Right. Because you know we're having thoughts about brains and the only way brains exist is through our internal representations of brains. In terms of human consciousness. So I think you know that'd be the other perspective is like consciousness itself is also a valid perspective on this. And from that point of view you know those moments of altered experience of like compassion like you described when you know you realize you helped the person in Asheville. And we're there for him or you know when your child's born or when you you know take a hallucinogenic medicine with the intention of learning more about your you know your deepest nature or something about yourself. Or going on a meditation retreat and exploring your experience moment by moment. I think those things reveal very important truths that are at the level of consciousness itself. That you know you can't convince a skeptic or a cynic that they're true. But you can give them the instructions and say hey run this program and see what happens. And if you do it with a certain kind of intention then you know it changes your life. It changes your perspective. It changes your sense of who you are you know and what this is all about. And I appreciate that you're pointing out you know the one side of it which is that you know yeah this is a limited trip. Like we don't really know what the hell is happening here. We don't know how we got into this body. At least I don't remember how I got into this body. I don't know why. I don't know why it's happening. And then like we're going to die you know at some point and we don't know when that's the other thing. We know we're going to die but we don't know when. We don't know how we don't know how long for now. And so there is a certain certain kind of like in your face shock about that. That I think we're constantly coping with as human beings you know we're kind constantly. And compassion can be a way to cope with that you know and love. Like there's a term that this Tibetan master used who came to the American the 70s named Chugam Trunk. But he said there's compassion and then there's idiot compassion. And idiot compassion is when you are trying to respond to suffering because you can't handle it. Because you don't you can't actually deal with it. So you try to like make it go away or you try to oh poor you poor you you know that kind of compassion. So compassion can just as easily be a way to cope with the shocking reality that we don't know what's even going to be. What's even going to happen next let alone like what's going to happen in 50 to 100 years from now. Does that make sense? Sort of I always felt like compassion was just the way that we kept together. We kept our love for each other and bonds and feeling other people's pain is a way to ensure that we minimize that as much as possible. That's just sort of part of the biological process especially the biological process of transcending the simple monkey mind and moving into some new state. The ability to understand each other communicate express information and also to be able to conceptualize very bizarre ideas that human beings have kind of based their entire society on. We based our society on bizarre things like laws, regulations, money, bandwidth you know there's a weird concepts that we have had to factor into our view of the world. The environment are our interaction with that environment or effect on that environment. How much can we mitigate that? How much is just a necessary evil to maintain our wonderful existence with air conditioning and high-speed internet? I mean what are those thoughts? Where are those things going? And how much are those connected to again the same thing? This constant need to stay together, help each other innovate, help each other move forward, press forward and continue to grow. And is something like Buddhism or transcendental meditation or anything? Are these just sort of ways to get through this in a relatively sane way? Are these essentially man-created technologies human-created technologies to mitigate the natural world? I mean in a way they clearly are because humans I'm sat under trees in India 2500 years ago, thousands of years ago. And explored their own minds and did come up with various programs for how to work with experience. Isn't that fascinating that someone a long time ago was like looking around people hacking each other to death of swords and was like you know there's got to be a way around some of this shit. What's going on here? Why is everybody launching arrows over the top of those walls? Like what the fuck are we doing? And why in India? What the hell is going on in India? Yeah, India has been the birthplace of a lot of developments and consciousness. Not coincidentally, worships cows who not coincidentally make cow shit from double-ungealed animals that silosab and mushrooms grow on. I'm completely connected for sure without a doubt and soma you know the ancient Vedic traditions and all these ancient Hindu texts that speak of these psychedelic drugs. We don't even know what the hell they were. These important psychedelic aspects of their culture that are completely lost. Like no one knows what soma is. It's a huge part of their ancient religious tradition and you know whatever it is. It's completely up for debate. Some feel it's a combinatorie drug with you know the amanita mascara and silosaben and all sorts of different things but no one knows just all guesswork. But that's gotta be a part of it right? Someone ate some mushrooms and said those cows are awesome. We need to think keep those guys around don't eat the cows eat this. Oh yeah don't eat the cows. This came from the cows. Yes. You know like what a trip. I'm just starving people letting cows go because the cows make shit that mushrooms grow on. Yeah I mean I think it's crazy too that people figured out how to pay attention and use their body in a way to produce some of those effects and dodgelessly to be able to experience that even without mushrooms. It's able to get into those kind of states of consciousness and even to stabilize them as a baseline of existence. Well Kundalini masters people that are really good at Kundalini. I have a friend who teaches it and he says that he can reach these complete psychedelic states where he's interacting with beings that may or may not be there that he can visually recognize in front of him. Like he can see it as if he's tripping. And I'm like how do you like where are you getting there? It's just years and years and years of mindfulness in this very specific practice. Right. Concentration is always tied to an every contemplative tradition. These sort of psychedelic or psychic experiences. It's like the ability to focus and to be able to absorb consciousness in one thing. It seems to be the gateway into which all of those other weird experiences can arise. But you're told to not pay attention to those experiences. That's like you're missing the point if you're trying to seek out these hallucinations. Some traditions, a lot of Buddhist traditions do sort of suggest not getting sidetracked by them. But they inform us and change the way that we can relate to things that they are important. But they can definitely do a lot of good work. And a lot of weird shit. I mean sorcery like into Bet, you know. There's like all these people like out there like casting weird stuff at each other. And you know I've been to Tibet. So I don't know how much of it is like you can just see weird stuff happening and how much of it is their mythology. But all the same like there's enough weird stories coming out of places of people that have been sitting in caves for you know millennia, exploring their unconsciousness. So we're already uploading. I mean we've been I guess uploading at least in some level. Well the artwork itself is representative of these experiences. If you look at Tibetan artwork it's so trippy. It's mind blowing. So psychedelic. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. We did a meditation a couple weekends ago and one of the guided meditations was to imagine a lotus flower in your heart that had a thousand petals. And each petal was shooting off a beam of clear light that connected with another petal and another being's heart. And that sort of spread it out infinitely. But it also went in both directions like in terms of the atomic and quantum level and the universes within atoms. And it went outward in all directions. And I'm like okay these these dudes were you know because they mostly were dudes that were able to do this. These dudes were like exploring the furthest reaches of the inner you know cosmos. What do you mean by the were mostly dudes that were able to do this? Well I mean the cultures of Tibet and most of these places you know there were nuns and there were women doing the practices. But I don't think they had as much opportunity to do them because of the you know the organization of their cultures. But there's not a biological limitation like achieving these experiences. No. Actually the Tibetans say women have an easier time at these practices. Yeah I would imagine that because testosterone is so controlling and limiting in that sense. Like there's so much ego bound to testosterone. And also the mortality of testosterone like being the one that survives and like all that is like inexorably sort of connected to the sex hormone over the male. I would imagine that that would be more limiting. Emily is a better meditator than I am. I practice twice as hard and experience half the results. Do you guys ever go in sensory deprivation tags? I have not done that. I haven't done that yet. How dare both of you? I know. I know. I know. This is such a confusing thing to me because I've been such an advocate on the sensory deprivation tank and I talked to so many people that are in a meditation. I'm like how do you not use the one tool that is essentially like designed for the best meditation possible? Well retreats you know we've both done a lot of months of intensive retreat and it's kind of like sensory deprivation. I mean you don't talk. You don't you know you eat what's in front of you. You're sitting in silence most of the time. It really does limit the sensory input. And you know I've been in states of consciousness where all sensory input sort of disappears for a while. So I feel like I've had that experience of how can you say that though if you haven't done it? If you haven't done the actual tank itself. Oh I don't know how it compares exactly but I know what it's like to experience a lack of sensory input. Right. At least on a certain level. On a certain level that you know there's no sense of visual sight sound. It's actually probably deeper because there's no sense of the body at all in those states. It's completely formless. A deeper than what? A deeper than if you're laying in a tank and you still have an experience of the senses of your body. Like if you can still feel your body. Can you feel your body in a sensory deprivation tank? No that's the whole point. Okay so it's probably similar. More intense. This is why I've done both. Yeah. And the sensory deprivation tank, your weightless. We'll have to do it. You're floating in water that's the same temperature as your skin. So you don't recognize where the water ends and your body completely ceases to send information to you. Yeah. And if you guys are already good at meditating meditating in a tank would be like turbocharged. Probably right. 100% guaranteed. I can't believe you haven't done it. Why don't you have a sponsor yet for a sense of my basement? I have one of my basement. I have a tank in my basement. I go in that sucker all the time. You need an advertiser here I think. Well I sort of help my friend Crash who owns the float lab in Venice. But I don't do it for financial compensation. I just do it because I want people to know about it. But I would do, I retweet people's tanks all the time that I have no affiliation with whatsoever because I think it's a massively important tool that is somehow another slip through the fingers of our consciousness. I don't get how people haven't grabbed a hold of that and ran with it. I read a study one time that says a lot of people once they have some sort of opening, we could call it mystical experience for lack of a better word right now. That a lot of people don't want to have them again after they've had it the first time. Something about the opening kind of freaks people out. Those people are weak. To just scare. But I'm just saying yeah. I mean and it can be scary for people. So it seems like the expansion of consciousness is something that is naturally in us as well. And so thinking about the technology where we started this conversation a little bit, there is this impulse to explore and to expand and upload into different states and realms of being. But that fear of expansion. That's just the ego. That's all that is. That's just your body. into different states and realms being. But that fear of expansion, that's just the ego. That's all that is. That's just your body trying to reclaim some sort of walls. Let's put boundaries on this sucker so we can clearly define it. Where when you have a psychedelic experience, one of the things that the most talked about aspect of it is the boundary dissolving aspect of it. That the boundaries all dissolve. And I remember one of the first times that I did a really potent psychedelic was five MEO DMT. And the overwhelming message from it was that there's no up and there's no down and that you're just a part of the infinite. And that feeling is very like saying it like this is it sounds like just a bunch of noise coming out of your mouth that sort of vaguely represents what this concept would be. But experiencing it in a psychedelic state was so overwhelmingly educational. And so it was so boundary defining. Like whatever I thought of as a boundary in the past was now like oh that was just this and this is just that. And what you really are is one thing that is holding all these other things that are all a part of this huge thing. And this huge thing is you're in it. You're not separate. I'm not separate from you. You and I are these containers that are inside of this. There's air and there's there's always something there. There's not there's no nothing. It doesn't exist. There's no nothing. There's no nothing anywhere. Even nothing is something. Yeah, no shins and young. One of our favorite teachers he says emptiness is not a thing. It's a pure doing, which is sort of another way of saying I think what you're pointing to. That everything is just happening as it is and there's no in a sense there's no thing that even goes beyond all of that. It's just this. You know it's just this happening that's happening. One of the universe also is like a soup. It's not like you're not throwing a ball through the air and someone's catching it. It's not hitting anything. It's not a vacuum. Like the whole thing is just it's filled with something. It's all connected. Like you and I aren't really separate from each other. We're just not touching skin, but we're touching something that's touching us. It's in that, you know, we're all feeling that. Boy, that sounds hippie. Oh, that's a maybe shit. But it's but it's also true. Yeah. In some way. It's also true. And that these these ideas, whether it's meditation or yoga or psychedelics or these ideas of mindfulness are in a lot of ways an attempt to escape this monkey realm to escape this biological realm that we find ourselves in to try to if not escape it rather to manage it. Transform it. Yes. I would say transform it. To what though? I don't have a good answer to what that's kind of looping back around where we started this conversation to what right? That's but that's not like building a house and you don't have plans like what are you doing? I'm just putting channels on this thing and it's going hopefully be something. I think having I mean, I think they're they're we each have to answer that question to what I mean and that's a very personal thing in that way I think. I mean, I think it's personal in one way, but it's also collective in another way because we you know, we influence each other and we get attracted to things that are connected with what's important to us. But you know, to me to what you know, I think what's beautiful is you know, to move toward deep percent of wisdom, to move toward being able to live in harmony with that realization of interconnectivity of deep that of the kind of profound interconnectivity that you're describing, you know, that literally that there at some level is an a separation between us. You know, how does that then inform how I live? How does that change? How I live? Do I sort of say, oh, what's the fucking point and just give up? Or do I, you know, take that experience and begin to dismantle habits and ideas and beliefs that are opposed to that experience and actually begin to live, you know, more in harmony to, you know, in the kind of language of contemplative training to embody that realization, to make it your own, you know, and to make your life an expression of that, you know, expression of that interconnectivity and compassion and deep care and love for each other, and including, you know, cutting through all the bullshit, including calling out the delusion, you know, including, you know, pimps macking the bullshit, which is I think a big part of, you know, what I see you doing here. And I would just say, leaving room for the what to change, you know, that's not like a fixed thing that we're going to transform into this fixed thing. We're going to continue to change and to evolve. And so that's beautiful to me. Yeah, it's certainly beautiful from a biological standpoint. I mean, I'm not a cynic in that I don't love life and I don't love humans because I enjoy this experience incredibly. I think it's an amazing time. I think being a person is great. I love it. I love people, I love all the fun things you could do as a person. But what I'm trying to get to when we're talking transhumanism and this escaping the boundaries of biology. There was a guy that we talked about in this podcast before they got bitten by a shark. So Australian cat, he lost his arm and his leg and they replaced it with this carbon fiber creation. He's moving around. He's standing there. No limp. Guy walks around, normal, has his hand that, you know, it's kind of crude, but it does move and it can pick things up. But I'm like, wow, this is quite fascinating. Like they said to this guy, hey, I know you got your arm and leg bit off by shark, but lucky for you, this is 2014 and we have some credible innovation that we've created that's going to allow you to have this leg that moves very much like a regular leg and you're going to have a hand that can do a lot of things that a regular hand can do. So that's better than not having that arm and leg. And yes, and guess what? It's going to get better. Five years from now, we'll have a better arm and a better leg and you're going to enjoy well, if as time goes on, the other parts of his body start failing. Like, oh, you know what, man, there's a problem because you have this artificial right leg. Your left knee is gone. So we're going to replace your left leg too with this artificial leg. So this way you'll have two artificial legs and then, but they're going to work great. Okay, great. Okay, listen man, your heart is going. But good news, we have an artificial heart and we're going to take this artificial and 100 years from now, this guy is just a brain in this carbon fiber body and he's looking at his eyes, he's looking through these artificially created eyes and they say, listen, everything works great, except the cells of your brain are reproducing irregularly and you're going to develop Parkinson's, but we have figured out a way to download your consciousness into an artificial brain. So we'll just download your consciousness into this heart and what's left of you? You don't, there's nothing. There's no biology anymore. And well, what's there then when you sit there, like, they turn that switch on and you're, you know, 2.0, what goes on there? Well, from a, from a Buddhist perspective, what's there is your, is your karma. What's there is the pattern that was you leading up to that point, you know, the information that made you up and that has continued to move into this new substrate. And that pattern has a momentum to it. It has a history. It has memories. It has beliefs. It has, you know, it has various things. It doesn't, it's not a complete discontinuity. This substrate's change, but the, you know, the pattern has continued in some sense, right? Maybe, but how much of that pattern is based on biological need? How much of that pattern is based on this cultural conditioning and the, the, just the patterns of behavior that you've adopted along the way in your life and the, the environment which grew up in, how much of that goes away when you have a brain that's made out of fibers that are constructed out of silicon and or whatever. I guess it depends on how it's constructed. This reminds me of, I don't know if you've had the experience and some of my teachers talk about this as an example, a lot is, you know, looking in the mirror now and you kind of get surprised that you've aged, but there's something in you that you don't feel as aged. Do you ever have that experience? I do. And what way? It's just like, you know, you just, there's part of you that hasn't aged. And then at the same time, if you look at the mirror, you can tell that you've aged. Does that make sense? Mm hmm. There's a piece of us. Right. That's like, I don't know. I still feel like nothing's changed. Inside. Inside. But your vehicle. But my, but then I look in the mirror and I'm like, oh my gosh, yeah, like I got it. I got it. My time is taken even though I'm long, you know, but I get that. So there's this like paradox kind of at play. So when we're talking about like, if we do upload or what is it that is still there, like I wonder if some of that will still be there, that feeling of nothing's changed. And then there is this change that happens in the way of the age. And well, if we'd stop aging, I mean, if it completely ends, or if it's a temporary aging, we just got to go and get repainted. You know, I mean, if your car gets a patina from, you know, rocks and chips on the road and stuff, all you have to do is bring it to the body shop and they can, it's old cars that look awesome. You know, we can't do that with a human being. But if we can, there's, you know, there's companies that specialize in replacing every single part part of an old car and creating you a new version of an old car. That, that is ultimately incredibly possible for a human being. I think that's possible. That's crazy though. You know, and there is this part of us that wants to live forever. I mean, the holy grail like some of these myths have existed for a long time. So everybody wants to sleep, but nobody wants to die. Yeah. It's quite fascinating. Everybody's more than happy to shut off for eight hours, like just, oh, yeah, here we go. Nothing. And what I find bizarre is like, I find it bizarre now is, I mean, a lot of the fear of death seems to be connected to a fear of the unknown of what would happen after death. Like, am I just going to disappear? You know, what's going to happen? And not knowing that is part of, I think, of the terror, the feeling of not knowing what's going to happen. And what I find interesting is, you know, and we were just talking to one of our Zen teachers who teach us here in Santa Monica. She pointed out, you know, in every moment we actually don't know what's coming next. You know, that not knowing it's something we're constantly having to deal with, the terror of not knowing, or, you know, as her Zen teacher called it, that don't know a mind. You know, and so I find it interesting to kind of reflect on what it's like to rest in the not knowing, to rest in that, that sense of not knowing what's going to come next. Because in that moment, every next moment is both a death of this moment and the rebirth of something new. There's something new coming online and there's something disappearing. And in that sense, I think if we become comfortable and familiar with that process of moment by moment, birth and death, then, you know, whatever happens, whether my consciousness gets uploaded to the cloud or I die, there's some sense of there's some part of me, which is fundamentally okay with that death process, that constant dying. And that was the thing I always thought was funky about the attempt to escape death. Because actually, in order to escape death, we're going to have to go through so many deaths of who we think we are, you know, like you're saying, you know, to transplant your consciousness into a silicon brain, like some part of you dies in that. And so we're trying to escape death by running into it headlong. Well, also, what if death is merely a transitionary phase? What if you are, you live in this existence, but when you die, you will enter into a new existence. And this is what, you know, many ancient religions are speculated on throughout the beginning of time. I mean, since the beginning of time, everyone thinks that there's some sort of, I mean, whether it's wishful thinking or whatever it is. It might be real. Just like consciousness is a very bizarre thing to try to define, but it is certainly a real thing. You know, if you tried to put consciousness in a lab and say, like, what is it? What is it that causes creativity? What is it that define love in some sort of a chemical process? Good luck with that. You know, good luck with trying to figure out why what that what that warm feeling is when you see your friend at the airport. It reminds me of that time magazine cover that says that you couldn't find the God particle during that. Yeah. Yeah. And the brain, the king. Right. Yeah. Well, what is it? You know, what what is there's so many different aspects to what is life? What defines this existence for the person experiences it themselves and does that transition to something else at the moment of death? And is that why the brain produces all these endogenous psychedelic chemicals that give you when you take them, give you this a a laid sense of being, give you this this sense of relieving of anxiety and this sense of connection to everything and everything, every one that exists. Like what why do those exist? Like why are those chemicals in the mind and why are those chemicals, why they released at the moment of death? Why they released at the moment of extreme stress when your body's worried it's going to die? Why are those released during the dream state? Like what what is that? And would we be trapping whatever consciousness we have now in this artificial creation? If you can download consciousness into some artificial creation, is that a hellish existence for that consciousness? Because it's no longer able to transition to the next phase of being and would you be able to transition to that next phase of being as a biological entity? And then realize like, Oh my God, what did I do with my consciousness? I left it back there in that fucking robot and who would be conscious of that? If there was no consciousness? Yeah, well, you put it. What is it? What is that thing? What is the life? What is the life that gets that transitions? The life expires, the the light goes out and you pass over but yet this robot wakes up and it's you. Right. It has no lifespan, you know, it has no whatever, no sexual urges, no need for community. It's just this thing that has all your memories. I hope you don't I hope you don't design the future AI. Well, we have real problems if we design it to mimic and replicate biological life. We have real problems there. I think we'd have real problems if we didn't too. That's true as well. Well, the biological us would. Yeah, because we would, you know, that's where the Terminator comes in. It has no need for us. Yeah. But that's why everything that we are as far as what the way our society structure as far as there are senses of fairness and love and compassion, they're all based on biological urges and needs. The need to for community is a strong urge to keep us all together. So we stay alive longer. When all of these things are they're a part of being a biological entity. And when we no longer are, why would we engineer all those biological urges and thoughts and concepts into this carbon fiber creation? I've heard the argument. I think this is interesting too, though, that, you know, the need for community goes back to the very earliest moments of the universe. You know, that in some sense, you know, when atoms when atoms emerge, they emerged in collectives, you know, that they didn't just emerge as a single atom, that they're always when when a single thing emerges, it emerges also with a collective, you know, and that's in that sense, you know, the the sense of community is hardwired maybe into the universe itself. But isn't also the sense of competition then? Because all biological life is just wild race of things eating things. Perciting vegetarians. I mean, the whole idea is things grow and other things come on and eat them as they grow and there's no way around it. Life eats life, you know, and you can try to keep your biological footprint as small as possible and do as little harm as possible. But every step you take is killing life. Every time you close your mouth, you're killing bacteria. I mean, you're doing it when you wash yourself. You're killing living things. And there's a lot of weirdness to this whole life that is tied to survival, tied to birth, death, and the prolonging of the species or the improvement of the species as it tries to prolong. Absolutely. I mean, it's a paradox too, anyway. But it's that part of what's cool about being alive is that it's not going to last. And that's that's one of the big issues with the transhumanist movement. This idea of transcending the biological limitations and living forever. But then it sucks. It's like a movie that's 100 hours long. You know, I don't want to see Star Wars for 100 hours. I want to see Star Wars for two hours because at the end of two hours, it's awesome. I think that was a great movie. Yay! You walk outside. You're in the sunlight. You talk about how great that moment was with your friends. Everybody's happy. But if Star Wars goes on for infinity, it fucking sucks. You know, for, you know, 100 years later still going warp speed and Chewbacca's like, fucking get me out of here. This is terrible. This movie sucks. You know, why? Because it's boring. I don't want to see it for 100 hours. I want to see it for two. Is that life itself? Well, I mean, the question I would ask is, you know, is it true that there will be no limitations if we transcend our biological limitations? Or is it the case that there will be new limitations that we can't fathom that become, again? And this ties in with the question, you know, that we've asked ourselves, you know, with the Buddhist practice, like, is enlightenment an end state? Or is it an ongoing ever unfolding process? You know, and I think if it is an unfolding ever evolving process, then that means there will always be as long as there's stuff. There will always be limitations. There will always be something that's not quite as perfect as it could be. Or that, you know, is not quite it. And so in that sense, I would guess that, I mean, this is my guess, is not that we will transcend limitations altogether, but that will transcend certain ones and then discover new ones. And then the whole process of creative tension will begin again at some new, you know, level and will be like, oh shit, like, I really don't appreciate the fact that I can't have two experiences simultaneously that I've, there's just one experience, even if I can move between multiple realms really rapidly, I still can only have this one in moment in experience. You know, then, well, that's just a guess if maybe one of the limitations. Well, that's fascinating. You bring that up because that does open up a different realm of possibilities. If we can transcend the limitations of biology and that includes experiencing multiple things simultaneously, or the ability to experience multiple lives, like if we figure out a way to combine our consciousness or whatever we call our consciousness, once we transcend biological life and combine our minds so that we do experience the lives of multiple people, if not the entire human race that's on the same track, experience it all simultaneously, and that this is beyond the realm of biological understanding. And maybe that's where we evolve from this thing and become something that's far more complex and complicated. Unless, unless one aspect of that decides it doesn't want to be merged into the hole and then you get wearing factions, warring factions, warring factions, warring factions, warring factions. They're much larger scale, warring factions of transhumanism, trying to pull each other's batteries out and trying to pull each other into each other's version of utopia. Yeah, right. That's another issue, right? Like, what if there's like a Mac version and a Windows version and they're non-compatible and everyone's trying to figure out which one is going to be the beta-max and which one, you know, beta-max was better but VHS survived and you got to pick the right team. That's right. Yeah, there's different. Yeah, because it's not like there's going to be only one company that comes up with a transhumanist solution, right? Right. This is reminding me of like the fluidity perspectives as I've trained in practice. It's like the mind, it has the capacity to take on multiple perspectives and how important that actually is in the world today to be able to take different points of view and take multiple perspectives and not have the right way or the way. So there's a lot of possibilities. Yeah, what you said also this fascinating is this idea that we can't even really imagine what the potentials are because the potentials will create new potentials that were before that unrecognizable. We didn't see them coming. Like, if you went back in time a few hundred years ago and tried to explain to them the internet, they'd be like, what the fuck are you talking about? If you went back before the printing press and tried to explain the internet and trying to access Google on your phone voice commands or Siri, you know, Siri. Yeah, try to explain that to people that live before printed type to be like, what are you even yapping about? They would never be able to wrap their head around it much like we will never be able to wrap our head around the possibilities once we transcend the biological limitations. The hive mind to me seems to be the most likely. The hive mind? Yeah, the idea that we're going to somehow another experience and experience each other on some very, very broad scale, some very large scale. And I think we're kind of doing that with shit like Facebook and with Twitter and with interaction on the internet. I think what we're doing is dipping our toe in the ocean of connectivity. Oh, yeah. I like that phrase. Yeah. It's really good. Yeah, because I think that we're slowly but surely devolve or dissolving or devolving maybe that's why I logally devolve. Right. But dissolving these limitations of communication, we're slowly but surely expressing ourselves in ways and interacting in ways that didn't exist before. And then when new things come along, like, are you aware of Oculus Rift? Yeah, I've got the dev kit too waiting for me in North Carolina. Duncan has it. My friend Duncan Tressle has it and he just got back from experiencing porn in virtual reality. First person porn and he goes, it is the craziest thing you've ever experienced in your life. Like you are this other person having sex with someone. You could look down at your body. You could look at your feet and your legs and and you can experience like sexual intercourse with somebody. You don't feel it obviously. But he's like, this is going to change the entire world we live in. And the new version of it is insanely high definition. Right. He keeps like, you gotta come over to the house and try out the fucking new Rift Man. It's mind blowing. He called me up the day he saw it. He's like, he's like, this is bigger than the internet because it's bigger than anything that's ever been invented by people. I've heard the same thing. And I mean, the thing I'm most excited about is creating contemplative training environments in the Rift. What would it be like to completely, you know, like he said, immersed yourself in a visual field, you know, with nothing outside of it and be able to, you know, in some sense, experience some of the same states that psychedelics bring on, but, you know, directly through a technological interface, you know, one of my friends called it Techno-Delix, you know, the sense that the technology could produce some of the states as well. Well, that's what McKenna's belief was about DMT is that he believed that if you could create a world that mimics exactly the psychedelic experience of dimethyl-tripped to mean that he believed that in that state those same beings that you interface with when you take the psychedelic drugs would show up. He had this like field of dreams type scenario if you build it, they'll come. And that that would be the best case scenario for psychedelic intervention. It wasn't getting a bunch of people to take drugs. It's like put this on virtually out with this. Yeah, that one day, the state will, I mean, the virtual reality will achieve the type of possibilities to achieve something like that. Yeah. And then the question becomes, you know, and I think McKenna said this, you know, what worlds do we build? You know, what virtual realities do we build and what values do we build into them and program into them? You know, because I don't think that issue is going to go away. We still have to ask those questions and decide what we're building. Well, again, that's the big, the real mind fuck. It's not even essentially that, you know, like we're going to have a different biological body, but we might have a different reality that is indistinguishable from this reality that we can pick up and put on a scale. The concept of virtual existence of some sort of existence in a simulation as it were. You know, the simulation is a weird word because simulation implies that it's not real. But if it has all the consequences and all the feeling and textures and all the interactions and interfaces that the regular life does as far as tactile, as far as heat, sensitivity, all the different aspects of our life, we could recreate those exactly. What is that if it's not life? I don't, I'm not, if it is an experience and you're, you're taking in every single aspect of that experience exactly the same way you would take in this life. What is it? And if that's the case, how do we know we're not already in it? How do we know that this isn't an indistinguishable artificial reality that we have created and we're just tapped into the sucker. I mean, that's my presumption that we're in an artificial reality. I mean, I presume this is a virtual reality simulation. Why is that? Because it, because stuff's happening and I don't know what's happening. What do you mean by that? I mean, I guess we were watching Nick Bostram last night kind of play out the argument for this. You know, the virtual reality simulation hypothesis. And he was basically saying, you know, one possibility is in we're in a virtual reality, an ancestral simulation. And then the other possibility is that no technology, no civilizations get to the point technologically where they can produce this kind of technology. They all vanish. That's one possibility. And then the third possibility was, I'll see if I can remember it. I don't understand that possibility. So, so basically saying this is a real universe because no civilizations get to, so there could be no civilization which gets to the point where it develops that capacity, that virtual reality technology. But how was that even an option? No civilization does it. Maybe you could say no civilization has or no civilization has. So that there aren't, so because he's assuming that if someone does do it, this is getting kind of analytically but so does this whole damn show. Right. Yeah, that's true. But I think he's saying like if if a hyper intelligent species can create a virtual reality, they will, you know, and they'll create many of them. Right. And so it's probably probability wise, it's much more likely that we're in a simulation because of how many that could be created. You know, you get some like an infinite number of universes through a like a hyper, you know, next generation computer. So that was his argument for why we're probably in a simulation. I would never say probably. And I would agree in the sense that it's quite possible. But if it is possible to one day achieve the sort of technological ability to create something that's indistinguishable from this reality. If it is possible and I assume that it's going to be possible, if you hear about things like this new Oculus Rift and compare it to the quill, they used to have to dip into ink to write things down. That was the only way to distribute information. Yeah, it's possible that one day we're going to achieve that. But the other thing that you have to take into consideration is it's almost universally accepted that at least if this world is real and if this life that we are living is not a simulation, it's universally accepted that this is the pinnacle of human information that we are at the cost. We're at the apex and that we are at the very like there's more information today. We have more knowledge. We have more of an understanding of our universe than any human beings before us ever have ever. So if that's the case, why wouldn't we assume that we just haven't reached it yet? That seems to be far more ending of our universe and have any human beings before us ever have ever so that's the case why wouldn't we assume that we just haven't reached it yet that seems to be far more likely than the possibility that no civilization ever achieves it that's why it's not there yet well that we just haven't reached yet yeah it seems way more likely i don't understand why anybody would reach a a country conclusion if all the evidence whether it's cultural like watching old television shows and comparing them to the sophistication of today's whether it's musical comparing old you know old Beethoven music and old music from the 50s like buddy Holly type shit and comparing it to what people are doing today whether it's technological which is super easy and clear to grasp and understand it's no there's no doubt whatsoever that we're at the apex that as far as what we can observe that things are we have more ability we're more competent we're more we're more able to alter our environment communicate etc our technology is far more far more complex than ever has been at any other time in human history that's been recorded that we that we can access so if that's the case why wouldn't we just assume that we're on this path to that why would we assume that no civilization has ever achieved it or can ever achieve it I don't assume that myself but I mean I think one one thing I'd throw in the ring is you know that way of looking at our history is sort of like a linear model right like we've kind of we've got this story about you know the universe started this many billion years ago with the Big Bang and then it sort of coalesced into whatever it coalesced into and eventually you know life emerged a billion years ago and evolved to to be what it is now and we're at this sort of we're at the sort of linear progression of evolution unfolding but that story is only like 200 years old so why would we assume that that story is accurate or that that way of looking at its accurate I mean it seems more likely that in a hundred years we'll have a completely completely different conception of what the universe is and and I wonder if part of that conception or part of what will break down and I'll tie this back into the contemplative tradition because this is it's something that breaks down in contemplative practice is the sense that time is exists in the way we think it exists it exists in a linear kind of motion time you know for the for the Zen in the Zen tradition with Dogen is holocronic like the holographic universe you know there all these things are contained within themselves in this sort of a lot of these Buddhist descriptions of consciousness you know all all times exist simultaneously and can be accessed simultaneously you know it can be accessed here or there and and so in that sense you know the as the as the traditional tech say the Buddhas of past president future all exist right now including ourselves and I don't know that would be a very different way of experiencing time I experience it you know maybe like on occasions experience it that way but for the most part that is not the way I I tend to think this is a linear thing that's like just got to start and it'll have an end well the number one mind fuck of all time is infinity and being being that not only is infinite like I think especially when your children you know like you know the kids will say something like you know I win times infinity you know what what infinity the the the the big mind fuck of infinity is that not only is the concept of infinity impossible to grasp but the parameters of that concept are so strange that if infinity is real and if the universe is infinite the way it's been described to me is that everything that has ever happened on this earth in the exact order has happened on other earths an infinite number of times including every single timeline so right now the 1950s are going on an infinite number of times and the exact same order the 1950s went on in America the 1950s on earth the 1950s are going on in the infinite number of times in the universe as are the 1960s as are 1961 December 21st as are December 22nd all those days are happening in the exact same order with the exact same events the exact same words and every possible variation in between right so different words different events different forms of expression different languages arise different conquerors win those things are all happening simultaneously throughout the universe so everything is happening all at once so if infinity is correct like what their concept of time being constant and happening all at once it is it is it is happening all at once it's just the container that holds it in is infinite it's it is a physical manifestation of this concept and and okay question to to rip off that that i'd ask is and is consciousness something that's happening to this biological being in this one variation of the universe or is consciousness something that moves through this infinite potentiality and experiences it that's the mind fuck if you wake up and you're in this other you somewhere else in the multiverse and you know your decisions and choices allow you to travel from one potential to the next but wherever you left off where you ever it may maybe you were a smoker or a drinker in the past or you had some sort of bad habits and you escape those bad habits but not every timeline and then it's sometimes not this timeline well maybe not yet if you will after this conversation you know what i mean i mean like the idea being that we're we believe that we're limited to this this very same physical space in the universe because this is where we are every day but what if we transfer our consciousness from this one to the next one and they're indistinguishable from each other physically to us but not their potential is very different and that in a sense you are dimension traveling and that's why we sleep so we could travel that's why people say sleep on it sleep on your problems man maybe they'll go away in the morning and you're just going to transfer to another stage of you somewhere else in the universe or maybe this is more hippie bullshit damn it hate it hey they want to accuse myself rightly so of hippie bullshit but if infinity is correct and not only do they believe that the universe is infinite but they believe they're infinite number of universes which is the ultimate ultimate mind fuck the fractal nature of reality itself being that every single galaxy which contains hundreds of billions of stars has a supermassive black hole in the center of it which is exactly one half of one percent of the mass of the entire galaxy and if you pass through that you will enter into another universe of hundreds of billions of galaxies each with a black hole in the center that has a portal to another universe and then the whole thing just keeps going on on so they're all the whole every universe is infinite and inside every universe is an infinite number of universes and that's how big it is that's why every timeline that has ever existed every possibility is all happening simultaneously all throughout the whole thing so those Tibetans thought as they sat in a cave and just explored their own minds yeah they were tripping balls they were probably taking something they were they were tripping on endogenous drugs yeah that's the thing the endogenous drugs like your trip and even if you're not tripping like you you have to everybody does there's no way around it you you trip and when you're sleeping I had some trippy dreams last night totally yeah those are trips yeah absolutely there this is a trip this is a trip yes i'm definitely tripping right now i think a lot of people listen to their trip and tell you this people right now on a subway going what will will that everything is happening everywhere all the time like the concept of infinity like no no no this is the this is a unique moment this unique what not not not really we've dropped the concept of infinity then everything's happening right now yes well for you everything is happening right now but the concept of infinity is undeniable mathematically that's the problem is that like you can't just ignore the like all you have to do is go outside and look up you go outside and look up at night and you see stars realize those are just an impossible distance and those are the neighbors those are the ones that are really close and if you stood on one of those stars and looked out into the distance you would see stars that were equally far away that seem equally ridiculous to try to reach and if you got to those there's no end you just you're going to keep going and going and going so all the evidence of infinity at least of the concept of great great distance being outside of the realm of understanding is all it's right in front of us yeah every night every moment yeah at the at the same time i think there's a way of experiencing infinity that isn't about distance it's about consciousness and infinity being you know this conscious experience that we're having right now right the room that we're seeing the sounds that we're hearing the body sensations that we're having all of these are also arising in our experience right in our awareness right and the idea of infinite distance is a thought that arises in my awareness and so in some sense there's only this awareness there's only this experience that we've ever had and so in that sense you know the idea the concept of of infinity has a distance is a great distance drops away and there's just this there's just this one moment that's happening i think that's what you're pointing to and there's an infinite quality to it in terms of that that the consciousness itself is infinitely present infinitely here i don't know how to describe it actually that the consciousness is infinitely present throughout the whole thing it it's undeniably the fact that we are conscious you know just like you said the infinity is undeniable consciousness is undeniable you know this is happening you cannot do this because there's levels of consciousness right there's people that are conscious that are just there apes there's wandering through this live drinking and walking in the walls like are they conscious as well and isn't that consciousness like a very limited consciousness and as consciousness expands what's the what the ongoing theme when we're talking about meditation and meditative practices in enlightenment achieving the psychedelic states through consciousness adjustment or consciousness manipulation like there's levels and layers to the whole thing yeah there there are levels and layers and there is this unified field of consciousness which don't no matter what is arising in it and how simple or complex it is it's just what it is that's why it's really strange to me that the concept of simple biology as opposed to like complex biological life that understand itself yeah the simple biology of individual cells or you know then multi-cell organisms and then the concept of a being that's aware of itself and can communicate over vast distances like human beings extrapolate that a thousand years plus whatever it is from now do we have the ability to do the same thing with consciousness throughout the entire universe itself like is our ability to communicate over vast distances and to communicate with each other is this just a beginning stage and this never ending process of dissolving boundaries where the actual boundaries of space itself no longer exist and we can interface with intelligent life that has figured out the same sort of shit everywhere in the world the world the like universe wide web or something yeah exactly yeah i mean if if universe is infinite and the most scientists agree it is or they believe it is many do i mean it's it's one of those things like you have the observable universe right which is like 14 billion light years or something like that but and then like we're talked about with the big bang like it all came out of what like McKenna had the the best take on the big bang he's like science is essentially saying allow us this one miracle and we'll explain everything and that's really what it is the the whole universe came from something smaller than the head of a pin how um let me get back to you on that but it did and because of that all the stuffs here what is that a miracle uh i wouldn't use that word you know like but yes yes it is that's a fucking miracle man if a guy can come back from the dad after three days that ain't shit the universe came out of a head of a pin you don't think that's more impressive than a dude coming back from the dead the guy coming back from dead clearly a miracle can we agree on that walking on water clearly a miracle right water in a wine the motherfucker made a miracle right the universe itself is a miracle all of our stories about it are miracles yes and whether or not those are just fables the same way the ancient Hawaiians the Polynesians talked about the gods stitching the stars together with thread you know maybe that's what our concept of the big bang is just our antiquated notion or our rather primitive notion of something that's really beyond our capacity to understand yeah that's the that's the mind fuck to me yeah it's our myth it's our our Isis that's our Zeus that's our you know that's our Odin it's like the big bang yeah it's it's in one day they'll laugh at us these fucking dummies thought that the universe is smaller than the head of a pin and that it whatever whatever reason man it just blew up and became the universe yeah one day soon probably yeah maybe right maybe or at least in terms of reference it'll be similar to Galileo to us yeah you know Galileo thinking that the universe was not centered around the earth and everybody going what are you fucking crazy this is like a big form point of contention and now it's universally agreed that Galileo was correct and everybody else is being silly they may very well cover day when someone proposes something far more radical than the big bang the priest to be true and everybody else is like wait wait wait what are you saying hold on hold on I've given you ever seen that there's an audio of I think his name is gates and William Gates the guy who had the the concept of a similar he has a simulation theory that he presented to Neil deGrasse Tyson yeah yeah that was the president's scientific advisor Obama's advisor for a while was he really William Gates yeah no kidding if it's the same guy it's the same guy that found the computer codes in string he's sort of like a Samuel L. Jackson look alike yes that's him that's him and the conversation that he has with Neil deGrasse Tyson where he says they found self-correcting computer code at the in the heart of string theory yeah and and then Neil deGrasse Tyson goes wait wait okay okay okay I'm I want to hear this again like say this one more time you found self-correcting code I'm not sure if I understand what you're saying pull the video because that's it's uh we watch this for the first time last night oh really yeah oh this is this is one of my favorites I got taken down I got that link I taken down it was on reddit god damn commies who's doing that take why would you take ductile just self-correcting computer code correcting code string theory gates let's say yeah that's a strange computer code to so discovered concealed if you just go to that I found it just do what I just did okay strange computer code discovered concealed in super string equations there's a little bit of nonsense the beginning for the first 30 seconds like weird da da da da here play images that are behind your head right now these are pictures of equations I've been for the last 15 years trying to answer the kinds of questions that my colleagues here have been raising and what I've come to understand is that there are these incredible pictures that contain all the information of a set of equations that are related to string theory and it's even more bizarre than that because when you've been trying to understand these pictures you find out that buried in them are computer codes just like the type that you find in a browser when you go surf the web and so I'm left with a puddle of trying to figure out whether I live in the matrix or not but you're blowing my mind at this moment so you're saying are you saying your attempt to understand the fundamental operations of nature leads you to a set of equations that are indistinguishable from the equations that drive search engines and browsers on our computers that is correct so by the way I'm still but I have to just be silent for a minute here so you're saying as you dig deeper you find computer code rich in the fabric of the cosmos into the equations that we want to use to describe the cosmos yes computer code computer code strings of bits of ones and zeros it's not just sort of resembles computer code you're saying it is computer code it's not even just is computer code it's a special kind of computer code that was invented by a scientist named Claude Shannon in the 1940s that's what we find very very deeply inside the equations that occur in string theory and in general in systems that we can say are supersymmetric okay time to go home I think I'm not way we're gonna go so are you saying we're all just there's some entity that programmed the universe and we're just expressions of their code well I didn't say that when some of those like the matrix do you think what you said some of those codes are showing on the screen behind you right now they don't look like codes but these pictures which we call a dingras are graphical representations of sets of equations that are based on codes so this is in fact to answer your question more directly I have in my life come to a very strange place because I never expected that the movie the matrix might be an accurate representation of a place in which I live Jim may it may give you an argument that we don't live in the matrix very good please yes very similar very similar argument there's a property the real world right down here has that no mathematical equation has that no solution of equation has that no okay that no abstract object has here in the real world it is always some moment which is one of a series of passing moments in a mathematical equation doesn't have a flow of time in it it just is and this means but Lee but I need him here and now this means that to me that the the the ancient metaphysical fantasy that we are just mathematics cannot be true because in a world that was just mathematics there would be no moment of time why isn't there a match as a function of time I'm sorry I saw this it's a differential equations but then you lay this solution out and this is if you're mistaken you can't use the word is and I'm talking about the word describe you see the whole drive is fine but no no but then we let me let me let me please since we started with my the point is that I you know it's fun to talk about some deep metaphysical essence that sits behind physics before some of us it's about trying to find the most accurate way to describe where we live it's my statement is that in the description of our universe that it's a supersymmetrical universe which we're going to test in the LHC if you believe that description I can show you the presence of these that's my statement I'm fucked I can't can't go on shows over what do you say that you listen to what these guys have just described and talked about I disagree with the one guy saying that because we live in this moment and this there's like this linear pattern to things that it can't be a mathematical equation that's not true that doesn't make any sense that's like saying if there is a car and the car is driving on a road that has been created by people if it's you know if it's going from one distance if it's traveling that it can't possibly be an artificially created environment that doesn't make any sense to me it's like you're traveling through this thing just because you're experiencing the now and it's progressive and you know the past and you're looking to forward to the future and you're moving and you're in this that doesn't mean it's not a mathematical representation well what comes to mind is that a lot of times in our formulas are a mathematical equation that I'm not a mathematician it's a mind tendency is to lock down on the variables but then it locks it down so it's constantly changing what do you mean by that meaning that we had there's a tendency of mine to like to go into concepts as if they were solid and as if they were fixed and any kind of time that we do that we lock down the possibility so if we can relax into whatever it's representing then that representation can continue to be fluid and so therefore there's a lot of space in a lot of room to continue and the present moment is not just one thing I just don't understand the argument that if if mathematics are if it's I guess he's trying to say in a sense that because we experience individual moments we have this moment or in this moment and then it's progressive that this wouldn't be the case if it was a mathematical equation that doesn't make any sense to me maybe I'm just too dumb but it seems to me that that leaves out the possibilities of yes you could do that yes you could it could be a mathematical equation that you're experiencing or it could be that this idea of this computer code that they're finding is just simply a lot like so many other codes that we found in things that indicate that nature has some sort of a pattern to it like the Fibonacci sequence like you know the idea that these codes that exist in nature they're they don't exist because this is artificial but they exist because nature essentially runs on mathematics so is nature artificial or is it well I don't think anything is artificial or you could say everything's artificial yeah well everything is natural this like everything on earth including like artificial chemicals were produced from things that are naturally occurring on earth and human beings are a natural creation of the earth or of biological life itself and all the byproducts of human beings including things that we consider to not be natural are natural just like a beehive is a natural creation of a be you know nuclear waste is the natural creation of the inquisitive human being it's they're not natural but they are natural because everything is natural they don't exist outside of our manipulation but we are a part of nature yeah so essentially all of our creations are in fact natural I make this argument so often to try to undercut the notion that using technology to develop your ability to contemplate the universe and consciousness that that somehow is unnatural I use that all the time but I'm thinking you know you could you could say the same thing like everything is artificial everything is generated from something else you know the big bang you know came from somewhere the mathematical formulas and the starting conditions came from some non physical place outside of this universe and so therefore their artificial from this perspective but I think that's the same the same thing as everything is natural like everything is artificial and everything is natural yeah everything is natural I think it's we have this idea of natural and artificial that we describe with our foods you know we describe it with our the things that are healthy and non healthy about what we've created in our culture but it's when you start using those same terms to describe human creation and then you start understanding the nature of human innovation and creativity in the first place like well I don't know if that's natural or not how could it be any less natural than an octopus changing its shape to hide or you know changing its skin tone to blend in with the environment isn't that natural so an artificial look that the octopus is created in order to camouflage itself from predators or prey what do you what do you think people are really pointing to and they say something's unnatural like what do you think they're really getting at or really trying to say it's bad it's bad yeah we've got to go back in time it's going back to chop and wooden and it's bad according to what like according to what set of values or what conception of what the is good in the universe right I think we're constantly instantiating our utopias through you know what we how we live and what we do and like we're constantly deluding ourselves into thinking our conception of the universe is the correct conception and but but like we can't help it like I cannot help but say you know I think this is the most important thing compassion wisdom you know like I've got my own conception of what's most important but is there a most important I mean is the word most important the problem where the definition of most important the problem because what is most important to you is not most important to others right so it's a very personal idea what's most important what's most important is starving people right now is getting them food and water right what's most important to the president is figuring out what to do about Israel and Gaza which most important you know there's like what is most important is a very personal thing yeah and yet there seem to be patterns you know like people have certain values and and share those values with others and there's a collective code that seems to be running as well yeah and again we boiled back to what what is that collective code what's the purpose of it all yeah to facilitate society civilization and to move forward with the progression of innovation till we become robots until we figure out a way to get out of here I mean the trend is obviously there right the symbiotic connection that we have to you know you don't want to leave your phone behind you want to keep that sucker on you if you leave it behind you feel like you left a part of you back there yeah oh my god I left my hand you know I got to go back and get my hand it's almost similar yeah my outer outer cortex yeah there's uh there's something weird to that yeah there's something that's something weird to our our desire that this marshal McLuhan's idea that we're the sex objects of the machine world that what we're doing is we're giving birth like a caterpillar becoming a butterfly we're unaware of our actions really ultimately being a part of this transition from the monkey body into this new transcendent thing but then then the big question is what is that and what's the purpose of that and if we do become that does it just sit does it say what's the point moving you know I'm just gonna sit here what's the point in innovating there's no need what's the point in creating new ones to what do more of nothing fuck it it just sits there so we show up on some planet someday and there's like these super complex artificial beings that were created by biological beings and then they just stopped and they all just sat around waiting for the next stage of existence and it never came in in Buddhist cosmology actually it's described that by biological beings and then they just stopped and they all just sat around waiting for the next stage of existence and it never came. In Buddhist cosmology actually it's described that way. Really? Yeah, actually there are six realms in the Buddhist cosmology and one of the realms is the God realm. And in the God realm the gods literally just abide in this formless awareness for like eons and eons and eons. But at some point the story goes something changes and they die. They do have they also are born and die. Those formless realms aren't permanent. And so at some point they come out of it and they die then they get reborn into some other realm. Well if you stop and think about the birth and death of stars and planets if these artificial beings live on planets, they have a lifetime lifespan whether they like it or not. Because the very solar system they exist in is dependent upon that star burning a finite amount of fuel. Right. Whether it's 500 billion years or whatever the hell your stars got in its tank. When that sucker is out it's going to supernova and that's a rap son. There's no more artificial intelligence on that rock that's spinning around in space. And the question is does the artificial intelligence that exist recognize that and feel the need to protect itself from this finite existence by building a spaceship and traveling physically traveling from dimension to dimension. Or traveling within the dimension of consciousness and looking for a resolution there. But doesn't have consciousness once it becomes artificial. What is consciousness purely something that the universe has created and we can't recreate? Oh I doubt that. Really? You think we'll be able to recreate consciousness? I think if we, I mean this is just a kind of guess but I think if we create a suitable substrate for consciousness, consciousness will appear. And that's based on my assumption that consciousness appears where there's something happening. There's some sense of it occurring to something. Well it depends on what we're calling consciousness. Yeah I use it in a simple way. Just basic awareness. Like just kind of the awareness of being in this room of sight of sound. So amolation. And even insects have consciousness in that sense. And Alfred White North had, you know, he sort of presumed that even atoms have a most fundamental sense of consciousness that they call pre-henchion. And I don't know if that's kind of like a pan-theistic perspective. But I think everything is imbued at the most fundamental level with consciousness. But that's probably because I've been, I've spent my whole life exploring consciousness. When you say everything do you mean physical objects as well? Like a desk? Like does it desk have consciousness? Yeah like at the most basic level. It's some form of but nonmeasurable so completely just- Consciousness is- Consciousness is- Consciousness is- and consciousness. Yeah consciousness isn't by definition immeasurable. You know you can't measure consciousness because it's not a quantity. Why would you assume that any of the objects possess it then? It's sort of just comes from the deepest states of meditation that I've experienced. This kind of sense of knowing that everything is at the most fundamental level consciousness itself. And so that there isn't something outside of consciousness. You know, atoms couldn't exist outside of consciousness. It's just a felt sense I guess. It's hard to describe. Like I don't have like a really solid argument for it. And even if something appears solid at a very, you know, microscopic level we can see things moving around. Like even though this table feels solid it's not completely solid. Right of course. Every atom is mostly air. Right. So it's space rather. Yeah so it's a sense like, you know, I've had experiences too where the concentration becomes so strong that things just start to break down and everything seems to be dissolving and reconstructing and dissolving and reconstructing. But isn't it just just the perceptions of your own mind? Isn't it just your mind has the ability to perceive its surroundings and its environment. And in meditation you're altering the parameters. You're changing the influences. You're changing the physical state, the flow of the neurotransmitters and all these different things are changing how you view the environment itself. But you're not really changing the environment at all. Yeah, it gets it depends on how you look at it. Because no, I mean I'm not changing it and then yes I am changing it by doing those particular practices. You're changing it in that you're changing your perceptions, like your perceptions, changes the way your interface with it. Yeah. I think this goes back to the paradox of like. It is very paradoxical. Yeah like the paradox of, you know, do we can we describe this from the outside objectively? And like that's the most true perspective or do we describe it as the subjective conscious experience of it. You know, which is more true. And I keep going back to like you can't reduce one to the other or conflate one to the other. Um, entirely otherwise you basically are just sort of propping up a particular perspective as the ultimate truth. Um, I don't know. I think there's something completely disenchanted about seeing everything as physical objects. And this as a kind of just like hallucination to make us feel better so we can continue to propagate. I think there's something fundamentally wrong about that on the level of being a conscious being. And yet I also see, you know, the tendency for people to conflate their own experiences with the external universe as being like highly problematic too. That's a funny word disenchanted. That's a funny way of because it is, you know, it is kind of, you're the way your perception of it is that. I mean, it's almost like this mystical view of it. This beautiful, airy, fairy view of it. It makes it more exciting. And so like to think of them as to think of it in more stoic terms or more, you know, more, um, I don't know what the word I would use. Just more, more clearly defined terms. It's like not as fun. Does that make sense? It does. It's also, I think like Emily was saying, like the moment we solidify reality, then like we lose the background. You know, we lose the sense that we don't actually completely know that every story we've ever told, you know, as a species, is ended up being wrong at some level. You know, it's not, it's not actually the big bank. You know, it's at some point we're going to realize that story was the best story we could come up with to describe the evolution of the physical universe or the development of it or whatever. But at some point, you know, we're going to discover something that just blows our minds again. And then we're going to have to come up with a new story that can make sense of that. And we're going to get solidified about that. We're going to think, oh, that's actually the way it really is. And so I think there's something about certainty, you know, and really thinking we have it worked out that it becomes problematic at some level. That's kind of the beauty of the existence, right? Is that there's a lot of mystery to this thing. Yeah, that's exactly. And just a gentleman, like, as part of that comes from like, I feel like people can get disconnected from their hearts. And that can be airy, fairy too. But it's that is real to be up in the mind and the brain and then forget that there is the feelings and the tenderness and the vulnerability in a positive way. Because there's actually a lot of power in the vulnerability. So there's some sort of balance that I think comes in to play from some of the Eastern traditions. And then some of the Western traditions, because I feel that balance too in the room as we're talking between, you know, opening more into the mystical part of things. And then also, you know, needing the concept, needing the rational mind, needing the science. And where is that balance in our modern world? I'm not sure. Well, yeah, that's the real question, right? Where is the balance in the modern world? Because the modern world is essentially without balance. That's the number one criticism of it is that we're raping the earth and torturing our planet, robbing it of its resources and polluting the oceans and all that jazz. And there isn't a balance to it all. And that the experience is just what it is for you. You know, you live this life and your perceptions and your ideas are essentially what flavor it for you. And if you choose to be Mr. No Nonsense, you still die. You know, you live, you die and that's it. And you still have blind spots. Yeah. You still, you know, limitations. Yeah, most certainly. And the concept of consciousness in this way is more empowering. Or at least gives you a better feeling about the life that you're living and may enhance that experience. May make that experience a more pleasurable ride. And it may impact others around you because of your nuance and everything else. Yeah. Well, definitely, you know, when I'm around people that are super positive, I feel better. It's this, that's undeniable. I don't understand it, but I do, you know, inherently this is like a part of you that grasps it. But it's undeniable. And when you're around pessimistic people, it's a huge drag. That's a huge drag to be around super negative people. Like I remember I had this really negative girlfriend once when I broke up with her. I remember dropping her off and driving away going, oh my God, I'm free. It's just, if there was a, a side of things that was negative, she would find it and just start pecking at it. And you would about that. Oh, it was brutal. It was brutal. And that, that, you know, if you could find the opposite of that, find someone who's always got a good take. Like, hey, this is what it is. But from here, well, we can learn to never do that again. And so this is an awesome blessing in that. We've learned a lesson from this and we're going to move forward and, you know, we have, still love and community and friendship. And there's a lot of people that look at things that way and there's so much more fun to be around. It just makes the experience of life itself more exciting. And in that sense, what people are doing with Buddhism or TM or spending a lot of time in isolation tanks or it's sort of a work around for biology. Sort of a framework for developing your consciousness as you manage your biology. Does that make sense? Yeah. I think that's a valid way of talking about it. We might have run on a mind-fucks in this podcast. I think we hit a wall. We hit a wall. We thought about self-correcting computer code, like James Gates and Neil Tyson might have thrown us into a wall. It's just too. How did you guys get involved in all this stuff? Like what made you gravitate towards this as a young person? Is it just something you discovered early on and sort of slowly but surely it became a massive part of your life? I think for both of us that's probably true. I won't speak for Emily, but for me, I grew up with hippie parents, you know, new agey parents. And so the notion of meditation and consciousness was kind of part of the dialectic growing up. Where'd you grow up? I grew up in Asheville, North Carolina. I love that place. That's where Duncan's from. Yeah, that's where we live now. You guys live there? Yeah. Place is so awesome. I don't want to tell people about it. So awesome. When I was there, I was walking down the street. I was like, this doesn't exist in anywhere else. The word's getting out, believe me. It is getting out. Damn it. And now it's really out. Yeah, now it's really out. That place is amazing. That's an amazing, amazing town. It's quite interesting. Yeah, we love it. It's so unusual. Like, I was there with a buddy and we'll dunk in in another buddy mind. We were walking on the street and going to this restaurant and we went to this bar. I was like, where else is there a place like this? It's like this small town of really like-minded folks, very open-minded, very progressive, but very small. What's the population there? 100k, I think? So it's very bolder sized, which is another similar town like that. Yeah. It's very, but you guys are like tucked up in the mountains. Oh, we're in a holler. We're in a holler. We like it. Yeah, it's amazing. How'd you get there? I grew up just outside of there, a little town called Mars Hill. And I grew up two hours away in Wilkesborough, small town. Yeah, so you gravitated towards Asheville? How? Well, we actually lived in Boulder for about a decade. Really? Yeah, she was working at Naropa. University, I went to school there. Oh, that's that freaky hippie university, right? Buddhist inspired, we call it the Buddhist inspired Harvard. They have a class in Zenflower arrangement. You keep on it? Yeah, I didn't take that one. Oh, like this is hilarious. You get an accredited class in Zenflower arrangement. The only place that I know of. Yeah. Which is also a kind of similar kind of vibe. Yeah, Boulder most certainly does. And another place that's tucked in the mountains. It's like there's something about mountains that are so humbling. Like you just look at it. Like you can't be that important. Are you seeing what I'm seeing? Like your daily life and troubles, they are balanced in perspective by the images that you're seeing of the most spectacular versions of art that nature has created. And then that's where the mountains are to me. Like snow covered, tree covered, whatever they are, seeing a lake at the bottom of a canyon and just like nature's stunning works of art. And just the sheer vast magnitude of them, like the Rockies, forces people to this sort of humility. Oh, yeah. Sort of like beach towns. You know, like wire beach towns, so why is everybody so chill by the beach? Well, look at that fucking ocean man. Who are you? How are you taking yourself so seriously? Look at that thing. It's fast. You can't see the end and it's all water. Yeah. And it's moving up and back. And at any point in time, it could just rise up and have thousands of mile highs swell and take out the entire planet. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. There's something about nature that's super important. It's like people that live in a place where they don't get a chance to see it. You know, and New York City in a sense is humbling in its own way because as we said, everything is natural. You know, human beings creating cities are not much different than a beehive. It's just we're way better at making shit than bees are. So we make skyscrapers. But when you're in Manhattan, like last time I was there, I'll stay in at this hotel and we were pretty high up. And you know, you open up your window and you look out the window and like, Whoa, this is crazy. This is so futuristic and bizarre. We're in the middle of it. Like all the buildings are around us. We're seeing all these people moving around inside of their windows. Some of them I'm sure with binoculars, telescopes and shit, peering out at all the different stories that are playing out in the various little cubicles and boxes around them. Absolutely. Yeah. But I think that the, at least to me, the most peaceful version of that, those, the, you know, that kind of imagery is the natural version. The real natural version as far as like, non-man created, I should say, you know, the mountains. And there's something about it. Like especially like a place like Asheville or a place like Boulder. Sort of like, it's just defined by its environment. Yeah. So the Buddhist geeks thing, one of the things that I thought that was interesting that you said that I find too is that you start doing it and people start getting connected to it. And then you feel like you kind of stuck in it. Like in that like boy, I have a responsibility now. Like people are enjoying this. Yes. Maybe hopefully getting some value from it. Yeah. Well, it, that's a very least being entertained on a bus, you know, or on a plane or, or what have your stuck in a commute. You know, at the very least, it's that. Yeah. How often you guys do it? We do a podcast once a week. So we do like a interview like this or a conversation like this probably once a week. Now when you do those, do you prepare for them? Like do you have like a theme or do you have like questions that you lay out beforehand? Usually, yeah. Usually it's with a with a person or a group that, you know, we're exploring a particular topic. Like, you know, we've explored a lot around the interface of technology and Buddhist practice, various intersection points of how Buddhism is sort of interfacing with psychology and science and technology and, you know, various aspects of culture. So we'll usually kind of go into one of those intersection points and explore it with someone who's really been working at that interface. And so who is, you know, in some ways the most informed and in terms of their ignorance about what's going on at the interface. And just kind of explored and see what happens. Can you give me an example of like one of the recent episodes we did that? Yeah, sure. So we recently, I talked to a neuroscientist named David Vago who's at Harvard and he's a contemplative neuroscientist. And Jake Davis, who's a Buddhist cognitive philosopher. And we sort of explored some of the recent work around finding and discovering a neuroscience of enlightenment. And they've been sort of working with the question, is there a neuroscience of enlightenment? Can we see what enlightenment and quotes looks like in the brain? And is that even possible philosophically? Like, is enlightenment one thing or is it many things? And so we really just went through and explored some of their ideas around enlightenment. What is it? What conceptions are they using? What have they found in their research? Because David's been working a lot with folks like Shinzanyung, who has been meditating for 40 years and who has a really kind of complex system of meditation and mindfulness practice. And it's something that he designed to be able to be scientifically studied. So they've been sort of putting advanced meditators in various FMRI machines and sort of seeing what happens when they do various kinds of tasks. Seeing what happens when they have these kind of peak moments. What actually is occurring in the nervous system? Seeing if they can come up with a model to describe that neuroscientically? That's fascinating. The FMRI is a really interesting stuff. Oh yeah. Have you ever been in one? It's so weird. No. No. It's like a shamanic drum beating through your head. Really? It's really bizarre. When we got in there for one of these meditation studies, afterwards I was like, are they taking into account the fact that the FMRI machine itself is like a completely altered state experience? It's just a huge magnet you're in. I've been in an MRI before. It's just similar. You hear that? This one had the one we went to. I mean, what sounded like drum beats and all kinds of weird stuff. Wow. I don't know if it was like that for you. That's what it sounded like. Yeah. It was weird. Yeah. I talked to a neuroscientist and they were explaining that there's some issues with FMRIs where they're trying to use them for crime investigation. They're being used by people who don't understand the limitations of the technology. So someone was accused of a crime in India, accused of murder and convicted by an FMRI result. Because the FMRI showed functional knowledge of the crime scene. Oh. Yeah. Exactly. And she was very concerned about this because her perceptions of it were you could by reviewing the case itself and by reviewing the information you could give someone functional knowledge of a crime scene without them actually having been there while the crime scene was going on. And that so if you could read that there's functional knowledge of a crime scene, it doesn't mean that the person has actually been there while the crime was being played out. I mean, there's people that have functional knowledge of all sorts of places like Mount Rushmore. And if you play that in some folks head that have like deeply studied history and been paying a lot of attention, you might be able to show some sort of a functional knowledge of the area itself. If they have especially if they have a vested interest in studying this like they're being accused of a murder, you know, you would think there's be a lot of intensity and emotional connection to that. But these concepts like all these different things is when it comes to technology and the understanding of the human brain they're so they're evolving right now in front of us so rapidly. Yeah. It's true. I mean, just recently in the contemplative neuroscience field they discovered that when you're you know not doing anything that is like your baseline state that you are in fact doing something and they just sort of that was one of the big insights that came out of a contemplative neuroscience was that the default mode network of the brain is actually the self-ing network. It's the network that is constantly constructing the sense of identity and referencing oneself even when you're not doing anything. So that was you know the assumption prior to that was just like when you're not doing anything nothing's happening. But no actually a lot of stuff's happening. It's like yourself program is running basically. Yeah. What well we don't understand what the fuck is is that self program. That's the problem. How much of that is just keeping the heart beating. How much of that is maintaining a normal state without freaking out ripping your clothes off running in a traffic and what causes you to freak out and rip your clothes off and running in a traffic. Do you find that having these shows and doing all these podcasts has given you like a window that you would have normally not had before? Totally. Totally. I can't separate now out the experience of talking to all these people and exploring some of the topics that we explore from my experience now of how I understand the world. It's just so intertwined. I'm sure you can relate to that. Yeah that's why I wanted to ask you because it becomes like a part of your life is not just about having these conversations but about broadcasting these conversations and exploring them not just through your own curiosity but through trying to either illuminate or figure out a way to express these ideas across where you think they're going to be accepted or understood the best. You know understood is probably the best way to describe it. The way it's going to interface with the most amount of people. Yeah I mean sometimes I think it's one of the most grandiose things to do is to start a podcast or to start to be a media person and I sometimes wonder myself as a result. Just being, he started the podcast seven years ago so I've kind of been on the periphery of it and just watching it from the outside perspective too. It's really interesting to see how his podcast and the stuff that he talks about and his own development is I don't know if you can relate to it has really come across in each episode as it's... and now we have an archive of seven years of like development of his own understanding and then how everything just kind of converges now we're really exploring the convergence. Well the beautiful thing about a podcast is that you don't have someone telling you what the subject of today is going to be. You don't have someone telling you this is what you should be interested in. You find these unique individual visions because of podcasts and some of them are ridiculously stupid and some of them are awesome. You know and what's ridiculously stupid to me is awesome to someone else and that's the kind of the beauty of podcasting. And it goes along with what we're talking about I think when it comes to technology and social media it's like the interfacing with ideas, the ability to exchange information. And so all sort of radically changing right in front of us and you know podcasting is just a part of that. Absolutely. How do you feel like you're going to take this thing into the future do you have any plans for it or are you trying to expand it or are you... you're nodding? Virtual realities next I think. Like Oculus Rift style podcasting? Well that could happen. We'll see if that's popular but... Jeez you. No I think for us we're doing Buddhist geeks as a media project but we're also meditation teachers and we work a lot with other folks. And we've trained with various Buddhist teachers so for us we're wanting to make a space both for these conversations but also for people to practice together in virtual space. So that's a lot of our focus lately is on how to reinvent the Buddhist practice tradition for the 21st century. And the big part of that that we're working on now is doing retreats online. You know periods of intensive immersive practice that happen in the context of your life. And also you know we're building what we're calling the Buddhist geeks dojo which is going to be kind of we're describing it as an early version of the matrix for training your mind. The Buddhist geeks dojo, the Buddhist geeks dojo. And what is that entail? What's going to be in there? It'll be at least a place for people to meditate together to talk about what's happening in their practice which basically is their life. And to find a community of folks who are kind of on a similar journey of cultivating certain kinds of states of mind and certain understandings. Why Buddhism though? Like why not? Why call it something? Is that work? I mean you're talking about rebelling against Buddhism right? Yeah well we've rebelled. We've thought about this a lot. And we've rebelled against our rebellion. That's the face of currently ancient. Yeah I mean it's like if we don't call it Buddhism we'll call it something else and then there's a framework around that. So it's like I can't get outside of the framework no matter how. I framework no matter how hard I try. And my training has been with some really awesome people in Buddhist tradition and I'm not going to be able to just let that. You know it's always going to impact me and influence me. And there's something about the flavor of that tradition and what it reveals. Hippies. And the hippies. And it's changing. And it's changing. And it's changing. And it's changing. And what way you guys are changing it a little bit because of technology and your interfacing with technology. I mean yeah I mean we're just a small part of it. How else is it changing? I mean... Science is coming in really influencing it. The mindfulness movement is very much influenced. You could call mindfulness a form of secular Buddhism. I mean certainly the guy that had the most impact on the mindfulness movement John Kabat-Zinn was spent a number of decades studying Buddhism in India and Asia. So I mean those things are very big shifts in terms of how it's being practiced and the context that it's being held in. Well that's one of the things that you said the secular because most people would consider Buddhism to be some sort of or maybe one of the only secular religions. And it's true in some cases and in other cases it's like a lot of other religions. There's a lot of... What's the creepiest forms of Buddhism? There must be. Throw them out of the bus. Creepiest forms. Still good. What's the most dogmatic, the most ideology filled? I mean... It must be right. I think... Be crum yoga? No. I mean there are lots of forms that are very rigid in terms of how they're taught and what to believe when you do them. I mean I think that's hard to escape in a certain way because when people find something that was really powerful and works they get really fixated on it. Right like wearing orange robes? Yeah like wearing orange robes. Although that's not really that popular anymore at least in its current form in the West. Manasticism is not definitely not taking off. So that's one way it's changing also. It's moved away from Manasticism and toward this more kind of lay-centered life that's... Being integrated with everyone else. Being integrated in your life you know how it is. And that's I think that's true of most religions that are doing well. They've moved away from the transcendent and toward the imminent. You know they're recansieving divinity as something that exists in your life as it is. It's not something that's beyond your life in some way that something's wrong with your life or your body. This is a sinful, terrible vessel that is completely limited. And it is in one sense. But in another sense that's an intermediary insight from my experience. What are the confining aspects of calling a Buddhism though? What are the pitfalls of that besides hippies? Definitely going to get some problem out of here. Not that I love hippies. Don't get me wrong. Yes, but hippies come in many shades. There's legit hippies. And then... You're definitely gonna get some problematic it. Not that I love hippies. Don't get me wrong. Yeah, same thing. Hippies come in many shades. There's legit hippies. And then there's like really annoying hippies that just sort of, you know, they use the hippie framework to just be annoying. Sure. I mean, I'll say one can finding thing is that Buddhism is a religion. I mean, at least in terms of how we understand religion. Is it tax-free? Is it tax-free? Yeah, do you have tax-free exemption the same way that other religions do? We personally don't, but you could do that. Yeah, you'll give fucking chase down. Don't do it. It gets really hairy when you don't wanna pay taxes. They go, oh really? Time to take a little closer look at the Buddhist geek organization. Yeah, see what you're doing on Saturday night. I think they're infiltrating. Yeah, I think with anything like Buddhism, I mean, you inherit, but choosing that framework, we inherit it. All, you know, we inherit it. And so there's a lot about religions and spirituality in general that is not, that I don't personally like. Like what? So I think that there's a tendency to project, I mean, you brought in the word divinity. So I always like to project our divinity onto the teachers or onto some sort of system. And it can be disempowering for a lot of people. People can get trapped in beliefs that have been carried forward for years and centuries that aren't, isn't forwarding anymore. And so that sense, like by choosing to go under Buddhism, we're also choosing to work on how we can evolve, how we think about it. And one thing that I really like is the practices themselves, the mind-training aspect of it. That's what's been really beneficial to me. And that's one of the reasons I want to have chosen to continue. Because if it's impact. The mind-training aspects of it. Like what, what do you think is like the tangible benefits of this mind-training aspect over that you personally experience? Personally, I can say personally, I feel much, much, much more open and much more generous, compassionate. There's a lot more freedom. I can get stuck on the smaller sense of self-meaning, I have these thoughts of unworthiness or self-contraction or hatred or any of those biological urges. And at the same time, they're so transient and they're so not who I am. And I see that very, very clearly that it kind of diminishes in just a second, on the good days. Sometimes it's more intense. And I have learned to really work with that and learn how to see clearly what's happening so that I have the freedom to really choose how to live my life in a much more full way. So really is like a workaround for a lot of the biological pitfalls. I think so. I think it's a way of working with the situation as it is and making the most of it. If someone came along with another name, though, like Buddhist, like the word Buddhist. If someone came along with another name for a similar practice, do you think that it would be accepted? Yeah. I think the Buddhist tradition, especially in the West, has been modified, like mindfulness-based, stress reduction. I mean, some of these different techniques are taking from the ancient techniques. There's something about grooves and consciousness and patterns like we were talking about earlier. So by going under Buddhism, we're kind of riding in those grooves. And they're not all bad. Yeah, no, there's something. I don't know, my own experience. And it's a little embarrassing in a secular context to talk about this because it's weird to say, for whatever reason, I just fell in love with the forms and the ritual and the, you know, and just the feel of the aesthetic of Buddhism. For some reason, I just immediately felt a sense of being at home when I went to the first meditation retreat and I was there practicing. And I was like, oh, wow. And I felt this deep sense of connection with that particular form. And for whatever reason, it just like it works for me. It's unlocked a lot very rapidly that I don't know. That would have been otherwise possible if I was trying to do some sort of practice that I didn't really connect with that much. Something about just the love of the form and the aesthetic itself that I can't really explain, except that I've always liked Asian stuff. And the inclining of the mind towards awakenings or awakening, that framework in itself as it's an interesting inclination. So, you know, just like we had to search for the Holy Grail, we mentioned that earlier, the inclination towards some kind of inquiry into, okay, and the question presented itself earlier, like who are we? Who is this? And I've found that the techniques and the forms have been really revealing in that way. The deification of the teacher is a real issue though, right? That really comes from an issue with any time, any person is the distributor of knowledge or information. They take this position. Yes, and elevated. That's challenging. And I think the best teachers, you know, we're learning as we become hopefully a little better as teachers is that the best teachers use that situation to help people kind of gain a confidence in their own experience and to be able to know freedom for themselves, you know, through their own practices of paying attention and being with things. And in that sense, the best teachers are the ones that make themselves irrelevant. And the best teachers make themselves completely irrelevant, I think. The process can be empowering in itself. Yeah. Everyone's so calm. Everyone involved the, did the Buddhist ever get into like death metal or driving too fast or racing? I get into driving too fast. Do you? You got to hold, there's a whole movement in the west of the Dharma punks, which are... Dharma punks. The Dharma punks, so who are based here in LA? They were like basically group of folks. That's my friends. Yeah, they're our friends. And, you know, their whole, you know, they have like major house parties with huge, you know, music bands and... Do they do drugs? That movement, not really. Well, I think a lot of them had done a lot of drugs. And so part of the movement is actually about being able to be okay without the drugs. And I think so that's part of the reason a lot of people are attracted to that movement. What about drinking? Uh, we drink? Yeah. I have a glass of wine. But little bit, or do you get hammered? I don't really. I don't get hammered. So if someone's at the bar and they pass your shot... I just don't like it. You don't like the feeling? Yeah, it doesn't feel good. I feel like crap afterwards. Definitely afterwards. You know, like that. It's not the afterwards part. Like how do you feel before? How do you feel daring and how you feel afterwards? Like if I take the average of that, don't feel very good. So I don't tend to... Yeah, that's... Personally don't tend to. Bukowski, you used to get upset at Stoner's. Duncan and I were talking about this last night because they didn't have to pay for the experience. They didn't have the hangover. The Bukowski felt like you earned your drunk with the hangover. You know, he loved that. He loved the earn. There's a hangover for being stoned. It's just a little more subtle. Really? You feel like that? Yeah, sure. What do you feel like the hangover for being stoned is? I don't feel it at all. It's a quality of kind of a little bit of sludginess of the mind and of an increase in self-referencing talk for me. Like more subtle fear and anxiety and self-preoccupation. That's what I've noticed. Well, that's fascinating. Like in what way? In the sense that I described, like after I've smoked marijuana, like during, it's an insightful opening experience. But after there's a sense of kind of being groggy and sludgy and like everything is like less clear and less open than before. And so there's a quality of kind of like, like contraction that comes after the expansion. So that's what I would describe. But it's like a mental contraction. It's not like the headaches and the... No, it's not as physical as alcohol. You guys getting that North Carolina weed, that's what's going on. You gotta get some California weed. Well, you remember we lived in Boulder, because in sativas, right? Well, you remember we lived in Boulder, so we've tried all varieties. Yeah, I'm sure. That's not all. Maybe it's a physical thing, though. I don't experience that. Yeah, I mean, maybe it's the mental training that we've done and being a little more sensitive to that, I don't know. I don't know, but I don't get sludgy afterwards. There's no sludginess. Yeah, it could be personal differences. But that's also indica. There's just a job, that which is a wide margin by a wide margin, with a majority of what most people are getting. Yeah. It's easier to grow, it's more common, and it's what a lot of people are looking for. It's got the more that narcotic effect. Whereas the sativas have more of like an uplifting, different sort of... And then it's also the eating of it, which is much more introspective. That's right. Much more psychedelic. That's right. Yeah. I mean, so personally, I don't have anything against mind altering substances. I think meditation is a mind altering substance. I'm more just curious about like, how do we use those substances? Are we trying to get away from our experience? Are we trying to have insight? Are we trying... Because the problem with so many substances, you get into a pattern of really trying to cope with the difficulty of experience and then getting addicted to that state as a way of dealing. And I think that's where the problem comes in from a kind of mind training and contemplative perspective. Yeah, that's a good way to describe it, because that is what sort of happens, right? That's why people get drunk. That's why people do pills. Yeah. This existence, it's so confusing in itself that you just want to escape and then you escape and that escape becomes a trap. Yeah. And then you get to escape again, you have to keep escaping. And then if you stop, then you got to deal with all the shit that comes up. It doesn't feel good. Yeah. And then you got to go to rehab and try to wean your body off the escape. And if you're a Buddhist teacher, you've got to be concerned about how everyone perceives you because you're not perfect, because you're all peeled up. Yeah, you kind of have a peeled up Buddhist teacher. So there are any Buddhist teachers that are all fucked up on Adderall. Oh, there are as many Buddhist teachers doing as many weird things as there are any other humans I'm pretty sure. But wouldn't you hope that at least overall there would be more improvement in their overall character or ability to cope with this existence? I think there is overall, I think, people inclined towards openness. And then there's a balance between the multiple levels of development. I don't know, meaning that just because we develop in spiritual context, then you also have your social context. And so we have to continue to develop evenly. Yeah. A full spectrum. I think that's one of the trickiest paradoxes. Like you can become really good at being in this free, liberated, open, spacious mind. Some people are incredibly good at it. And you just with them and you have a hit of that. But their sex life is completely messed up and they abuse small dogs and children. And really, I mean, I'm exaggerating a little, but not that much. I mean, there are people who have had profound, profound realizations of the interconnection of all things. And they are profoundly dysfunctional on other levels. And I've met many of those folks. And have been those folks at times. You have been those folks. Oh, yeah. I've been dysfunctional and messed up and doing stupid stuff. While you're practicing Buddhism. Sure. What was the influence that caused you to be dysfunctional and fucked up while you're practicing? Usually the insights that've come from Buddhism. I think it's a bit of a direction. So the insights that have compromised me. Really. Sure. Sort of like a psychedelic experience can make someone go crazy permanently or temporarily. Yeah. I've gone through periods. I'd say, bless, it's been less the Buddhist meditation as much as it's been healing just parts of my past, being a human and having been through difficult times. I think more of it's probably been psychological. And one of the common things that happens in a spiritual context is that people use their spiritual practice to bypass those human psychological issues. It's called spiritual bypassing. So for me, I think part of what happened is I bypassed for a long time and really deep in a particular way. And then I had to come back around and deal with my human experience on a level that I hadn't wanted to before. And then it was really painful. So it's almost like you have these sort of confining aspects of your personality that, because of your perceptions, those confining aspects are probably good. And then Buddhism comes along and blows down those boundaries. And you're like, I'm not ready for this yet. And then you freak out for a little bit and then you come back around. Yeah. And then the integration part, I think, is kind of what you're talking about too, is going deep in the contemplative space. And then if we're inclining our minds towards seeing the reality of what's really happening here, like how are we constructing this reality? And that starts to peel back. There are moments where there's a lot of freedom. And then at the same time, it's like, oh crap. I've got to figure out how to integrate this in my life. And maybe that, those insights of the vastness and the spaciousness and that we're not just our bodies and we're not just our limited views of who we are. Those insights have to be integrated into the way that we live our life. And that's challenging part. That's when the rubber meets the road. And that takes psychological work. It takes body work. It takes really tumbling. It's very humbling. Because then, putting the teacher on the pedestal, going back to that, it's like, oh, OK. We're actually all in this together. And maybe I've traveled these interworlds and can help other people navigate them. And at the same time, we have to come back as a collective. And you've got to watch the dishes. He's got to take out the trash. And then if you have kids, you've got to raise the kids. And how do you do that without killing each other? So. Yes. One of our teachers, Jack Cornfield, says often, you have to remember your Buddha nature and your zip code, both. And the zip code part, I think, can be hard if you've been focusing mostly on recognizing your so-called Buddha nature is the way that your mind inherently is. Yeah, that's similarly discussed in the psychedelic community. Like, what's the point in having these experiences if you can't bring back the revelations and enhance your actual here and now life? Sure. Yeah. It's really important. And then when it is integrated, I definitely want to flushes out just a little bit more. So people can get the sense of that, yes, they're really their difficulties. And they're beautiful, vast, spacious moments. And then at the same time, and even if you don't have any beautiful, like, vast, spacious moments, even this moment in itself, as you're sitting here, can be beautiful. We've all touched into that. So it's like, there's a sense that when it's a wearing out, that's how it describes it's a wearing out process of a smaller sense of who we are. And that integration process is not always easy. And yet, as it happens overall and over the long run, we are very, very, very beautiful people. There's that capacity to be extremely powerful, extremely beautiful and connected, really connected with each other. And that's what inspires me to talk about all of this. So in a sense, you guys are kind of Buddhist evangelists. That's part of what you're doing in the podcast. You're sort of explaining or expressing how it's enhanced your life. This is one way. It's one way to do it. I mean, we're not evangelists in this sort of missionary sense. I think we're evangelists in the sense that we think there's value here for some people, for some of the time, that are inclined toward this or find it attractive. And if they do, like we have, it's useful to be able to connect with other folks who've done it and who, in some sense, can be there with you. One of our mentors said, the role of a teacher is to be just a little less afraid than the student. Doesn't mean they're like, have it completely figured out. It just means they have a little bit less fear of what's happening. So I think it's useful to connect with people like that. If you find you're attracted to something like that, if you're into psychedelics, we've explored psychedelics. It's useful to go work with people who know a bit about it and who can not freak out if you have a bad trip or if you start losing your mind, that can extend their stability to you so that you can actually go through that process and learn from it. And in the end, have an empowering experience of it, or at least in an empowering interpretation of what happened. And instead of just feeling like, oh my god, my reality sucks and I'm just going to be depressed and kind of crawl into a hole. So I think in the same way, for us, we just want to create a space where people can practice together. They've been doing for thousands of years sitting and exploring their minds in a collective. Well, I think you two are the calmest people I've ever had in the podcast. This has been like the calmest podcast ever. And I think in that sense, you guys are excellent representations of the Buddhist lifestyle. Right? That's what it's all about, right? Being at peace. Sometimes. Being chilled. Sometimes. Unless you're a Dharma punk. Unless you're driving up the four or five, five o'clock. Yeah. That'll do it to you. That'll definitely do it to you. Thank you guys very much. It's been a lot of fun. Yeah. Entertaining three hours. And if anybody wants to get a hold of your podcast, your Twitter handle is Buddha Geeks, Emily Horn and Vincent Horn. Those are your two individual Twitter handles and your website. Buddhistkeeks.com. And the podcast is Buddhistkeeks. And available on iTunes, I'll let you guys on Stitcher. Yes. Yes. Excellent. And can you just do you have a video aspect of it or just audio only? We do a conference every year. And so we've recorded all of the presentations at the conference and do release those eventually videos. Who knows on Buddhistkeeks.com? Yeah. OK. Terrific. Well, thank you guys. Thank you very much. It's been a lot of fun. Thank you. Very interesting. Thank you. Thanks to our sponsor. Thanks to LegalZoom.com. Go to LegalZoom.com and use the code word Rogan at the referral box at checkout to save yourself some money. Thanks also to BlueApron. Go to BlueApron.com. Ford slash. What is it? Ford slash Rogan. BlueApron.com. Ford slash Rogan and get your first two meals for free. We'll be back tomorrow with stand up comedian Nick Yusef and lots more podcasts this week. So take care and bye bye for now. Big kiss. Bye.