Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night. All day. Gentlemen, Mr. Croissetti. How are you, sir? Very nice to meet you, by the way. Nice to meet you, too, Joe. Thanks, sir. Thank you very much for that video. We talked about it before, but I want to say publicly, the debunking of the debunking by Flint Dibble. And you really nailed him on so many of those things that he was dishonest about. And it just, I wish we knew in real time, but unfortunately, it takes a lot of research to be able to figure out what he was telling the truth about and what he wasn't. Yeah. About to thank you. That was a- Tell everybody your site, too. Oh, de-dunking. De-dunking the past as my email, de-dunking on YouTube or on Twitter. That's with 2D's like my ex. Not debunking, sorry. Keep this de-dunking. Sorry. That's okay. I'm sorry. De-dunking, not debunking. Yes, Dan Richards. De-dunking, Dan Richards. Thank you. Yeah, the thing with Flint, it was actually funny. The moment that I knew that he was lying about the science was when you asked him about the fertilization of plants. That's what they roll back into a no longer domesticated. He was like, oh, I'll just take thousands of years. It's like, no, no, no, no, no. I've researched this and I know better. And he was just knee jerking straight. I thought of just thousands of years. And when you pressed him, he's like, well, I don't know for sure. Well, that's a bummer because that's his field of study, which is really kind of crazy. And it's a really fascinating thing that seeds do adapt to agriculture. They adapt to the fact that it's better for the survival of the plant if one you develop agriculture, if they're more robust and they stay on the plant, it's better for the wild if they break off easy and they can scatter better and they can proliferate. Yeah, it's really basic if you think about it. I mean, if it stays on the plant after it's ripe, it's just sitting there waiting for the first thing to come along and eat it. For that whole natural selection thing when it comes to plants is so fascinating. But the question was so simple, if you stopped having agriculture and these plants just grew wild, would they go back to the same characteristics of wild plants? And he was like, no, there's no evidence of that. But then I saw your video and then I looked at some other stuff and there's quite a bit of evidence of it, particularly with wild rice, right? Yeah, particularly with wild rice. Yes, that one it looks like out of any of them, if there's a possibility that one was domesticated and then went back to the wild and then was domesticated again, it would be rice. That shows multiple types. There's different ways the seeds can break off, right? They can break in different points of the plant where they can just fall straight out and rice shows numerous past layer where we only has one genetic pathway to that seed shadow where the seed falls off. So it's, they get pretty complicated, but rice does have a lot of genetic possibilities for that. No, I'm not a geneticist, so I'm sure that somebody's gonna come and say this is pseudo crap. But ultimately at the end of the day, Flint was treating it as a debate whereas you and Graham were both trying to sift to the truth. And that's why he was not gonna give Graham one little corner, one little shred of possibility of being right anywhere when in reality, it's just like everything else in life, it's a lot of grain. Well, it's also this whole subject of the past is it's so obviously confusing. Because when you look at, I watched your video today, the ballback video, just looking at the enormous size of those stones. There's no reasonable explanation how people, what is that dated to? Like what year do they believe it was made? This is where it gets fun is because they credit it to the Romans and the Phoenicians. However, there's, it goes beyond the sophistication and the capabilities what the Romans were known to have, whether it's the existence of the screw jack for lifting the stones. But ballback, which is located in Lebanon. And I had the great privilege of going there in September of last year, exactly one month before things kicked off in Israel with the whole Hamas thing. And if I hadn't got there then, I wouldn't have no chance like right now Israel's bombing Lebanon. And so it's a dangerous place. But ballback, if there was one example, one ancient site on earth that is evidence of a lost ancient advanced civilization. And by advanced, I'm not talking about space lasers here. I'm talking about more sophisticated than what we were taught in school for the known capabilities. And ballback has the largest stones that were ever quarried in human history, so the largest stones that were lifted stacked and transported in human history, and the largest stone columns in all of classical history. And we're talking, so the trilothon stones, three stones, 900 tons of peace or 800 metric tons. And they were moved a half a mile from the quarry, they were lifted and stacked approximately 30 feet off the ground. And when I say stacked, they were perfectly lined up and Jamie, it's in my folder of ballback if you wanna show some of these. And they're absolutely massive. So let me tell you right here, and I of course have the gentleman there who I'll tell you about later highlighted just to kind of show you for perspective, like that's someone right there, it's five foot 11. Those stones that are highlighted in red are the trilothon stones. But these pictures do not do it justice cause it's taken through an ultra wide camera lens. From the top to bottom of the red highlighted stones is 14 feet. And they're 62 feet long, or 62 feet, excuse me. Like there's me. And- So it's hard to tell because of the perspective and people need to kind of understand how a wide angle lens sort of distorts things by showing you this enormous field of view. But when you're looking at something that's 14 feet long and 60, excuse me, 62 feet long and 14 feet high, like what is the weight of that? What's the overall weight? 900 imperial tons or 800 metric tons. And to anyone listening, a metric ton is 2200 pounds, 1,000 kilograms. And in imperial ton is 2,000 pounds. So that's 1.7 million pounds. Each of them, there's three of them. And if you were to go to the quarry, there's ones that are 1,200 tons and even 1,500 tons that are 20 feet tall. This is mind boggling. Like Jamie, if you want to just scroll through some of the other photos to kind of give Joe the perspective and the audience the perspective. Those are clearly cut stones that were moved into place and moved 23 feet above the ground. Right. And technically 30 feet because there's stones that are actually below the ground there that you can't see because it's submerged under the earth. So technically it was 30 feet, but 23 feet off the ground today. And right there, this highlights. So not only is that 14 feet from top to bottom, which you would never realize when you're looking at this. And these are confirmed measurements, by the way. This is right out of encyclopedias. But notice how they're completely flush, nice and even with each other. And this exceeds the known capabilities of what the Romans had. And it's worth mentioning that this site is some 2,400 miles from Rome, the capital. And if they're going to say that this was created by the Romans, one, people need to understand that the Romans were renowned for documenting everything. Yet this site is not credited to anybody. They don't know exactly who did it or when. But the academics conclude that it had to have been the Romans or the Phoenicians because, of course, there was no one before them. And with this photo right here, let me say something else. There is evidence of at least two, but arguably three different architectures that were done at this site. And I would conclude that this is evidence that this site existed in prehistoric times. There's also, I could show you encyclopedias that talk about Balbeq being prehistoric and nature, dating back 11,000 years of human history. And what I argue is that it was built up, it was found by the Romans, and the Phoenicians, and built upon later. And right here is evidence for all that have ice to see. Look how they obviously use broken stones and constructed on top of it. Why would you go for making the most advanced stones in history that far exceed anything you see in Rome? For example, if you were to go to the Colosseum, as magnificent as that is, it is architecture of mathematics and just brilliance. But this right here, why would they use the, why would they, for all the feats of Roman history, why would they have the most impressive feats over 2,000 miles away from the capital? In fact, let me just say this. When I'm talking about 900 tons stones, the largest stone in all of Rome is 53 tons. It's the Tracian capital block to make up the Tracian's column, 53 tons. This is 15 times heavier. There's a number of things too. Now I'm not a huge believer in ancient technology. Come, sir. I know you've heard me talk about AG1. It's an awesome way to improve your whole body health and just feel better in general. But today I have a new special offer for you. If you try AG1, you also get a free month's apply of AGs Omega-3 supplement. These once a day, capsules have high quality Omega-3 fatty acids to take with your AG1, just that easy. Over 80% of people are not consuming the right amount of Omega-3s in their diet and AGs capsules ensure that you'll get the essential fatty acids you need. These nutrients provide additional support for brain and cardiovascular health, when taken together with AG1. And if you've ever taken fish oil before, you know that taste. Well, don't worry, AGs encapsulated fish oil actually has a nice lemon taste, not bad at all. If you're looking for a simple and effective investment in your health, try AG1. And if you've been thinking about it, try it now. This November, you'll receive a one month's apply of AG Omega-3 when you first subscribe in addition to the welcome kit with five AG1 travel packs and a bottle of vitamin D3 plus K2. So make sure you check out drinkAG1.com slash Joe Rogan to claim this special offer. That's drinkAG1.com slash Joe Rogan. I'm not a big believer in ancient technology as Jimmy's well aware, but which is why it's important that you're here because people are going to hear multiple perspectives. Yeah, that's where I can tell you some things about a bowel back that are still interesting to me. One of them is you don't see the Roman foot in those stones, which is weird. You would expect to see some sort of breakdown of the Roman foot in these measurements, but they're not there at bowel back. They are there on the stones that were quarried by Roman foot. What you're saying is that there's a different measurement what they consider to foot. It's not 12 inches. Correct. There's a Roman unit of measurement that they would use in construction. And it's see it. We don't see it in those stones in the trillathon in, but there's three stones that were quarried and left in the ground. All of those stones show signs of using the Roman foot. Jimmy, will you scroll over to them? So that right off the bat shows to me that the ones that were installed were not built by the Romans, but the ones that were quarried were made by the Romans. They were trying to quarry out stones to match it. Right here. Another thing is that's crazy. Roman architecture always uses the most impressive things right in the front. You walk in the front of the thing, and that's where you're gonna see the biggest stones, the most impressive, for obvious reasons. These are in the back, completely on the opposite end of the entrance. So if you have to like, from what you told me, you had to look for them if you don't know where they're at, like you can't just show up on the site and they say here's the trillathon. Well, let me tell you a quick story real quick. So I had the pleasure of going there with some people, and I'll tell you about it later. I won't do the name drop just yet. But Dory, who lives in Lebanon, he toured us around, and he had been to the site three times before. When we went to his fourth time, he did not know of the existence of the trillathon stones. They're around back. You gotta walk probably a third of a mile to get there. They don't even bring the tours around to the trillathon stones. He had no idea what I was talking about the night before dinner. I'm trying to explain to him like the trillathons stones, the 900 ton stones. And I had to show him a picture. He had never seen him before. How do they not show the tourists this? That's an excellent question. It, you have to walk, to be honest, it's like a 12, 15 minute walk to go around to get there. I mean, it's part of the platform, but you have to go all the way around. And some people just don't feel like making the walk. And when we were there, we were totally alone for a half hour with these stones, not a single person. There was hundreds of people at the site, not a single one of them came around back. Now, just to clarify with the audience to seeing right now, this is at the quarry, which is a half mile away. This is where all the stones originate from. And this one right here is what's called the stone of the pregnant woman. It is 1200 tons. As you can see, it's 14 feet tall, which is the same height. So when those trillathons stones, I was showing you a moment ago. This, the only difference is that this one's 68 feet long. It's virtually the same size, except for just a few feet shorter, but it's the same height. So that gentleman right there, who's a wonderful man, is six foot tall. And look at him just dwarfed by the stone. To well, 100 tons. It's the same. And it's not from there. Well, no, it is. This was core. So this is at the quarry. So the, so this one's at the quarry, and but the ones that were placed, where are they from? This quarry, which is a half mile away. So this is to the moved 1,800 pounds, a half a mile. Three of them. That doesn't include the two dozen that are 350 tons of piece. That doesn't include the nine that are 600 tons of piece. Nine stones that are 600 tons of piece are somehow a side note to the trillathons stones. And then we just tell you this, this is something Jamie, if you scroll over, a few to an articles involving, because this is what the audience needs to understand. A lot of people hear these numbers, and they don't wrap their head around exactly how important this is, which is that the go to the article involving the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. Okay. It's in the same folder of Fallback. And the largest stone moved in modern times is 340 tons. And we're gonna come back to all these photos too, because it's extremely important. There's some details in here. That's the one at that goofy museum in LA. Yes. Which is by the way a very goofy museum. Yeah, I have been there. It's so dumb. It's so dumb. It's, there's an acrylic box that's on the ground. Yeah. You're supposed to interpret as art. It's just a box that's just sitting there. It's one of those places where you go there and you go, what is my tax dollar going to? Jamie, go to motherfuckers. Go to the other folder that's moving stones. So let me just, while he's looking for that, let me explain to you. I saw the video on that. And so what this is, is there was a suspended stone that's an enormous stone that they placed there as part of their art piece. Yeah. And this thing was not that, not that Jamie go. This is just fail. That's it. Yeah. We'll play that video in a little bit. It's pretty funny. They had to move this stone. It was four miles an hour as the fastest they can move it. They had to build a structure around the stone to move it. Yes. And this fucking insanely huge truck that me tell you. So the details, it is a 200. So they had to custom build a trailer truck around the stone itself. Tell Jamie what I've heard. Look under the moving stones folder. There's not a folder. It's just a video. Go to, let's see here, scroll down a little bit. Go to Ramas, he him statue. Man, the silly, you're using a Mac. It doesn't show you the preview of the pictures. Silly Mac. Keep looking until you find the of a big red truck. But I'll tell the audience while you're looking for it. Exactly what we're talking about here. So yeah, keep going. Back, back, back, there we go. You're on it. Go back a little bit. Go back to the article three, go left like three times. Right there, go back, right there. So this one stone, 340 tons. They call it the largest operation of its kind since the Egyptians built the pyramids. They had a custom build a 260 foot long trailer truck that consists of 196 semi truck wheels. As 44 axles, it's 32 feet long. It took a year of planning. It cost $10 million. It took nine days to move this 340 tons stone. What a great use of taxpayers money. $10 million. There's no way they needed that money for LA. Who cares about potholes and homeless people? No way. I mean, this is more important. And so this is what's so important is that this, the largest stone moved in human history is at the Ramachium. It's the Ramachium statue in Egypt. It's 1,000 metric tons, which is 2.2 million pounds. That was inexplicably moved 170 miles from the quarry in Ass 1. And here's these significance of this. Brother, this stone at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art is 1 third the weight. One, the stone at the Ramachium is three times heavier. And how far did they move that stone? All right, this one at the one, the one, the Ramachium, 170 miles and the other one was moved 106 miles. 170 miles. And it's 2 million pounds. And so this is where things get really fun is that they say the academics, they say that the stones would have been moved on tree logs because that's their best guess. And it's not an unreasonable guess. But when you look into the nuanced details, so I really nerd it out hard on this, there's a lot of people, are you familiar with the mows' scale of hardness? No, so it's the measurement of stone and it's often used by alternative ancient history buffs to say that hey, copper-based tooling could not have been utilized to cut granite stone like that's been claimed. And there's no evidence that the Egyptians never told us the used bronze tooling to cut the stones and make up the granite stones within the pyramid. And so I started asking them like, wait a second, if they're gonna say that they moved a 2.2 million pound stone on tree logs, well they say that it was the cedar trees. Well, I nerd it out on this and there's something called the jenka scale of hardness which measures the hardness of wood and it's often used for if you're gonna pick wood flooring in your house. It's very soft wood. It's one of the softest on earth, not the softest. But it's so soft that it would never even be considered for flooring in your house because your furniture and your heels would dent it immediately. And if you're to put significant weight on it, whatever that weight is, it would either crush it, crumble it or at least dent it out of a circle or being a circular nature to roll on. And so when you look into the nuance details involving the mysterious accomplishments of the ancients, it becomes abundantly clear. Like if I had one thesis, is that the true history of mankind was more advanced than what we were taught in school. Now how advanced? That's the fun topic. We'll dive into that here in the next couple hours. But the reality is that there's evidence for all who have eyes to see that there are, I mean, again, brother, 1,000 metric tonne statue. And this is right out of encyclopedias. Show the statue. So this is the statue. It somehow or another fell. Yeah, so it was a seated statue. That's me in front of it. And it's broken into multiple pieces. There's some images, Jamie, of what it originally looked like. So that foot, it's up to my belly button. Like the top of the foot, that's just the foot. There's another picture that would, an illustration that would show you would have, what it would have looked like when it was full. There it go back one. So that's what it looks like from an aerial shot now. It's completely toppled over. God knows what would have taken to knock this thing over. They would, they say probably an earthquake. It was a seated statue. I, if it was a standing statue, so that would, that's what it looked like originally. That's what they, yes. And again, a thousand metric tons is 2.2 million pounds. How it got knocked over in itself to me might be indicators of some sort of cataclysm, but that's a side point. But the point is this, it was moved 170 miles. They do not, the Egyptians did not articulate, illustrate or describe how they would have done so. Isn't that part of the problem with like the burning of the library of Alexandria as all that information was lost forever? Yes. Here's the thing, hold on. Let me say this real quick. Brother, the library of Alexandria was like thousands of years before the Great Pyramid. Like the library of Alexandria was just after, was it 47 AD or BC that it got destroyed is believe something around there. So 2000 years ago, this statue is 3000 years old, according to the academics. So this is a thousand years before the library of Alexandria. So yeah, it's not a reasonable to suggest that they would have had information about how they constructed these things. In fact, I want to believe that they did. But they might not. Yeah, they might not have. Where are you gonna say, James? Well, you're talking about the, we look at the way that they move the stones, like you're talking about the cedar. They moved one stone in human history that was really big. The biggest stone ever moved was the thunder stone was moved by Catherine the Great People. Late 1700s. Late 1700s. They used big team of people and they moved this thing, not very far, like 10 miles, eight miles, something like that. Nine miles and it took over. And it took nine months. And when they were pulling this thing on the ground, they had to consistently try metallurgy and different types of ball bearings to roll on because the ones they were moving would keep being crushed. And then they had to use screw jacks that are just like you jack up a house floor with. Like I saw before. They would use these screw jacks to lift the statue back up and put it on bearings. Well, the Romans didn't have a screw jack. The degenerate, we had metallurgy with trying different kinds of ball bearings and shit. That's something way outside. I mean, the 1700s, at 1700s, we're talking right at the cusp of them actually making structural steel. You know, this is the beginning of iron bridges and shit. They were actually making good metallurgy and it still took trial and error to move this stone. And that stones basically the same size as the ones at Baalback, a tiny bit bigger. But the same kind of issues where they would have had to have jack that thing up. They would have had to, which would have took steel or hard hard metal. They would basically, they had to have some highly advanced metal orogie for the time. Not as good as we have now, but 1700s level of metallurgy. That's what it would have taken. And the Romans did not have that level of surface. But it was close. So that's the thing. So there's something that you inform me of, Dan. And this is, let me just give you a shout out. Hey everybody, go subscribe to D. Duncan on YouTube. Your channel is a gold mine that is bringing, you are bridging together the facts that the alternative theorists are presenting, as well as the academics and you're differentiating the truth and your truth and your channel is so valuable. And what you taught me is that the invention of the screw jack was utilized in order to lift that thunderstone, the bronze horseman, on top of those metal rails. So with the Egyptian, or excuse me, the Romans didn't have that. That wasn't invented until thousands of years later. So without that screw jack, they would have never been able to lift it in the first place. That stone would have just sat there. Because yeah. You said something that you don't believe in ancient technology. I don't believe in ancient high technology in the regards that generally speaking, when you start getting put this mic on the line. I'm so sorry. It's okay. I don't feel like this from your face. I'm so sorry about that. That's okay. I'm not a believer in ancient high technology in regards to what I don't believe. Even ancient steam engines would be pushing it. When you start talking really advanced stuff, I tend to look for other explanations. I tend to look for, stone was the premier building material for hominids for millions of years, literally millions of years. So Father passed to his son how to do this sort of thing. And eventually you get to a point where we start working with metal and that kind of just dies off. We quit doing that for a while. And then a thousand years goes by and we look at what our ancestors used to do and we're like, holy shit. But I honestly think a lot of the stuff that we just saw how they did it, we would just be like, well fuck, why didn't I think of that? But wait a minute, when you're talking about moving things that are thousand tons and you're moving them through the mountains. Like how? I mean, why wouldn't you believe in such an ancient technology? Well, let's put it this way. I'm not opposed to the idea, but we need to get there first. Like if we're going, like we're talking about the thunderstone or the ball backstones, going from, like I feel like we need to exhaust every other possibility before we can start hanging our hat on something bigger. Because what other possibilities could you even conceive of? That's, I've been hoping to the conversation. But it is technology, right? It would be a form of very sophisticated technology. It would be something that heavy. It would be definitely something better than we know or different than we know. But like, like I give an example that I've used it with Jim before was, you know, when this World War II ended, America ended all their sniper schools overseas to tighten the budget. And Vietnam started, we didn't have any sniper schools. And the NCOs on the ground say, hey, we need trained snipers. They had to actually recruit snipers, star shooters from the American Olympic team because we didn't have trained snipers anymore. In 20 years, we had better tools, worse results because of the lack of skills. So I'm of the opinion that there's some, you write, but the sniper is something that we're all very well aware of. It's conceivable, it's obvious how you would do it. You could explain it to the layperson. Yeah, you can. But it was something that still there was a skill set that was lost in just 20 years. That's all, I think that, I think that like a lot of things, you see a lot of the ideas for moving the big rocks. So some guys will use like, like they think that like, like water pressure vacuums are used to pull rocks up tubes. And you see all kinds of interesting hypothesis that use lower tech means that I tend to think, most of my think that don't work. But I tend to think that those would be the direction we should be looking before we go to ancient high technology. And again, the reason, the reason that I think that is because if we do get to ancient high technology, we really need to have eliminated everything else but we get there in order to be taken seriously. I guess that's kind of how I look at it. I'm a more skeptical person. Real quick. So that's back up to this. Let's see if we ground this. Would you agree that what we were taught in school that the ancients were more sophisticated than the described narrative? See, then there you go. So we're on the same page because it's like, what's technology? Like do they have space lasers and hydraulics? I'm not suggesting that. Oh, that always took no. A horse saddle technology, right? So they had something else. Oh yeah, they definitely, when I guess, when I get to the, when I think when most people think high technology, like you say space lasers and stuff, power, power things, like something where there was no longer using human power or water power, something that we're harnessing energy or doing sophisticated chemistry, things like that's where I start to be like, well, I need more evidence to go that far with it. However, the moving of the big rocks is something that I'm quick to say, but in order to do it, we would need, if we were to do it, we would need technology well outside of what they had available to them at the time. And in my opinion, if you look at those, like this, that we took go back to that, you've got the three big stones that were put in a wall that don't have the Roman unit of measurement used. And we got three big rocks in the ground that do have the Roman unit of measurement. I think that they gave up. They realized they weren't able to do it. They had one group carving them, and the guys tasked to move them and looked at what the fuck are you guys on about it? No way we're moving these things, you're on crack. And the fact that it's undocumented, like the foundation of all becca's completely undocumented, the, go ahead. Do you were saying something about dating it to 11,000 years? There is, so Jamie, if you go to the ballback folder, you'll find in cyclopedia article that describes the evidence of human habitation at ballback dating back 9,000 BC, which is 11,000 years ago. And I'm not suggesting these stones were created back then. I'm open to it. What is the evidence? Like what kind of evidence pottery? Oh, I sure. I'd have to go read through the scientific article, but it's humans were there 11,000 years ago. Yes, okay. And the fact that they don't document when the Romans were, yeah, see right there. And there's another history of the dates back, at least 11,000 years of company in a significant period, such as prehistoric, cananite, Hellenistic, and Roman errors after Alexander, the Great Conquered, the city in three, three, four BCE. He renamed it Hellopolis, Helliopolis? Helliopolis. Helliopolis. Greek for Sun City, the city flourished under Roman rule. Now, let me say this real quick, Jamie, will you go to the picture of the mountains in this folder? So this is something that's unbelievable. All right, so just scroll through all these photos of the mountains because here's something that people need to understand that it's unbelievably significant, which is that all at Balbek, there are approximately 200 rose granite columns that were transported from the Aswanquiry in Egypt, which is 700 miles as the bird flies. And what's wild is that the only way to get them to Balbek, because the Balbek is located in the middle of the Lebanon mountains. And it has an average elevation of an 8,000 feet with peaks reaching over 10,000 feet. As you can see, there's a frickin' ski resort there, which I couldn't believe when I was driving there, there was literally the ski lifts. I went there in September. So they had to bring all of those multi-ton columns, stone columns from Egypt and the only way to get there was over these mountains, which is mind blowing. And what you're saying by how the crow flies, as the crow flies, what people need to understand is that doesn't take into account elevation changes. So if you have a flat line, like a bird, and you're flying from one point to another, that's 700 miles. But if you have to go up and down and up and down and up and down, it's significantly larger. In the measurement, it's not 700 miles, it's probably double that. Right, and that's an excellent point. And it's like, then the question is like, why would they do this? Like, why would they go out of the row? How and why? How, why is like it's cool? But how is the real question? Like, how do you mean obviously we built things because it's cool. Right. If you go to the Acropolis and the Parthenon, you go, why did you do it? What was the fucking cool? You know? But like, people like to leave cool shit fine. But you look at Balbeck, sort of sort of a lot of interesting things about it. Like it has the largest temple of Jupiter out of anywhere on the Roman Empire. Generally speaking, it's got some of the biggest temples in the Roman Empire period, but it's a far-flung corner of their empire. And it's not an important city really. I mean, it's semi-important in the region, but it's certainly no Tyrow or anything. The whole, but it has all these huge temples, my opinion is, my thinking is that they showed up and there was this massive stone work there. And these are the Romans. They can't have, these can't have the locals thinking their ancestors were better than the Romans. So they fucking hijack it. showed up and there was this massive stonework there and these are the Romans they can't have These can't have the locals thinking their ancestors were better than the Romans so they fucking hijack it Just build big shit on top of it. This is now ours. We plant our stamp on it. This is a Roman building This is all Roman now. This was never your ancestors. This was always ours and then the locals No, never you can't look to their forefathers or whatever legends they had in a couple generations Just the power of Rome well even the Parthenon it's built on the Acropolis and the crop list is older than the Parthenon And it's you know who made that everybody just shrugs their shoulders Folks We put up here You know it's interesting about Balbeque as well is that it's in the Bible The Lebanon mountains are mentioned 103 times in the Bible I am not a Bible thumper I am a believer in a divine creation I'm proud to say it because I've seen the proof in my own life However, what's interesting is about Balbeque is that they said that it was created by ball Which is like this demon entity in the Bible and they declare it as the world's first civilization after the flood And it was created by giants as punishment for what their iniquities of the flood And I have an article about it Jamie if you scroll through you find it now we're in the anonaki There you go Under the chip. Hold on go back to those cranes. Let me tell you this so what you're looking at here is the Romans most sophisticated crane in their history it had a max lifting capacity of six Point six tons in other words to lift just one of those trilophone stones you would need 133 of these which is obviously completely not feasible What so ever you couldn't you wouldn't have the space to do it and it's just ridiculous to suggest you would coordinate 133 cranes around it so what it's what I'm trying to say is that it's Further suggestive evidence that the Romans didn't build it because they didn't have the capability to lift stones of that mass Yeah, they're still pretty fast. Me the Romans were able to build a crane that could lift six tons That's amazing But not enough to even lift the stones that were inside the kings chamber right so let me let me put this in a perspective So the largest stones inside the kings chamber of the Great Pyramid are approximately 80 tons imperial So it actually 78 tons imperial or 70 tons metric removed some 500 miles from the aced one quarry and lift and stacked hundreds of feet above the ground But here's what's wild is that those stones the largest stones in the Great Pyramid compared to the trilophone stones The trilthons stones are 15 times heavier Not not not twice as heavy those 40 times as heavy not 10 times as heavy as a guy who skeptical of that Ancient high technology there's a couple of things that make it words like I had guys straight up can't explain Bob back as one of them you can when you can You could use those cranes and lay them on their side and drag that stone across the ground That's exactly what they did with the thunderstone Catherine the Great Time, but then you have tasked with lifting that son of a bitch and all the sudden you're right back to where you started You can drag it across however you want but when you get to picking it up for 15 feet off well Andy dragged it on those those rails though. Yeah, I mean 23 feet off the ground. Oh, yeah, what a 30 feet right yeah, it is 30 feet is documented I have 23 feet illustrate because it's where the ground is now right, but it's the foundation of it goes subsurface So it's like you know with these details like there's a reason why there is a growing interest in the mysteries of lost ancient civilizations Because smart people of all kinds of walks of life are looking into the nuanced details and realizing like oh wait a second Like when Graham honk Graham Hancock says that there's a missing chapter of human history Like this is reality. We don't know how they built the Great Pyramid It isn't it is a fact that the Egyptians left us with no explanation of any kind out of the tens of thousands of higher glyphs all over Egypt not a single one of them describes how they constructed the pyramid or how they cut granite stones not one Yeah, there's not there's big lacks of big gaps in the knowledge is where we end up having these kinds of discussions And I think to go back to where we first started we mentioned plenty at the beginning it that We have a problem in my opinion that most people that see things kind of like I do as opposed to like Jimmy yourself does where they're looking Where it's I kind of we need to take my steps to get to that ancient Technology they end up going that just straight debunk her out and then they get skeptical that that's skeptically It's cynical they turn into assholes they turn into they're looking for ways to deal with our the shoot this down I just fuck your idea right just so your idea is wrong. So I know what the implications are instead of saying well You know, maybe there's other implications. Let's have a discussion about it. They just go straight to know this is impossible This is stupid make fun of the person compared to flat earth orism compared to aliens all and not seeism Kp even worse. Yeah, influence cases even worse. He he's somehow another classic to white supremacy It's not just a planet. It's that fucking John Hoops man. He's the one that started that shit. He's he's that guy Wikipedia and we could talk about that for a quick second John Hoops is Professor for the University for Kansas University and he is been on Ben one of the earliest editors of Wikipedia Consistently Graham Hancock's page younger drives impact hypothesis page all kinds of pseudo archaeology and then all pyramids in Atlantis all that shit He's got locked he's not just so he edits it him and his buddies edit it and you can't go in and edit it There's a scientist from the comic research group that tried to edit though younger drives impact hypothesis page and was told He can't because it's a conflict of interest a fucking scientist it works on the shit's a conflict of interest But a scientist from outside the field isn't by the way John Hoops studied at Harvard and Yale He got his undergrad I believe from Harvard and his PhD from Yale or vice versa This is this is significant because he's controlling the information He hides this stuff too if he'll tell you that You know he'll tell I watched him tell Forbes Hey you you guys need to site Wikipedia instead of just because they said the younger drives impact hypothesis And they just made a real quick article about it with no skepticism He says you need to site Wikipedia as well He edits the Wikipedia page and doesn't mention that he edits it when he tells people to go look at the What's his motivation for he hates onking this stuff? He doesn't like Graham Hancock. He doesn't he think he's same kind of thing He thinks pseudo archaeology is all the isms He's if you believe in ancient high technology or you believe in Atlantis You must be a white supremacist or racist and misogynistic Let's forget about Atlantis for a minute, but I definitely want to talk about it But that what you're seeing is Impossible it's essentially impossible with today's technology when you're talking about those stones that were moved 700 miles through the mountains If you tried to bring some engineers together in the United States in 2024 the best in the brightest and said here's your project They would say fuck you Money to that right you would need super billionaire money and even then I don't know how you would do it I just don't I can't conceivably think of a way and That's what's so interesting about this stuff is that whatever they did was not just Complicated for the time. It was so beyond our imagination of what was possible at the time that it's beyond our imagination of what's possible today So it just it throws this these facts the physical facts about the size and the location They were brought from that fly in the face of logic and credibility and our understanding of what's possible Not just then but today so for anybody to say oh we've figured this out Hey, man fuck you I definitely haven't and the problem is that you have these fucking names attached to you Harvard and Yale and you've decided because there's a group of people that have been studying this stuff and they fucking wrote some shit down And you studied what they wrote down you did your own studying you got a degree You're the guy you're the only one and it's the same fucking weirdo weasels that put their pronouns in their Twitter bio and They're just crackpots their crackpots masquerading as intellectuals Because the things that they're saying are completely bizarre They're all one hundred percent of them are captured by this woke ideology Well, they're said them they're weird people man because they exist in this structure that's been completely compromised And that's our education a higher education systems have been completely compromised and this is not to say that they don't teach you amazing Stuff about medicine and science of course they do, but they are also in a cult It is it is a total cult behavior and honestly it's their religion that when you ask the most the most lea Atheists yes, they are that let me just share this so with the biggest critics and the naysayers of alternative theories There's a common denominator like when you mention the pronouns in their profile Yeah almost all of them have it and they're not trans and if you look at their political ideologies It is extremely left and these people are visceral they're toxic and that means just make a side point that I almost forgot Is when we're talking about Wikipedia a lot of people say well, that's why you don't look at Wikipedia You don't trust it who cares about Wikipedia? I'm like excuse me It shows up at the top of Google on anything that you search so it cannot be ignored And when you're talking a moment to go about the impossibility of the movement of these stones I wouldn't just emphasize this point one more time Which is that movement of that 340 ton stone at the lodge Los Angeles County Museum of Art is one third the weight of the largest stones In ancient history and when you look at what it took to do it so it's like when people you know when you're using word impossible It's like listen with what it took for us to do that and it was a third of the weight And he had a custom build this 260 foot long truck with 196 wheels have internal combustion engines Hydraulics have roads that are flat far better metal far better road The roads the roads one reason why they had to go 106 miles is because they had to go around different roads because most roads couldn't support the weight Like this people that look into this like don't listen to Jimmy the YouTuber Like look into the details on yourself and you realize like this is completely inexplicable and it's so important now because We're living at a time where people are starting to realize that not everything we were taught was true in fact a lot of things You see in the mainstream media nowadays have been utterly debunked. It's all propaganda and About history about the recent history that's easily proven and the mainstream media will tell False narratives right absolutely then so we know the people lie So we know the people lie and we know that people love to be in a position of authority to be the only people that are allowed to Distribute the truth. We know that. Do you want to get provocative real quick? Sure. So there it nowadays There's a lot of conjecture about the historical accuracy of different things involving World War II and Jamie if you were to go to the ball back folder or in fact go to the folder called Swastika so this is something and I got tremendous heat for where is that when I went to ball back I noticed that there were swastikas all over the place and I'm like well that's interesting That's an ancient symbol. Mm-hmm The the what a lot of people are not aware of is that the swastika is prehistoric It's found on five continents around the world and dates back approximately 10,000 years It is found in Europe Africa Asia North and South America all before trans oceanic sea travel was thought to be possible If you scroll for the images Jamie you'll kind of give the audience an understanding now. Let me let me preface this whole conversation with this Fuck Hitler Right of course God I thought right he stole the symbol which was a symbol of peace and he bastardized it So this right here. I took this photo you'd almost think it's photoshopped in this is literally this is a photo This is real and unlike well, this is fascinating. I put this up on Twitter And I said did Hitler know something about ancient history that we don't and the reason why and this was a sincere question Everyone started calling me a Nazi. I was spreading dangerous Naziism for it No, this is a grown-up conversation Hitler was a very intel he was evil, but he was intelligent and the Nazis were arguably the most technologically advanced Country at that time in World War II the jet engine Rockets and for some reason for reasons that I cannot find a definitive answer on is Why was Hitler so in to archaeology they call it Nazi archaeology and The mainstream people will say oh, well, it's he weaponized He was trying to get this area thing going to unite people and just create an enemy If I'll kick it to him or a lot they'll say that him or was the one that was really into that shit And so that's by the that's Peru Like 800 years ago You'll find the Native Americans the Pima Indians the Navajo the Apache There's actually a Hindu temple in Los Angeles that was near my old house Yeah, and we went to visit it You could actually have weddings there and they had to have a sign up explaining why there are so many swastikas on the building I went to swastikas all over it. I went to Japan. It's the same thing there They had swastikas on different trials now in karate when I was a kid Okinawa and karate one of their patches was a swastika Yeah, and this was when I was a kid So this is in the 80s when I was studying March when I first started studying martial arts You could get these Okinawan karate patches that had a swastig on it had nothing to do it Hitler It had to do it Japan right? Well, so sorry go ahead Alright, so real quick while Jamie's on this slide This is from the Hopo mound people which is a modern day, Ohio and that dates back 2200 years ago Jesus Christ this is from modern day Ohio 2000 years ago 2200 years ago and so here's the point that I'm making about the swastika is that Look people debate on whether is the Milky Way galaxy the big dipper whatever you want to say its origins were I do not think that it's a coincidence that a symbol is so specific as it is is found on five continents around the world Before trans-oceanic sea travel was said to be possible because just to remind the audience It wasn't till 1492 when Christopher Columbus killed the ocean blue and of And it's like no this I believe this is strong suggestive evidence that humans were traversing the continents and the oceans Thousands of years before we were taught in school, which is evidence of being more advanced than we were taught in school Right now, what did they think this thing was? Well, I have an idea about that. I mean, it's it's not you know It's just Dan's idea But um the four the four directions across it's the root of the swastika that's pretty commonly used I'm even in Native American culture as like your cardinal points, right? This is northeast sure So this could be a symbol for the passage of time Here's this guy's turning that the card of points turn rotation of the earth is actually along with the points of the Compass exactly now that's what I that's just an idea. I mean that doesn't it? It doesn't really add a whole lot of context to it as far as you know I Why not just have a cross then up down left rising isn't it crazy that a geometric pattern is evil? Yeah, not just the geometric pattern, but a mustache Like it's like it's like it's like it's funny Your beard is fine. Nobody else any problem to it, but imagine like if like oh You have a wizard beard you believe in child sacrifice. Yeah It's very strange what we've done and obviously that's how horrific Hitler was so Here's something people need to understand. I want to emphasize this point Hitler people need to look in the details He was looking for giants in Africa. They did the they said a mission to the first also on meth I love it the thing is though It's like I have not found an answer on why he was looking for the arc of the government Covenant he was looking for Thor's hammer and the Holy Grail and and the thing is to me I'm like I don't What did hit I feel like there's something that they knew about ancient history that we don't I don't know if this is true or not But I want I feel like I can't find a straight answer and let me tell you this if you go Googling for answers on Hitler's interest in archaeology I come not You're gonna find the same article so this is actually kind of explosive About two years ago. I made a video about Google Savataging their search results because remember how I will show you if you Google some topic I'll say there's like a billion results. Yeah, so I made a video on this and They would max out it It didn't used to be this way because I remember watching a video years ago of people going thousands of pages to find some blog Spot and subtopic it then became limited. I did experiment myself many times on on benign topics such as pancakes Was one of them I typed in pancakes had like a billion result like 700 million results And then it only go back to page 41 and then it would recycle them all those pages before it the dozens of pages Would recycle some of the same exact mainstream articles And so I did this on all kinds of topics and now Google has since removed the page numbers and so you can only just go See more see more see more and so if you Google any type of topic and if you're looking for answers on this They're gonna keep sending you the same regurgitated mainstream articles So I can't find a reliable answer on why Hitler was so invested in ancient history and again I don't give a shit about his area and stuff like right why was he into the occult Why was right? Yeah, I want to know why he was looking for the ark in the covenant? Well, obviously they their engineering was insane. I mean to this like look so many of our best vehicles that we buy today The most coveted vehicles came out of Nazi Germany originally Audi right Volkswagen was his Porsche You know BMW is Bavarian motorworks. I mean all that shit came from the book in Nazis I mean have you ever seen Hitler's race car? No Hitler had an Audi race car, right? Yeah, man It's worth like a shit ton of money See if you could find Hitler's race car, but this was I mean their engineering was superior This is the reason why we had Operation Paperclip So Operation Paperclip we brought over all of the best knock Nazi rocket scientists The one that the car never had yeah, that's how we got NASA. Yeah, we got NASA essentially from Nazis That's the last two to put the woman on the moon. I mean I had it Yeah, that's his original race car. It's not fucking crazy. That was basically a feature that's an Audi right is that is that What was the Ozamer Sadie's Benz? Did he have more than one I believe he had a later one that that's it. That's the one Wow that one had the Audi symbol in the front of it Can you just clarify your pronoun so I know not to be offended that you're interested in this? I'm an American man We're coming to your town So look at that photograph click on that Auto Union, I guess that was what Audi's original name was isn't that crazy look at that car It's pretty sharp pretty fucking dope. I mean I mean in 1939 oh my god It's probably where it says it's worth 5.5 million pounds and illegal to sell on so many markets. Is that pounds? Yeah, little sign So many things they would be like oh, that's Hitler's card No, I have you had you had a list in that here, buddy So Tom's a girl bought Bert Crusher a cup that apparently was one of Hitler's cups He handled really allegedly, but you know how the fuck let's get him in the studio and see this thing Yeah, but if you have that you're a monster But if you had Genghis consored you're fucking cool. Yeah, that's actually an interesting That's a good comparison. Yeah, a lot more people. Yeah 10% of the population of earth We need a long enough ago that you don't hear anybody talking about it He raped so many people that his DNA is in a giant percentage of people today It's like 20% and it's something great. We've done it before. I forget where the numbers are but they're really nutty But the point is there's something particularly disgusting to us about that one genocide and it's it's really interesting and You know you you wonder like how long it's going to take We mean Dan Carlin has talked about this in depth because he talks about the Mongols and that it's so far in the past You know we're talking about like 1200 AD it's so far in the past that we look at it with almost like An objective perspective instead of a moral perspective So we say you know one thing that didn't Genghis Conde It was great he opened up trade to the east and he was a believer of all religions You could practice anything he didn't impose anything on people. You know, buddy fucking killed everybody Live back then it's way worse than it where he killed 10% of the population of earth But the Nazis were so recent, you know, we have grandfathers that alive today that fought more war too And they can tell you, you know, I fucking remember this shit and then we have Jews like Irish fears dad Who was in the concentration camps? Irish fears dad has a tattoo and a song. That's wild. Yeah, his dad's in his 80s. I believe Wow that that that recent memory is a big part I guess he's the other as Thompson stuff on your wall. Do you read his book of Hell's Angels? Yeah Yeah, you remember him talking about that aspect of it. Mm-hmm that The the bikers the Hell's Angels rocked Nazi memorabilia the guy he asked the guy why why don't you He's like because my dad fought the Nazis and he fucking hates this So I wear this you just I wear this to piss off my dad a lot of that this contrarian But that's that's my point is is that you know, he wouldn't a Genghis Kong symbol wouldn't be doing any good Right right. It's this this has this has an emotional attachment Genghis Kong's mustache would be fine on me right people might like me a little bit But I don't even know what it looked like. Yeah, it's it. I mean, I don't know what it looks like Yeah, it's pretty it's the the Nazi thing the the fact that it's so horrific It just like puts any anyone who has anything to say that's coloring outside the lines You get labeled the Holocaust deny her and anti semi You know though the worst labels that they can put on you and a good example that is That podcast Oh God forget his name But it was the Tucker Carlson controversy where he had this guy in his podcast and he was talking about What William Churchill's role in the Holocaust was because they had put these embargoes on Germany and they basically starving everybody to death and They just started calling him a Holocaust an iron just like not what he was talking about at all That's not what he was saying at all. He was just saying no, there's there's a multifaceted explanation for why they decided to exterminate all these Jews and part of it was because of an embargo Although where they were starving people out. What is his? Darrow Cooper and what is his podcast called it's excellent. I listen to it all the time, but my brain's not working right now I just got out of the gym Come on meet him I know what you're talking. I can't I've drawn a blank on it as well Martyr made that's right. Martyr made and he's martyrmaid on Twitter and Instagram and You know to call that guy and anti seminar or a Holocaust started so stupid He's a brilliant guy and his podcast is excellent and he's really sensitive and well balanced and he gives a very comprehensive view of things It's not in any way Prejudiced it's a great podcast. We did not allowed to color outside the lines. Well. Yeah That's all he he was just saying that Churchill was one of the villains. Yeah, and that's very Realistic like the multiple different reasons for that you tighten up their belt They're gonna that's not gonna be passed to the top. That's gonna go straight to the people on the camps Exactly it's real that's and that's no brainer shit Right, I see the punch of fun with the murder of all those Jews. That's not what he's doing. That's that's where it's so crazy about Stifling discourse. Yeah, cuz because that was a fascinating conversation We should be considering that like wow that's crazy There were so many factors so many horrible things going on all together Well, they say you're supposed to learn from history But how the fuck you're gonna learn from history if you actually take the lessons out of it Right, I mean this is a important thing here You'd think about this right now with the stuff in the Middle East in the last 20 years We're sure time we put an embargo on there. We are we're not starving Saddam Hussein We're starving the people in his freaking prisons. Remember that Dave Smith was talking about that in a podcast recently That during the Clinton administration the embargo's starved to death 500,000 children So that's fucked. Yeah, and that's worth remembering that it doesn't if if Having that conversation makes somebody call you a Holocaust an iron that person should be out of the conversation Might be right and what you were saying academia is chalk full of those kind of They should be shamed by people who want to know the the whole picture the opposite of knowledge. It's it's certainly not condoning Holocaust it's fucking it's so stupid to not be looking at everything The good news is that people are waking up to this a lot of people think just like us where they're objective enough to Understand that like well that's silly Yeah, and so they're putting themselves in a corner in this echo chamber where people just aren't listening to many more like You know when it comes to like mainstream archaeology we call it big archaeology establishment archaeology They're putting themselves into a corner where people like if you're gonna if I'm gonna ask questions about the swastika And you're saying I'm spreading dangerous Nazism some people will buy into it But I've noticed that most people are like now he's asking a question We have the internet now We have shows like yours and yours in mind where you can have conversations about things and people get to see oh These people that are in control They're all wounds and they're all telling us that you have to think this one way or you're the the worst person on earth And I don't buy it. No, it's it's a dumb way to look at the world. It's an American. Sorry to Yeah, I did really is proud to be I live in a country where I can have somebody with their pronouns and their fucking bio and somebody We're not with their prime we can both yell at each other and not have us end up in jail over it It's also this position that people have when there are features when they're educators and they have this position You know and I can speak to it a little bit from martial arts because in martial arts when when I first started doing martial arts it was in the 1980s and the 1980s every Discipline believed they had the very best discipline all the judo people thought judo was the only martial art You need to know all the karate people thought karate was it talk window people where I came from they all believed in talk window And it took UFC to slam everything together and go oh Jesus Fucking useless. Yep, and you know some of it's not useless, right? There were some things from like John Jones won the UFC heavyweight title this past weekend with a Taekwondo kick was amazing Yeah, that was unbelievable and grew up so happy because that was my thing So me watching him do that was like yes, why are more people doing this like you guys should have been doing this from the beginning It's the most powerful kick in the sport, but this the you were in trouble if you trained in other disciplines like Bruce Lee was a heretic and He's probably one of the most important figures in martial arts not just because he introduced introduced people to it like myself Who became martial artists because I was a Bruce Lee fan He also Combined all kinds of different martial arts and that was jikundo He developed a style that was essentially he took western boxing He took some judo that he learned and karate and all these different techniques and just tried to find what is the absolute best thing for just fighting and That was he was a heretic like he was his life was threatened for that And it's because the educators want to be the only people that can distribute information and they don't want to be challenged When I was in high school I had a teacher whose his name was mr. Holman He was a very nice guy, but he was a smart guy that wanted to be the only smart guy And he was great talking to me because I was a stupid kid but Unfortunately one day I had watched documentary and I have I've always had a very good ability to recall things and We were we're in class and he was talking about the pollution in Lake Erie and I had just watched a documentary about the extensive Work that they had done to clean up Lake Erie and that they'd made these huge strides and removing Pollution and crap and all these different things from Lake Erie and he was talking about stuff that he had learned in school 20 years prior and so when I was I said well, you know There's a PBS documentary and I brought this up in class where there's been this extensive work And they talked about the amazing accomplishments of cleaning up Lake Erie and he got so mad at me Like you're not mad at me man. You're mad at PBS like I don't fucking do any research I watched a documentary But back then you could say you don't know what you're talking about and I couldn't pull my phone out and go oh But what look at that right? You can watch it dude Like these people have done an amazing work cleaning up Lake Erie But he didn't want anyone else to have any information other what he should have said is that's fascinating I haven't seen that documentary can you can do recall the name of it Let's see if we can get it maybe show it to the class right? I'm gonna try to do that because that's great That's a good sign what I'm talking about is what Lake Erie had become because of industrial engineering and because of Pollution and waste that was coming from all these plants So he was true it was correct But time had changed and he did not like that I knew that and he didn't know that and I remember being in that class going this is so crazy This is my fucking science teacher. My science teacher doesn't want details. He doesn't want facts This happened to me so I was in the military years ago and it wasn't long after I got home for a rock And I was going to Warrior Leadership course which is to become an E5 asargent and Back then they were teaching ABC which is airway bleeding um, what was the other one circulation? whatever and uh for emergency medical response of someone dying and They had since updated where bleeding is the most important thing to focus on because soldiers were bleeding out and During this Worcestershire leadership course they're teaching the core the class 30 people wrong information that since outdated I try to interject to say oh this is what they're teaching now It was the same exact thing that happened. He didn't stop You know, this is what this is what's written down right here I'm like no, but that's not even what they're teaching in theater right now like I'm trying to this is what this whether teaching now it was the same exact thing that happened. He didn't stop. You know, this is what this is what's written down right here. I'm like, no, but that's not even what they're teaching in theater right now. Like I'm trying to this is this is medical emergency stuff that could save someone's life. And he didn't want to hear it one bit. I couldn't believe it. I was astonished. But they have said that's interesting. I did not know that we need to update what we're showing you. These three factors are the same. But now we know. Thank you, Jimmy. Now we know that bleeding is more primary. That should bid the, that's the response of a real leader. Right. And a real leader, you look, there's you're always going to have blowhards in your class that are going to want to hear their own voice. They want to talk about stuff and chime in correct people. And you got to let a certain amount of that. And that's the internet. And people don't like that. And that's why they wanted to ban people from Twitter. They don't like these people coming along that have ideas that like the Great Barrington Declaration, where they, you know, the government actually conspired to get these people removed from Twitter. And we know that because Elon, thank God bought Twitter and changed this course. But this, this was a concerted effort to take these people who were brilliant people who had degrees were experts in this field that they were discussing. And they decided they were going to remove them because they didn't go along with the narrative. And they were confusing people in a time where they were trying to force vaccinations on everyone. Right. The emotion side of it from the individual levels, like what you guys described, you have a teacher, there was emotional reaction. That's a huge part of it. But when the, like that's a huge part of it, when a special with archaeology, because a lot of it's not really hard science, a lot of it's like I've got this arrowhead here. And I've conjured up this story. And so now it's my story and you're not attacking the science, you're attacking me. But it gets even worse when you look at it, what they get like this hate for gram Hancock, in particular, Graham Hancock, that makes it where it's like you can't trust a damn word that comes out of their mouth when they're discussing. Like if we were talking back to the martial arts, you know, one of the things that came out was a keto was just ass. It's no good at all for like man to man combat. It's what was it for like, samurai's it had been knocked off a horse or something. Well, it was designed to redistribute the energy of your attacker. Okay. So if someone's coming at you with a sword, if you don't have a sword and a guy swings a sword and you're fast enough to get away from the path of the sword and grab the guy's arm or body and manipulate him to the ground to remove a sword, it's essentially a disarming. Okay. So it's not the best thing. It just does it work against a wrestler. Okay. So now, no, wrestling is way better. And wrestling is the, if you want to find out the best way to take a person to the ground and control him, we 100% know it's wrestling. Yeah, you just grab the most ancient sport in the world that dates back to the scenarios. And by the way, wrestling in wrestling, I include judo. I include different forms of jujitsu that were ancient because these allowed people to manipulate limbs and to control joints, which allowed them also to take people down and submit them. But the point is, you, you know, how to bunch of people believing that this one goofy ass martial art was the end all be all because of a good Steven Sagoam. Exactly. No, no. My point was there is it's like your your considered pretty much an expert in martial arts. You're not like your professional announcer for UFC. So you know your shit. So if I watched you say Steven Sagoam, you know his martial arts, it's fucking a keto man. I don't know what to tell you. But I would not do that. I would tell you Steven Sagoam was really good. Yeah. Really good at a keto. But if you were, if you, if you hated Steven Sagoam, you were one of his many haters, you could just attack a keto without ever saying his name and just be digging him a ditch, right? You could just be burying him without ever mentioning Steven Sagoam. You could just attack a keto. A keto is this shit martial art. It's not effective. It's not very good. And then by extension, you're making Steven Sagoam look bad. And this is one of their favorite tactics to do to handcock. They will attack this idea is racist. It's inherently bullshit. They don't have to mention hand cocks names. That was just, they just grew the two. They're so insidious this way. Yeah. And they connect, the connecting handcock to white supremacy and aliens is the dumbest one. Cause at first of all, he never said nothing about aliens. And not only that, not only does he not think of it as white people built this stuff, he thinks it's the people that live there, but they live there a long ass time ago. It's the same fucking people. It's Africans. Whoever built the pyramids, they were Africans like I'm an American. Yeah. Let me just remind the audience. He lives Egypt is an Africa. Yeah. Yeah. That is Northern Africa. And it's the most sophisticated construction we have ever witnessed on the face of the earth. Yeah. Anybody that disagrees, you need to really study what they accomplished in just in the great pyramid. It's mind boggling precision. It's not just the incredible feet of moving massive stones, hundreds of miles through the mountains. It's the mind boggling precision of the construction of these buildings that it's so crazy. It's almost like they made it so nutty that even if everything dissolved and expired, it would give us at least some clue that maybe something happened. Maybe people had achieved a level of sophistication. And my thought is, and this is just a is that as we move towards metal and we move towards using different kinds of combustion engines and electronics, we moved in a very specific area of technology. And we were allowed to do this because things have been relatively peaceful for a couple hundred years. Okay. Relatively peaceful and also there's war in other places. So it allowed us to spend our time here devising ways to fuck up people over there. That's the Manhattan Project. Right. But if you have a completely different avenue that thinking goes in and innovation goes in. And instead of combustion engines and electronics, you have something that we haven't even considered. And that to me seems like what Egypt is. It seems to me that they have this incredibly fertile area. So if people look at Egypt now, you're looking at all the sand and all the shit, that is not what it looked like. In the thousands of years before the construction of the pyramid, it was a rainforest and it was fertile. And so my thought is these people probably had plenty of food. And so they didn't have to go anywhere. And so they weren't attacked that often. The newbie is conquered of and that's when the statues changing, looking more southern African. But you have these people that live in this incredibly resource rich place and they were able to spend thousands of years there. And I think in those thousands of years, they devised methods that we still haven't even considered because we went in a different path. And we can't consider any other paths. We consider our path and we say, well, we're the furthest. We live today. Okay. So those are fuckers in the past. They're basically cave people. Right. That's how we look at it. That's it. Yeah. They look like dumb people playing the stones. Oh, they were silly. Yeah. They use stones because they weren't smart enough to use metal. It's like when you look at the details of stone, it's like, you could say it's more impressive. But we wanted to talk about go back to the topic. And the backly, tippy is not just fascinating in its construction, but also in the timeline because the timeline fucked everything up. Oh, remember when Graham Hancock and Zawee Hawas were having that big debate with that other guy who's an archaeologist, the American guy's very smug, but he's like, what evidence do you have of a civilization? I lived 10,000 years ago. Well, you have one now. Yeah. So you have to shut the fuck up because you were wrong. So in the 1990s, as she perdered finds the stone, he starts kicking it and moving it around and he realizes, wow, this is a big stone. I probably bring in some smart dudes to figure this out and they start digging and they go, oh, Jesus, this is these huge circles of giant stone columns with 3D carved animals on them at a time that we thought people were living in t-p's. Right. We thought people had stone tools. We didn't think there was any metal. We thought it had to be done the opposite way around. We thought you needed to be a hunter, gatherer, a former, and then you could build. And now they had to flip that entire shit on its ear. Well, actually, maybe I think they only flip that shit on its ear to try to make it look like they were right about timeline of hunter gatherer. I completely agree. To ignore the possibility of an ancient civilization before Mesopotamian completely agree. Because it's the only thing that makes sense. There's no way when you're just struggling to find food. Okay. And if you've ever gone on a fishing trip or a hunting trip, it's fucking hard to get food when you we have modern stuff. It's hard to get food with a rifle. Right. So these people were getting food. And they somehow or another in between them while like running around trying to shoot rabbits with a bow and arrow, they figured out how to make these massive stone columns and put them in position and move them in circles and hundreds of them. Pretty great artists doing some relief carvings. I mean, that's some that's not the same as just carving it. But animals that we're learning to hear you. Yeah. Which is like, how do you even fucking know this is a thing? What is this? So go backly, Tepe. Brother, if there is such a thing as an ancient conspiracy theory, it's it's this. So I remember hearing Graham Hancock come on your show back in like 2015 or 2017. And he was talking about go backly, Tepe. And at that time, he had shared that the site was only approximately five percent excavated. It's the first video on my channel. It's like August, 2017. And I share the details of it. These these pillars, dates back 11,600 years. It appears to be purposely buried at the same time of the younger dryest climate catastrophe. This is fascinating. And you know, excavations were continuing. So I'm like, okay, I'm going to back burn this topic of go backly, Tepe for a little while, let them further their excavations. And I'll revisit this later when there's something new to share. So earlier this summer, I'm like, all right, let me let me revisit go back to Tepe and see what's new there. And I was astonished to learn that that five percent figure was still the same. Have you heard this? Yeah, I've watched your videos on a YouTube channel, bright insight. I'm undeniably strange. Your videos are undeniably strange. So here's some images where you could see what it kind of looks like along with this global heritage fund dot org story on it. So so it sells five percent. And that figure is still the same as of 2023. I had part one, there's a lady who does tours there and corroborate the five percent figure. And then there's a gentleman named Hugh Newman, who's an author and also leads tours. And he communicated with me that what they were going to do, and I couldn't believe this, they're going to defer a full-scale excavation for quote future generations with a 150 year estimated timeframe for a full excavation of go back to Tepe. And I'm like, wait a second. Are you serious? Like this makes no sense. We're talking about arguably not just the world's oldest ancient site, but arguably the most mysterious because it's like you were just not supposed to exist. Based on everything we're taught in school, it's supposed to be the Sumerians. And then you have the site of go backly Tepe made up of sophisticated pillars and concentric surface at least 5,000 years older. Yeah, that older than almost 7,000 years older than Stonehenge and Stonehenge is a mystery of itself. Right. So I start looking in, I start googling and looking into the details. I'm like, this doesn't make any sense. How could there possibly be how could they defer excavations for future generations when this may be the most important ancient site on earth involving our lost, our mysterious lost ancient past? And so I started digging into this and I couldn't believe what I found. So they were doing large skill excavations, but that has since ceased just to clarify, they are still excavating go backly Tepe, but they have rolled and dialed back the large excavations of the years prior and they're focusing on conservation and tourism management of the site. And like I said, with 150 year timeframe, and I'm like, wait a second, I can't and I have all this green shots in that folder because of funding. Absolutely not. So not only have they never claimed that it's related to funding, but this is where things get bizarre is that there's a Turkish conglomerate called the Doge's group, which consists of 250 companies within Turkey. It's a billion dollar industry. And they're the ones that took over management and funding of the site back in 2017. And they announced this at all places, the World Economic Forum meeting in Davos in 2016 is when they announced this partnership, initial funding of $15 million at that time they set up the infrastructure for tourism, roads, sidewalks, walkways, roofing platforms. And since then, is when they dialed back the excavations. And I'm like, this makes absolutely no sense. So it has, let me just be crystal clear here. It has nothing to do with funding and they've never claimed anything to do with funding. But their excuses, they have said one of which is that well, we want to wait for future technologies to develop so we can more safely excavate the site. And I'm like, wait a second, hold on a second. We're talking about pillars buried in dirt. It's 2024. Do not tell me that we do not have the technological capability to act up to dig rocks. What would be an alternative explanation? So, okay, this is where things get fun. Boy. So, rabbit hole, hello, funny, that's a good rattle. Let me say a couple of things before I get into it. One of which is that them saying that they're waiting for a future technology to develop to safely excavate the site. I'm like, what type of magical shovel or pressure? Water hose, are we talking about here? And since they're saying that they're continuing to excavate the site today, since they're saying they continue to excavate the site today, I'm like, well, which is it? Are you saying that you're doing so in unsafe methods? And I already know that's not the answer because there's been no issue with distracting the site from digging it up. It's not like they broke a pillar and like, oh, dang, wait a second, we need to walk this back. We're not doing things safely. That's not the case here. So there are a few explanations here. One of which is that I, the most logical explanation, this is the less conspiratorial one, which is that it has to do with money. You have this Turkish conglomerate of people that are saturated with members of the world economic forum. For example, the CEO of the Doge's group is a long time member of the world economic forum. That may back burn the world economic forum for a half a second. They're business people. They took over the site and it's all about money now. Back in 2019, go back. They tap. They had approximately 19,000 visitors yearly. Now it's at a half a million. They're focused. If nothing else, they're just trying to bring revenue and it's all about money. Yeah, they don't care about this. You've been in the rest of the site. It's not going to bring 15 more million in revenue. Right. And they just want their money back. Okay. But I'm like, well, this is that makes sense. It does make sense. That's the way in on that real quick. It also, the mystery plays of that site is probably the second most popular place in the planet with people like ourselves. And the more mystery is there, the more money it's the more like, you know, we deal in mystery. So if they excavate everything and we know everything there is about that site and it's all super mundane and there's nothing cool about it anymore. That that that tip dries up and there's no more. But how could it ever stop being? I agree with that. But that one doesn't make any sense. That's a Zahi who lost kind of thing. He's of the same opinion where I think a lot of the same things excuse me happening in Egypt for the same reasons. Zahi who was quoted with saying that those new age people, it doesn't matter what happens in Egypt, the new age people they come. It's about tourism. Ever since the Arab Spring tourism and he just been lower. So I think a lot of the same like that we're going to talk in a minute about the hidden chamber in the pyramid that they've located and still haven't excavated for whatever fucking reason. I think that might be part of it. If you want to get super mundane and not conspirator, it's just as simple. The tourists keep coming while there's a mystery there. As soon as we open that up, it's just an empty empty chamber. I mean, so I don't think I don't buy that. I mean, either the mystery of the structures themselves that we have completely excavated is just so fast. So let me be clear on go backly, Tepe. It's somewhere between five and 10 percent excavated. There's a bunch of some archaeological sites that were only 10 percent or less have been uncovered. None of which date back anywhere near remotely as old as go backly, Tepe. And so just to put this into perspective, go backly, Tepe, according to ground-petituring and radar, consists of approximately 200 T-shaped pillars. Only 72 of them have been unearthed. And as of just a few years ago, they're, they're dialing that back to fully excavate them, which again, the 150-year timeframe. And I'm like, this is entirely unacceptable. It is, there could be hidden answers about our lost ancient past waiting to be discovered on these pillars because all the pillars are trying to tell us some sort of story. They all have depictions, animals, all kinds of things on there. There's the shaman with the bag right, which has seen interesting. Right. We've seen that from the Sumerians. We've seen in South America. The bag thing is very fascinating. It is. It's hotly debated. Yeah, I'm sure. I don't mean you could say maybe it's a tool bag. You could say maybe it's psychedelics. He's gotten that bag. You know, academic say it says water. It's a water. It's a water bucket. You guys know you're with there you go. There you go. on Swatman. Excuse me. You guys from there with the work of Martin Swatman? No. I'm not. He's the one that he was on ancient apocalypse season one for a minute. He's the guy who's made basically a star map of that pillar 43. And in his opinion, those three handbags at the top were three sunrises. And if that's the case, that would almost make sense because then like a picture of an Assyrian holding that would be like holding a vast canonical knowledge like this symbol could have been a symbol of knowledge of the strong. Which is one thing honestly about go back to that book bag. It could have been a book, right? I mean, it kind of makes sense. It probably had to travel around with their books. So here's the thing that pillar. That's just one pillar of 200. And here we are debating. We don't even know what it is. It's all conjecture. Pull it up. Jamie. So we can see with that pillar. So this go back to the tepi situation is far more bizarre than than we've described so far. I think the logical explanation knows that you have massive tourist revenue coming to see it as is why spend more money and excavate these things. I think that's the most. I think that's the most logical explanation, but it could be more insidious than that because that's one pillar. That's just that's pillar 43, the most debated one of them all. And there's approximately 128 more pillars that are still buried in the earth. What's that bird doing holding near that? Dr. Martin, Dr. Martin Sweptman, his first paper on go backly tepi's pillar 43. He's got Scorpio in the bottom. He believes that Sagittarius, that that's the sun. And if that's one, basically it's a star map denoting the time that the comments smack the earth is what people use. Each one of those V's, his latest paper on it. Each one of those V symbols is a day. Each one of his opinion, each one of those boxes is a month. And there is a basically a full year denoting the whole thing the way he's broke does very interesting stuff. And one interesting that's wild to me when we talk about like the lack of further excavations is almost every pillar we bring up has new new symbology new symbols, new iconography. If we're trying to find some sort of ancient proto language or something, we need more symbols. We need more things on earth. Sure. And that's completely opposed by the mainstream archaeology, the idea that these guys had any sort of written language is fucking ridiculous. But what are the theories involved in, you know, I know it's been theorized that it was purposely covered in dirt. It really looks like it. If you look at pictures of the excavation, it looks like it was all piled in with stones and dirt because if it was some sort of natural event, it would have destroyed the call, the pillars. The pillars are preserved. So it wasn't just blown in with dust. If you look at its gravel and like his gram Hancock has explained that Klaus Schmidt, the original excavator of the site before is untimely passing in 2014. The people that have worked the site believe it was intentionally buried. That is debated in the and academia today. But isn't there also carbon isotope dating of the ground soil that shows it's the same age throughout the entire whatever feet it is of the, the, the, it's carbon. And so it's very apparent that it was purposely buried. And what's interesting about that is that it coincides exactly with the younger driest climate catastrophe. So if you want an alternative idea on, so okay, we can talk about slides. No, because it would destroy those, those pillars. Knock them over. Yeah. That's, that I've seen that in Iraq with these statues. So we'll share, let's talk about this in a second. This is, so this is where things get wild. So that's before the excavation. This is an aerial photo from what year is this? That should be 2004. Or external, it'll be that before 1994. The started excavations in 1994, 1995. So that is when it was just dirt. Correct. What he thought it was just a regular hillside, which is makes you wonder how anymore they're, well, they're finding dozens of other sites around Turkey. They're even older. And even older. Yes. So let me tell you a few different things about Gobekli Tepe. When you bring up pictures of the pillars, notice how the all annotate animals on them. Yeah. Now this is a fun topic. And I have a few other things to share. One of which is that if you want to talk about reasons not to excavate it, I'll give you two possibilities. And this is just conjecture. I don't know what the answer is. Let me say this up front. But part of it could have a religious implication, as well as a climate change implication. Let me start with that. So we know it is an established fact that the younger driest climate catastrophe happened between 12,800 and 11,600 years ago. We know that there was vast changes in weather patterns throughout the Northern hemisphere. The only part of it that's debated, and as well as near extinction events or extinction events of many different mammals in North America. But what we know is that something happened, whatever it is, is what's debated, whether it's a cosmic impact, whether it's a pole shift, whether it's sun cycles, all kinds of conjecture all the way around. But when I mentioned the WEF, they are the biggest proponents of the manmade climate change narrative. They're the ones that want to get rid of gas powered stoves. They want us to get rid of vehicles. They are pushing their initiatives around the world. And they believe that we're destroying the planet. I'm not saying they're entirely wrong, but I don't agree with their ways of going about it. But that's a side point. But here's the thing. When you look at the legend of Noah's flood and Noah's, and Noah's, or excuse me, Noah's ark and the flood. So I'm not suggesting that there was a flood that covered every mountain on earth, and nor am I suggesting that there was a boat that housed every species of animal on earth. However, if Noah's ark existed, many believe that it was crashed onto Mount Arat, which is also in Turkey. And something fascinating is that in the Bible in Genesis 820, some of the first verses after Noah emerged from the flood is that he was said to have constructed an altar to the Lord where he sacrificed some of every clean animal and some of every clean bird. Go backly, Tepe is in Turkey. And every single one of those pillars, and it takes animals. And some have suggested that it could be Noah's altar. Now, that could be one reason why they want to excavate it is because Turkey is an Islamic country. And if there were some Christian religious belief that was corroborated, they might not want that to happen. Another possibility is that the site itself might cooperate the younger, driest climate catastrophe. And when we're in a timeframe where they don't, they don't like talking academics. They don't like talking about cataclysm. They want to pretend they don't, they didn't happen. If they want everything to be man-made climate change, they don't ever talk about the Sahara being green 5,000 years ago. Look, when you're talking about Egypt being they find whale bones in the Sahara. Oh, don't tell. Those are 30 million years old. So stop talking about it. It's amazing when you think about it. Yeah. And so as far as the climate change narrative, there could be a possibility that they don't want the evidence of a pre-historic civilization that was more advanced than what we ever thought to believe that might corroborate some Christian narratives. And if nothing else, they don't want it to be brought into the discussion of modern day climate change because notice on the topic of climate change, they never mention natural stuff. They don't discuss the malaanqovich cycles, which consists of three variables, one of which is the earth's procession. The other is the earth's tilt. And the other is the distance from the earth from the sun. All three of those variables are constantly changing every single day, although immeasurable day by day, they happen over tens of thousands of years. But each individual of those variables impact climate on earth. For example, when it talk about the green Sahara, they believe the most likely reason has to do with the earth's processional cycle. I'm like, well, wait a second, where's this in the conversation of modern day climate change? If we're talking about us destroying the planet, I would just like an answer as far as where these three variables are in the conversation. Did you see the Washington posts very inconvenient data that they published about the temperature of earth? No, please tell me. Find the Washington Post climate study. They found that we're in a massive cooling period. If you go back, you know, X amount of 100,000 years and you look at like what's happening to it, yeah, it goes in cycles, but that's what it looks like now. Right. So, there is climate over the last 485 million years. Look at the dip we're in. Then look how it's never static. It's down and up and down and up and down and up, all throughout the history of the earth, which is measurable. It's not to say that we don't have an impact on it. We definitely pretty sharp, pretty sharp increase there, but here's a thing, even if we didn't, but there's sharp increases in the past. Look at those back. Look at, you know, look at 390 million years ago. Look at that giant peak. That's fucking crazy. That's straight up and down. It's always happened. It's not like it's static and then industrial engineering comes along and then you see this big increase. Oh boy, what are we doing in the earth? No, it's like even if we didn't do anything, we have no control over the temperature of the earth. And what's really terrifying, Randall Carlson talks about this all the time is global cooling. That's what's really terrifying. When global warming happens, oh no, you got to move out of Malibu. You're going to be okay. Hey, James, kind of move to places where it used to be called and now it's warm because humans have always been nomadic. That's the whole reason why we're not in the community more. Right. So global cooling will kill, global cooling will kill everything. And we came, Randall talks about this that we came very close at one point in human history. We came very close to losing the whole life change that's required to just literally keep life. Jamie, we bring up my ice age or ice folder. So I have an update for you from the last time I was on your podcast. Go over to the graphs to be one of the first slides in it. That one. Go right, hang out right there for a second. So when I was on your show last time, Joe, I discussed, I said something very specific where I said, I think the death, this is what my exact words. I think the data might indicate the cold is more often than it's hot. And do you know what happened after that? I was going to send this to you, but I held off because you've seen enough hit pieces. So there was a hit piece done on me by media matters, which was funded by George Soros. And they're networking of Vox and other, they did this hit piece on me to say that Jimmy Course said he was on Joe Rogan spreading climate change denial and inaccurate information. The only thing, if you could bring that back up, Jamie, please, the only thing that I said wrong is that I said the data might indicate that the earth is cold more often than hot. Excuse me, no, the data, the data absolutely definitively shows that earth is cold more often than it's hot. And what you're looking at here is straight out of the Utah Geological Survey. It's prestigious. It's found at the top of Google. And what you're looking at here is data from the last 450,000 years corroborated from data taken from ice core samples from Antarctica as well as Greenland. And what it shows is that not only are we in the middle of a three million year old ice age, there's something called glaciers and interglacials. Glacials are where it's cold and the glaciers grow. Interglacials are where things warm and glaciers what you're seeing here is four arguably five interglacial periods over just the last 450,000 years. So never mind hundreds of millions of years ago. What it shows is that the periods of cooling last seven to nine times longer than interglacials, which are periods of warming. And here's what the fun part interglacials last anywhere from 10 to 30,000 years. And our warming started 11,600 years ago, which means that we're already in the window for potential catastrophe for things to start cooling again. So when I was on your show last time, and I was mentioning Elon Musk talking about ice ages being a deep, deep rabbit hole. Do you remember that? He was talking about it. Well, I know what he's talking about. It's this. It means that we're already in the window where things could start cooling again. And when it does, we're in a lot of trouble. I think, and I can't speak on his behalf, I would, God, I gotta tell you next time. Could you just text them and ask him if he thinks it's related to pole shifts? I need to tighten up my study on this because I'm like, I think, because let me tell you something, let me share something right now that you've never heard on this show before. If you're everyone talking about cosmic impact hypothesis, here are people talking about sun cycles. Not a lot of people have been on here talking about pole shifts. Let me give a quick shout out to Ben Davidson of suspicious observers. I recommend maybe you link up with him. Nobody has researched the topic of pole shifts and sun cycles as much as him. And he brought some. give a quick shout out to Ben Davidson of suspicious observers. I recommend maybe you link up with him. Nobody has researched the topic of pole shifts and sun cycles as much as him. And he brought something to my attention I had never heard before. Jamie, the very first slide that you showed was of the Gothenberg excursion. So there was a partial pole flip right in the middle. See how it dates between 13,000 and 12,003. So the younger dry started 12,800 years ago. And it's right in the middle of that ballpark range. We already know it is established signs that when geomagnetic pole excursions happen, it changes weather patterns on earth on earth as well as the ocean current. Jamie, if you want a Google, there's a space dot com article titled that in 2025, some scientists are suggesting that the earth's ocean currents may stop. Have you heard this? No. Okay. And nowhere in the articles that they mentioned anything about pole excursions. So people need to understand that we're already in the middle of a of a pole excursion, which is a partial pole flip, which means that things are shifting inside the earth. It's also known that that can cause changes in ocean current. Now most mainstream articles, then we just be fair and tell you what they'll say. They'll say that, oh no, it's related to man-made climate change. Weird, weird changing the currents of the ocean. I don't believe that. But yeah, don't allow to let them take your data. Look at this. Nowhere in this article to explain why. But here's the thing, people need to understand that the number one thing that affects weather on earth is of course the sun. The second thing is ocean currents is the reason why England is relatively temperate. The fact that it's a reason why England is relatively temperate is because the Gulf Stream flows up there and it keeps it relatively warm and comparison. The way it says it here, key Atlantic current could collapse soon impacting the entire world for centuries to come, leading climate scientists warn. So just by saying climate scientists, you're already implying at least this is the result of climate change. Right, that's a dish. The further fuels this agenda that man-made climate change is the cause of all of our woes. Right. And it's a narrative that you're consistently hearing. And again, to be real clear to someone's going to say something about this, this is not to dismiss pollution. This is not to dismiss our impact on the atmosphere of the earth and what we're dealing with coal plants and all the bullshit that we're doing. For sure, we're doing bad things. Right. Also, if we weren't, we have no control over this thing. This thing is constantly moving and both of those things need to be looked at at the same time. The problem is this whole narrative of climate science has been adopted by these same fucking people that want Twitter pronouns. It's the same people, it's the same sort of thing. And if you have anything to say about it, if you want to talk about a swastika being an ancient symbol, yeah, you're a Nazi. If you, you know, you're climate denier, you're a vaccine denier, you're a lesser of that. You're a Holocaust denier. It's like the same kind of stupid shit. And unfortunately with this one, this one is uniquely tied to money. This one is uniquely tied to green agendas and the enormous amount of funding that is going towards these green agendas and people that are profiting off of spreading this narrative. Being being full and through capitalist that are making hundreds of millions of dollars promoting this idea of climate change being our primary problem. And if you deny it, you're a science denier. And the reason why you shouldn't listen to these people is because they're leaving out the key data involving first historical, earth's historical climate data. They're not including all these other details. Right. And so I think people need to look at polshifts because it's very interesting in this alternative realm that you have people that are proponents of the of the cosmic impact hypothesis. You have Dr. Robert Shock with the sun cycles. You have other people talking about polshifts. I think people should consider that all the above are correct. And let me explain why when polshifts happen, earth's shields are diminished. We're in the middle of a polshift right now. The earth's shields are diminishing and it's been happening since the 1800s. It's been accelerating over the last few decades. This is scientific data. The North Pole is shifting at like almost 40 miles a year when it was half that just a decade ago. And when the earth's shields diminish, we are more susceptible to cosmic impacts because less than miles a year. Google it. This is real. Wow. It's happening. No idea. I thought it was a feeder. Now, the mainstream will say, don't worry. It's still another thousand years away. And like, they actually can't prove that because we've never we've never been we haven't been alive to document a polshift. But what I'm trying to say is that we should consider the polshifts think brother, ask Elon Musk his thoughts on this sometime. Well, they actually just tweeted something about it recently. What do you say? He tweeted something about the magnetic poles. Oh my God. Yeah. He tweeted something about, um, I think he actually retreated to the core of the earth. What's his face? I forget his name, but you were just showing. Then Davidson. I'm pretty sure he retweeted been. We need to find that out. That's the case. Um, because here's the thing. So much though, it takes so long. I don't do his weeds. I don't know. He doesn't too much. It's less effective because I'm like, I missed stuff. And and I follow him closely, actually. You know, here you go. Look at this. Oh, it's over the front. So I saw a broad switch of vast ball molten rock earth core, which generates most of our magnetic field is 85% iron and moves independently from the surface plates, which is why the the magnetic pole changes position. I love Brian Ramelli. I've, I've seen his name right. We follow each other. Um, he's a great guy. Um, I think Elon Musk is giving a hint here because you remember how the Northern lights were visible as far south as Mexico recently? In the dust last few months. That was from solar activity, right? Right. But the reason why it's more visible now is because the earth's shields are diminishing. Mm. This is, I'm not making, this isn't like from Bob's website. This is, this is, this is mainstream science. Again, Ben Davison has taught me a lot on this. And he was actually on with Alex Jones, not long ago. And he really blew Alex Jones's mind. He vetted him. And, um, so what I'm trying to say here is that like, this is not being brought into the equation of manmade climate change at all. Because of all the things we were talking about, the educators want to be the only ones that distribute the information and they don't want to look at the full picture. The only one to look at this one thing for the greater good of all of us. It's better if you just get people to only focus on getting an electric car. Right. Which is like, I've never, I've always, ever since I started doing this stuff, I've had people that are like, Hey, man, you fact check scientists, we want you in the climate change debate. And I've always had the opinion of like, look, I'm talking about big old rocks and move it, zero, zero, zero skin in the game. And if I'm wrong about that, nothing changes. But if I'm wrong about climate change, and I get a bunch of people, I feel a little like it's not your area of expertise. And there's too much skin in the game. Right. But when I did the debunking of Flint, Dibbles debunking of Graham, the part about the metallurgy, I spoke with an ice core specialist and now they're in but a handful of these dudes on the planet literally just a handful of those are very important part of your debunking. Oh, thanks. I appreciate that. Do the guy that blew the roof on that. You're the guy that contacted firsthand. Well, let's explain what you did. Well, I spent an hour on a zoom chat with the dude because what flinted said was that there was no proof of metallurgy in the ice age. And of course, there's no proof of it, but there he said that we can prove definitively there was no metallurgy. And that's where it's like, well, no, because they look for levels of lead and levels of lead. What graph you just showed with the interglacial periods, lead follows that because when there's more dust on the ground, the reason they believe is that more dust on the ground more gets kicked up more ends up in the glaciers. But that's the same dirt that would be kicked up if they were digging for iron, right? So either way, you're going to end up with more lead and the glaciers. So I talked to this ice core specialist for an hour on zoom, and I'm like, man, so I flushed this out for you explaining to me. So he explains to me how they determined whether or not lead's from an anthropogenic or a Jennifer's natural. And that's based on if there's an archaeological site that they can match the other isotopes to. He went through all the troubles with it. He even even lamented having, he's got other people in his field that are hardcore anti-sudo science because their, you know, climate change deniers are dealing with him. So he's all he's like, and he's like, some of these guys are just two zealous over zealous with it. I get where you're coming from. But then I put the video out and flint contacts the dude and next thing you know, well, you know, I didn't exactly say it. He doesn't change what he says. He just kind of implies that I wasn't quite being accurate. He doesn't, he doesn't give a fool anything. It's just, it makes it vague all of a sudden and it quite clear. He was pressured from a fucking archaeologist. He's a climate scientist. Why do you care? Because they're all part of the same little Twitter versus World War. Yeah. Yeah. And that right there changed my attitude on like changed my attitude on the whole global warming thing. I was like, that's probably accurate. And I was like, ah, you know, I don't fucking know. And I'm at the dig into this. Because I don't trust you. It's a bit just anymore. I know that if somebody pressured him from upstairs, he would have crumpled like a bag because he sure did when Flint pushed him. So the issue is that it's not like there's one explanation that could conceivably have caused this massive cataclysm. There's probably a lot of variables. It's just like there's always been. I mean, we always like to conveniently ignore Super volcanoes. One of those blows, the whole world's fucked the country's dead. Everyone's fucked. You should consider the possibility that that's related to pull shifts as well. And I could give you a point. There's one that happened. You know, I've heard you talk about before the Toba Super eruption. Did you know that happened at the same time of a of a geomagnetic pull excursion? Oh boy. Well, it makes sense. You're ever in the most movement. There's movement. And inside the earth, a full pull shift is when they believe that the inner most, the inner most portion of the molten within the earth core shifts. A geomagnetic pull excursion is a partial pull flip, which these theorize is related to the outer portion of the mantle. The earth's crust sits on top of molten everything. And when that shifts, it shifts our compasses. And it's not unreasonable to suggest that when something shifts inside the earth, it would affect things on the surface. I touched on this in the last time I was on. But when it comes to earthquakes as an example, some originate in the crust, which is like 28 miles at its thickest, I believe, or on average. And others originate in the molten out of portion of the mantle. Well, if something shifts inside the earth, why wouldn't it cause issues on the surface, whether it be earthquakes or volcanic activity in some volcanic activity involving super volcanoes coincides with the geomagnetic pull excursions. And so when I was on your show last time talking about pull shifts along with the ice ages, I was part of the same topic. Why is it that media matters funded by George Soros decided to do a hit piece on Jimmy Corsetti, the YouTuber brother that came after me hard on this, which I to be honest, I relished over. I was like, this is hilarious. I'm like, well, they don't understand that it's actually good publicity. It is. And it makes me feel like credible anymore. Right. And it makes me feel like I'm over the target because what's that saying about you get the most flack when you're over it? So like, I'm like, it makes me think that I'm onto something because nowhere in any of these climate change topics, the mid, you know, as far as like the narratives on it, do they mention anything natural involving, whether it be pole shifts, they sure as hell don't bring up the green Sahara. They don't bring anywhere into the equation. They don't bring up the scientific fact that the earth was one or four thousand years ago. There's no about prize laryants that have been speaking out about this. There's two of them. Dr. Clouger and there's another gentleman I'm going to draw blank in the top of my head. But like, they've shared this data. This is scientific fact and they're getting shunned and ridiculed for it. Yeah. The problem is there's a consensus that's been politically accepted. And it's been talked about so much. It's a political talking point. And if they lose that political talking point, they lose a large percentage of their platform. Oh, yeah. Right. There's so many parts of the liberal, the leftist platform that they need to have these narratives. And one of them is climate change. And that Donald Trump has a climate change denier, the right ring people are climate change denier. Or no science deniers or go racists. It's very, very, very, very stupid. And it's bad for all of us. Because I think we all need to have an understanding of how delicate our environment is and how delicate life on earth is. And that it is this constantly changing thing that has never been static. We know that. We know of the dinosaurs. We know about all these different things that we know about the ice age. But we don't truly have a comprehensive narrative that everyone accepts. It's become politicized. Yeah. And it's become politicized by the worst people because they're the cultists. They're the ones that made not the only ones. But you know, I'm a lot less political than a lot of people in this community. And I said it when COVID first started getting bad. And you could see it on the internet. I was real quick to say, man, we're going to be fucking locked down for years guys. And everybody's laughing at me. But it's like it's a political football. Neither side, neither side is going to to drop a square. We don't live in a society of political compromise anymore. We live in a society of give them an inch. They take a mile. Neither side is going to concede one fucking inch on this. And we're going to be dealing with the same argument three years from now and blow and behold, you were dealing. And that's what's crazy about this is that data has become politicized. Science and data and knowledge has become politicized. Over 80,000 papers were retracted last year. 80,000 scientific papers. Like 60% of them were the top 10 most still cited papers that have been retracted are all medical. The medical community is is fucked right now from from COVID. It turned in on itself and just started and if you look at their papers and stuff, it's insane. They are all at each other's throats and all kinds of different ways. Still citing retracted papers and all kinds of goofy little shit because it became a political football. We could see it on TikTok. You watch a you watch a nurse come out there and she's going to be doing a little TikTok and you can just look at a donkey next to her name or an elephant. If it's an elephant, she can tell you there's nobody in this hospital. It's fucking empty. If it's a donkey, she can tell you about the body outside the machine outside making corpse starch out of the fucking dead people that they're they can't bury them as fast as their diet. It's it was so openly easily from the average joke could look right through it. Could just see if this is a fucking this is just an argument between the two parties, isn't it? They're just transferred this to the medical problem. Well, you remember in the beginning days of the pandemic when they were really fear-mongering when they gave a preposterous number of people that were going to die from COVID. And what was the percentage at the high point? Was it like three and a half percent or something like that? Or was it 30 percent? It was something that there's a compilation video Jamie see if you can find it where they're dunking on Donald Trump because Donald Trump said it's less than one percent. He was right. He was totally quite a bit less than one percent. He was right about the UV stuff too. But I think they were trying to say that it was 34 percent. I think that's what they were saying. It's 3.4 or 34. I can't remember which, but they were repeating it ad nauseum on television that this was going to be the death rate of people that got COVID. It's one of the things that justified the lockdowns. If it really was less than one percent people go, what's the what's the flu? And then you get into the flu what's the percentage difference? It's like 50 percent difference. What are we doing? Is it bad flu? This is like a bad flu, but you can't say that or you're some kind of anti-science heritage. You're a terrible person. You're killing grandma's. You know, if you want to mix it up Jamie, there's a video. So last time I was on, I mentioned a clip of Donald Trump talking about it's going to get cold again. And we couldn't find the clip at the time, but I have it in my folder, Jamie. It's just Donald Trump. It's in the front with all these full-time steps at a time. I'll try to find that video of them all repeating the same thing over and over again. It's Brian Stelter, that little weasel on CNN constantly repeating the fact that Donald Trump doesn't know what he's talking about. He was right. He was absolutely correct. Donald Trump doesn't just say things out of his butt like people make him out to leave. I'm not seeing he doesn't talk in that way. When he's a raster. If you're a rancor, you're your podcast. You're running up. He wasn't talking about your ass every day. He wasn't talking about his butt with the UV killing off bacteria and viruses. No. No, he just said it in a way that wasn't logical. He said like, you get the light in the body and everybody's talking about it. No, they figured out how to get LED lights into lungs to kill viruses. And specific thing to look as typing in Donald Trump COVID compilation video gives me a bunch of COVID death rate. Death rate is what's important. Death rate compilation versus the media. And see, as the media was the one that we're dunking on him first Sunday, and they were coming over this ridiculously high rate that turned out to not be accurate at all. Well, I think we have these, those people, those people, the leftists or whatever you want to call them, the affluent dibbles of the fucking world, these guys are, they like we're talking about with climate change and everything else. They don't want to leave anything in there that could let the other side have anything. They assume that the average rank in Joe, rank in file Joe, public is dumb as hell. Right. They, I mean, one of the things I'll always say about ancient apocalypse complain about, they'll be like, well, he goes on there and he talks shit about archaeologist and everybody's going to believe everything he says because it's so well made. It's like, man, I think that at all. And the first season he did talk a little shit about archaeologist. But the bottom, to me, if I'm watching us anything, I don't care what it is. If the person says, you know, mainstream scientists disagree with me here, but here's what I have to say, all my alarm bells go off and that tells me I cannot hang my hat on with this motherfucker saying, I got to go Google it. Right. That's what Graham does over and over again. Mainstream archaeologist disagree with me. So for them to say everybody in the country is just, everybody in the world just goes to believe this. So it's 3.4% so this is it. So give me some volume here. There's a lot of conversations with a lot of people that do this. Pick the numbers way under 1% So to fact check, the World Health Organization says the coronavirus death rate is 3.4% President Tron lies that the World Health Organization is wrong. The number is 3.4% 3.4% 4% is what it's doing reported. My boy, Sanjay. The percentage is 3.4%. I know hung from the president can change that. From light of us, the most recent World Health Organization estimate that the global death rate of coronavirus is 3.4%. Jesus. The 3.4% death rate was wrong. And WHO data later updated it to. We're a fraction of 1%. Let's go back into history. Trump has a hunch that the death rate is lower than 1%. Way under 1% way under 1%. The someone put a mozzarella stick in this stupid old job line of viewers about the mortality rate. Way under 1%. False information. Spreading disinformation. This information that dangerous. This information. If you're president of the United States, you have the world's greatest scientist that you're supposed to be listed to that. Leading scientists including Dr. Fauci wrote in the New England Journal of Medicine that the death rate could be considerably less than 1%. Way under 1%. See, this is we've seen enough. These people are fucking puppets man. They're puppets and they willfully, gleefully repeat these narratives. And instead of saying, well, where did you get that information? Who are you talking to? Let's find out if that's correct. Why does the world health organization think it's 3.4%. Is there any nefarious intent behind this whole idea of it killing everybody that's forcing some enormously profitable venture? Like forcing everybody to take these fucking new vaccines you guys developed. Right. Like is that? Could that be factored in? Maybe? Well, no, only you only hear that it's factored in once everybody's profited and got out, including Bill Gates. Yeah. Bill Gates who's on television telling everybody get the vaccine. You won't get COVID. And then afterwards I didn't work. Every had unloaded all of his stock. He wasn't effective and it turns out COVID wasn't as bad as we thought it was. Well, you guys are really responsible for a bunch of people taking a medication that was unproven. You're responsible for all side effects. You're responsible for all these and you're responsible for fear mongering, lying, closing down businesses, ruining economies, changing the political structure of the country. They need to be held to account. I'm not going to forget this and a lot of other people want people's lives were destroyed. And it is, I mean, there needs to be there needs to be a reckoning. Elon recently said that he's still has pronouns are still prosecute, Fauci. I love it. I love it. And he's a real, real possibility of making an impact. Oh, yes, he does. I mean, they they listen to him. Yeah, when it comes to the when it comes to the, the economic side of it, I honestly think if out of everything, if it, uh, whether the jab notwithstanding, just strictly from the top down perspective, those guys, I mean, it's most immense transfer of wealth in modern history, Amazon, Walmart, everybody, all this motherfuckers cleaned house and you know what shut down, and Spokane, we lost wide elephant. This guy had started in the 40s after World War two. He would buy surplus and put it in this store. He had fishing wars for 30 cents. What can transformers from the 80s? He always buy it in 2000 zone money. But that all kinds of shit there. And he went out of business because he had to close his doors. All everything. Everything. You can't even go to fucking Walmart at two in the morning like we did like everything's closed now at a certain time compared to where it was. Everything's true. Well, it's important because the coronavirus doesn't stay up. It's a sleep. And it doesn't exist when you walk to your table and sit down. All the homeless people need a place to hang out. And so Walmart parking lot two a.m. I'm going to show up. I meant that actually the opposite. The coronavirus comes out at night. But it doesn't even. It's like the whole thing was so dumb because then they allowed black lives matter protests. Like what about six foot distancing? Everybody's breathing. They're screaming and yelling down the street. And you guys think that's not gonna spread it. Right. And the brain dead stuff behind this symbol is my talk about this a long time ago my channel. The person that thought of, oh, we're going to have this band to play. Let's get them masks that have a big hole in it to show solidarity with everybody. Got it. That's what fucking it is. It's like everybody's just going to look at that. It'd be like, how about people swimming? So we don't need that. Oh my God. It's a swim at the math side. It hurts me to see those clips. That was one of the biggest IQ tests in modern times. Well, it was really a compliance test. Yeah, that's what it was. It was a lot of complacent. And check to see how many cowards there are out even though they know something to be true are terrified of the blowback so they don't speak about it. And when you do speak about it, you do get attacked. You know, I obviously experienced that and I was fascinated by it. I mean, it was kind of horrifying to watch, but also fascinating. Like, oh, so this is real. Like you guys are just completely all lock in step and all full of shit. And you don't even care that I got better quick. Right. You can watch how the world, you can see this from a world perspective. Two different, different communities all around the world react differently. I remember lots of people, oh, why can't we do like Korean Japan? Almost everybody's wearing a mask over there and they do all this reporting and all this stuff. It's like, yeah, you ever been there, man? You ever talked to any Koreans or Japanese people? Their fucking culture is lockstep compared to ours. There are very much there's there's no counterculture in those communities. They encounter culture people are on jail. You have one community. So yeah, they're told to do this. They fucking do it. Well, obviously, we don't do that. You're so compromised. So obviously, compromise. And you know, Callie means has a really good point about this. He was saying that the reason why they spend so much money advertising on cable news is not because it's effective. It's because once they do that, now cable news cannot criticize them. It's so much smarter because it's like, listen, we're spending all this money just to make sure that you guys tow the line. That's what they're doing. And so the news is not the news. It's only the news if an advertiser agrees that it's the news. Yeah. And that's not good. No, that's not good for anybody left wing, right wing. If you think that somehow or another money gives a fuck about your political persuasion, it's just it's so stupid that it got attached to a political ideology and from the most compliant of people, those are the ones who are the most willing to go along with the narrative because the consequences on the left of coloring outside the lines, they attack you so hard. They crush you so hard like this. Water made situation or anything. Anything where you're stepping outside the line to talk about it. Like what you experienced just discussing something that turns out to be absolutely correct. They fund a big hit piece about you, which essentially acts as an advertisement for you. It just builds your channel. It's a strike and effect. Right. Then people will go to your channel. Go, this guy's great. This fucking show is awesome. Like this is interesting information and just undeniable facts, the undeniable facts like that no one can discuss. No one can debate in any way, shape, or form the actual size of these stones. Where are they coming from? This is not under debate. So just the undeniable stuff is unbelievably fascinating. And then when they go to your channel, they go, where's all the knots you should. I'm just counting on the numbers. I'm not just counting on the numbers. I'm not just getting facts. You know, we should go back to go back to the Tech Bay, Ganung Paddang, and the Great Pyramid because there's some more stuff involving archaeology and lack of excavations that are actually pretty significant. So going back to go back to the Tech Bay, one of the photos that Jamie that you showed earlier was before excavations began. And do you notice that there was no trees there? So one of the controversies is that there's some 800 trees that were planted on the site, a full decade after excavations began. And the trees are buried on, or were planted on top of ancient ruins, which stand to not only destroy the ruins, but also highlights that they can't excavate what's underneath them with the trees are there. And so here's the before and after. So what's the conventional explanation for why they planted all these trees over a site that they know is filled with ruins underneath it? So when this property, this was a property owned by farmers. And the Turkish government wanted to purchase the land for them. And the owners felt that they were being low bald. So what they did was they planted all of trees on top of the site in order to increase the value of the land, which for me, when I first heard this, I'm like, I don't understand, this doesn't make sense to me. Go backly, Teppy is already priceless. The world's oldest and most serious ancient site on earth. It's priceless now to be fair and Dan, you've you've harped on this. And I really agree with you. It's government stuff. But if the feds are going to buy your land for a highway, they don't care what's underneath it. And it's an Indian burial ground or what it's what's this land worth in this city. It's this kind of property. So they made it in the orchard instead of a desert. Now here's the thing though, of all things, they planted all of trees. And there's something that was enacted. It's called the all of law in Turkey in the 1930s, where it's illegal to cut down all of trees in Turkey. So I'm like, well, that's interesting. And let me ask you this real quick, imagine, no, just imagine being the owner of that property. And you've got this. You found these ruins here. You've got all these people coming out there, paying you money to check shit out. You're selling all kinds of stuff. And now you're, the government's going to take it from you. You've had it for 10 fucking years. Now the government's saying it's, it's theirs. So you go out and you start planting trees. So when you dig a hole to plant that tree, you find an artifact. Do you put that in the pile of artifacts to hand to cloud Schmidt, or do you put that in the pile to sell to the antique collector that's not going to tell anybody? Obviously, you put in, he's pissed off. My opinion is that guy sold a ton of fucking artifacts while that was going down. He just, why wouldn't you now? Are there artifacts connected to go back? They find stuff. They were kind of stone. No pottery or anything. But they have found like, one of the biggest things is a bunch of chunks of stone like a to archaeologists, even they call a microchip, which would be like a tiny little piece you get from that's still technically an artifact. So there's a lot of that kind of stuff. There are a lot of bones that have been charred and things like that. But there's nothing too terribly amazing tools. Well, nothing too crazy. But again, that's the kind of stuff that would possibly deal. I'm a lot, this where my skepticism can get a little cynical. You know, I'm of the opinion. If the anti-Kithra mechanism would have been identified as what it is when they pulled it out of the ocean, it would have never made it to a museum that there was somebody I was like telling Jim last night, we were having dinner. If the reports of giant bones that you see in the 1930s from guys that were over in New Mexico and they're bringing them back to the Smithsonian, they just never made it there. If they really did find giant bones, which I'm skeptical of, but if they did, this is probably an advertisement to sell them while they're traveling these things across the country. Oh, you know, this happened to lose them along the way because this dude came over and bought them. This has been a problem since day one. Especially when you think about those kind of like one crazy old school Rockefeller type billionaires who really love to control information and everything. You know, if you have access to something that's just undeniably throws the whole timeline into a question or throws a narrative of human beings to a question. Now you got some power with that little artifact. Yeah, so that's, yeah, that's, I'm of the opinion that that's been a problem. Like I don't believe in the Denderel light. I assume you know what the Denderel light is. But you glossed over the anti-Kithra mechanism. They say anti-Kithra mechanism. That one is fast. It's crazy. Because that is how old is it? It's like 2000 years old. 2000 years old. It's a hand car brass machine that you use to attract the cycles of the moon, the earth, and different planets in our solar system. Brilliant. Yeah. And they didn't know what it was and they found it. It was like some corroded up gears. And then they start doing some sort of, I mean, I don't even know how they did it, how they understand all the different pieces of it because it's all corroded together. But they use some sort of scanning mechanism. Correct? And see if you... They did it how they understand all the different pieces of it because it's all corroded together But they'd use some sort of scanning mechanism Correct to and see if you can find what it actually looks like you can buy replicas of it nowadays They make little boxes of that. It looks like when they found it Yeah, but now show what it looks like when they've done a scan of it I'm going to cross something interesting too and the guy found it he Heaped of dead naked people Whoa Embergent to see shaking in fear and mumbling about a heap of dead naked people He's among a group of greepe divers from the eastern Mediterranean island of Cimi who were searching for natural sponges They had sheltered from a violent storm near the tiny island of how do you say it again and take And to Kithra and to Kithra between Crete and mainland Greece when the storm is beside of the diver sponges Chanced upon a shipwreck full of Greek treasures the most significant wreck of the ancient world have been found up to that point The dead naked people were marble sculpture scattered on the seafloor along with many other artifacts soon after the discovery prompted the first major underwater Archaeological dig in history so see if you can find what this mechanism looks like would it actually looks like? There's a replica. Yeah, so this is the replica of this thing this incredible piece of engineering from two thousand years ago Or all these gears and all these planets and you could figure out where everything was how How how how how they do this how they do this and this is beyond what we ever thought was available? But no, there is a YouTube channel that a guy goes through I forget his name But he does go through and he makes one of these with old school tools, but he's making each gear by hand He's making the wire by hand. Whoa, that guy's a dork. He's a dork. Yes Bring him on the show version of a dork. I mean it a good way, but it is fun to watch, but it's It's incredible though, but at the end of the day. It's the that's that's interesting to be able to to recreate it But the planning of the thing that's really where the engine of the mathematics and then you have to take any consideration What is this based on what knowledge was available back then that we did not think was so we're talking about two thousand years ago This is the time of Christ We did not think that they had any kind of machines that were in any way Similar to that thing. What else don't we know right? What else is lost? How much of that stuff is gone? Like if this is two thousand years ago and it's that corroded what is 10,000 years due to it? Right? Oh, yeah, the box right and the fact that even found it the bottom the ocean is a miracle And so this is what's important to understand and this is another lie that flink double told about the number of shipwrecks That have been fined and not only that but what would be left over after just a few thousand years and that when they find these 1,000 year old shipwrecks they don't find any wood anymore You just find the pottery So you just know where the shipwreck is because there's a bunch of gold on the ground and some pots But if you go back 10,000 years before that how much is the surface of the floor of the ocean shifted? How much of that stuff has been covered up? How much is it? 10,000 years is so long now what if it's 20,000? What if it's 30,000? Yeah to say we don't know Is the correct thing that's the correct thing to do and that's what nobody wants to do. There's a there's a hypothesis It's more of a it's more of a like a mental Forget the name of what you call it like a mind teaser like a way to make your brain think it's called the solarian hypothesis The solarians are a doctor who Monster that less supposedly lived on earth like millions of years before humans wake up one day and they find all these monkeys Run around and they decide they don't like us But the hypothesis is how would you determine if there was a species where it advanced civilization that lived on the earth a million years ago 5 million years as soon as we have fossil fuels There is as long as we have the first bit of oil had been created on the planet You could have a civilization like ours. So what would you look for? The only conclusion is maybe nuclear stuff if they tested like maybe nuclear power plant We might still be able to find some radioactive material Beyond that not a goddamn thing after 10 million years you can find a fucking bit of it And that's what their conclusion is and this is a scientific thing. This is something that I thought tool That's what it's called it's something that they use in Science in archaeology and history and stuffs presumably to To look at that problem, but these guys like point obviously didn't do that Like I said, he thinks people are stupid He said right here on in sitting in this room that oh well, you know it doesn't matter how long something's underwater You might think that it matters how long something's underwater, but it really does. It's like are you fucking kidding me? Of course, I don't know if anybody knows that Of course, they think this in terms of whether or not you're gonna find it Right they haven't done like a comprehensive lidar scan of the bottom of the ocean floor It just has not done that that's not possible right now But if they did do it who fucking knows what they'd find down there Well, here's where things get nuts is that here we are talking about things in far as tens of thousands of years So we do have a site the Graham Hancock highlighted in season one of ancient apocalypse called Ganung-Pane and Indonesia And Jamie I have a folder on this so this pyramid structure could Potentially the 27,000 years old it's hotly debated But as Graham Hancock highlighted there is a subterranean tunnel in chamber which may have those those dates and It's not being excavated and a geologist Danny none of the job I never pronounced it correctly to give me Danny But he is a geologist that analyzed the ground penetrating radar and he said they're strong likelihood that it's man-made now the Skeptics the academics will say well, it's probably just a lava tube because the structure is volcanic in nature But something interesting has happened that back in 2014 the Indonesian government said that they were willing to allocate unlimited resources and funding to excavate the site something shifted a handful of years ago where they're not excavating it now and As of today, there's no plan in place to find out what that subterranean chamber is So if it was indeed man-made we don't know it could be natural It could be man-made, but we're never gonna know what it is until we go digging and Right now for sure is that people occupied the land above it after that 100% 100% that is a man-made structure it was it was volcanic in nature, but they terraced it. It's it's a pyramid like structure It's not a pyramid And we do have examples over and over again of truly ancient things unexplainable things where people built more crude versions above it all over the world The lava tubes there's all kinds of places in South America where they have a big pyramid built on top of a spring The lava tube could have been a cave that was sacred that they just kept embellishing and kept embellishing and kept embellishing Saying it's just a lava tube not a man-made tunnel down there is a non sequit or anybody who knows anything about ancient history Could understand how a sacred site can have a pyramid built on top of this thing about from brick. Yes, come back. Awesome. Okay So where were we we were about the lack of excavations at Gunan Penang and this should segue into something that's very very interesting Which is the great pyramid of Giza? I? have already said that go backly tepay is arguably not just the oldest but the most mysterious ancient site on earth because it's not supposed to exist however the great pyramid of Giza I Would say probably trumps it from the standpoint that it's just so mysterious. It's sophistication as well as the fact We have no idea how it was constructed and it's arguably the most debated Structure in all of human history for two standpoints One of which is that so many people debate on whether it was built to be attuned for the pharaohs Or whether it was some sort of lost technology and had some other purpose whether it's energy or whatever amazing for done stuff Which is a fascinating topic and I'll have a story Involving me visiting it there with a certain person That really is it's a story in itself, but let me say this so they're back in Eight years ago back in 2016 through moan technology they discovered that there's a hidden chamber in the great pyramid which is massive Jamie I have a folder on this great pyramid hidden void and It was established in 2017 through a scientific study, so we're talking seven Discovered eight years ago corroborated Or eight years ago corroborated seven years ago in a study Just debates it at all. Is that a rough interpretation of this? Yes, they don't know the exact shape of it They they'd have an approximate size and an approximate shape So what now many theorize that it is a second so-called grand gallery It was originally thought to be 30 meters long now they have it at over 40 meters long so almost 150 feet and It is above the so-called grand gallery and So when they first discovered it Zahi-o-os came out of the woodwork and like denounced it and said this is nothing You know, you know And they said they're gonna spend a few years debating with the international community on how to go about it Brother that was seven eight years ago almost Rounding up to a decade and as of today. There is no plan of any kind To go and find out what's in there. So they would have to go through the walls to get to it. No actually Brother they could just drill a one a half inch diameter hole and set a little tube Camera through it and they could figure out what's in there by the end of the week Get an endoscope right there just like when you go to the doctor And here's what's so important about this like we're talking about the most debated and argued the most important structure in all of human history Was it a tomb was it a lost technology? We have no idea how they even built it. That's the only thing that's more debated than that is how did the Egyptians construct the pyramid So many theories have already been debunked on it. We just don't know how they did it two million three hundred thousand stones that were Supposedly all put in place within 20 years right A 20 years part. I've referred to that is like the gateway drug to becoming a pyramid It's that's that is that's 20 years things the stupidest fucking thing if any guy who's ever Stacked bricks for five minutes knows that is absurd But they just run with that because you know you can't There's one of the weird things they're written record is more robust to them than the actual like science like the carbon dating For the pyramid in the written record or a couple hundred years off all the entire fourth dynasty the carbon dating is a couple hundred years off They just come up with some explanation for it and stick to that written record My favorite is when they look at the hieroglyphs that depict pharaohs from 30,000 years ago They know how that's all bullshit. Yeah, but the one that I the little further down This is this is important shit here, but up there And why do you think that the 30,000 year mark is bullshit? But the 5,000 year mark is legit like that is really weird guys Like why you conveniently ignoring all this other stuff while validating the more recent because it contradicts the textbooks the already road The edge case that dynamic sorry really quick that dynamic you mentioned Christopher Dunn When he saw one of my recent videos about two months ago mean him We're gonna start he's gonna come on my channel and each artifact that he's covered We're gonna discuss one at a time. He knows I don't believe in ancient high technology And he told me basically to summarize what he said is that he is tired of having either Yes men or cynics he wants somebody that doesn't agree with him to sit down and have a conversation about these things and that'll be honest and we can actually get somewhere and It was like it was like you think I had been waiting 40 years for you know I had a fucking GED and I worked as an electrician. I don't fuck I should not be the one sitting in the chair next to the man But all the people qualified to do it when a treating like he's an idiot right and his theory is very fascinating It was some sort of a power plant generated hydrogen and it's feasible It's it's wild and I gotta tell you you you know when you walk through the Great Pyramid There's nothing about it. There resembles anything like a tomb It seems like it was some sort of industrial function that had a or a function of some kind So here's the story and I have his permission to share it So I had the you know the only thing more wild than then the topic of the mysteries of lost ancient civilizations is The diverse nature of people that are into this topic. So I had the pleasure of connecting with George St. Pierre The goat the great legendary UFC fighter and because of him is how I went with him to ballback He had unique connections and I was able to go with him and we had connected and then I went with him from there to Egypt and we went inside the Great Pyramid is his first time in there and We basically tipped the we tipped the guard I'll just say it and we had the kings chamber alone to ourselves for a few minutes And we were with Yusuf Ali on who's the son of late Akima della Ali on who is the mentor of John Anthony West and he was in the pyramid code and so George laid in the so called sarcophagus and Yusuf did the ome I can't do it, but you do it with your throat and he does inside the box and it makes the whole granite box Vibrate I've experienced its wild it feels it's the reverberation off the of the stone So he did that to George George laid in it and he did it for about a minute And this is so George comes out of the box His eyes were wide open and he said yeah, there he is He said I'm coming out of retirement. I'm gonna win the title And he just started pacing around the room So fast forward three four hours later. I'm in the hotel pool with them. What year was this? Just last year of September of 2023 And just to clarify at that time he was considering doing a grappling match That's not what he was talking about. He was talking about winning the UFC world title again So fast forward a few hours later. I'm at the hotel the meanah house Marriott Hotel pool with the pyramids overlooking us and I'm like Hey, George You said you're a thing about coming out of retirement and he's like I'm gonna I love his accent. No, Jimmy I'm not coming out the retirement and I said Well, what made you say that he's like He thought about he's like it's just how I felt So just to clarify Arguably the goat although him and John Jones, I you know, they're they're comparable just different but the goat and His first inclination out of coming out of the box with his why his eyes wide open Was like I'm coming out of retirement. I'm gonna win the title And I asked him he's like no, I'm not gonna do it It's just how I felt in the moment and I'm like when people talk about it in the context of it being some sort of energy device Some people speculated that with all these legends of humans living to hundreds and even thousands of years Some people have proposed that maybe was a DNA restoration. I have no idea what it was I just don't think it was a tomb. I think it was something Else I think it was a functional structure of some kind But the fact that someone like him with his history in his accomplishments The fact that that was the first thing that he felt coming out of that box after doing the reverberation thing Is a story like I don't know what to make of it. I think that's normal. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think a guy like that has always got it in the back of his head That's a good point. Yeah. I mean that's the highlights of his life when he was conquering everyone in the welterweight division He was the greatest fighter on the planet earth It's the highlight of his life. So anytime he gets an elevated feeling I'm sure that's one of the reasons why like a lot of old fighters. They drink a lot of they do drugs I think they're trying to they they experience highs that most people could never imagine Right, and I think whenever they experience a new high some new thing they get in their head I'm making a fucking comeback and they want they want to chase that dragon You get the ring with Jake Paul Sorry Do with money. Yeah, but it's just this thing that just isn't every one of those people. Yeah, that makes sense Although the fact that he's laying inside the great pyramid and You would almost think that'd be the furthest thing from his mind at the time elevated experience. That's right So it's an elevated experience and make some very excited and when a guy like that It's very excited he thinks about the most exciting thing He's ever done is like I'm gonna fucking go do it again. We gotta get you in that box. We gotta get you in the Gary period I like to go in the box. I'd like to go there. I really would it's just a matter of carving out the time Right, I really have to do it, but especially if let's see what happens with the world Right, so the world just keeps getting sketchier and sketchier in certain parts of the world right. Yeah, sadly Yeah, sadly, but it'd be nice to be able to visit going back to the point of the this hidden chamber Yeah, like what is so why would you not want to explore that it makes no feasible sense like this just say that Well first of all whether it was a tomb or something else we could find out by going in there Maybe there's another fair maybe there's a fair one there Maybe we'd instantly know that okay all this conjecture and debate is is now been put aside We know that there could be treasure this afternoon for real and here's something else right a lot of conjecture as far as a lost Technology could there be some sort of evidence of a tooling on how they constructed it could there be evidence on how it was constructed itself Even if it's a completely empty room and nothing else We still would have learned something new in fact I've joked to other people like hey, they could turn this into a paper view event I bet you a hundred million people around the world But even if there's nothing in it even if there's nothing in it So when because we will learn something new yeah, and it is Of course the the academics will say well we don't want to damage the pyramid anymore I'm like okay, I respect that but the thing is already a wreck the use tons of dynamite to blast their way in it The casing stones are all blown off your holes in it on the regular the Tritings it's not I don't under so between go backly taping not being fully excavated G'dong-Padang as well as the great pyramid arguably the three oldest and most mysterious ancient sites on earth for some reason They're not being appropriately excavated. Isn't there chamber underneath this finks as well? Well, there's tonn of obli yeah, there's there's something there, but they're not it's it's smaller He's smaller and and Zahi was stuck as nose down the tiny little chamber that's down there They say that they're supposed to be something more there, but like that's Dicy as far as what they know for sure They have never released any photos or video or have any kind underneath this thing So it's like okay, just stick a camera in there with a flashlight and show us that there's nothing in there like they're Or just show us what is it? It shows the walls. They say they say there's nothing in there You know like okay, well show me show me what nothing looks like right? So like I'm just look I'm an outsider in this and I I have an increase in mindset You're not you're human being on planet earth and you're a part of history And you know what every single person alive has an inherent right to know the true history of our origins And I don't care what country you're born in because people have come after me like you it is none of your business What's happening at go backly tepay? You're not a Turkish citizen and I say Excuse me. It is a they elected for it to become a world heritage site So they have thrown that out the window. It is everyone's it's everyone's business. It's surely is That's a silly that's a silly argument. It doesn't make any sense It's the history of any place to weigh in on Nazi Germany because you don't live in Germany It's the people of earth. It's like we we have a very fractured understanding of the history of the people on earth Get backly tepies an excellent piece of evidence that points to that we don't really understand why they did it or who did it And there's probably more of those things out there that we missed the Sahara Desert It's the greatest example All right, if they did some sort of very comprehensive examination of the Sahara Desert Like say if technology advances the point where they can do like some really comprehensive like underground Scanning of that entire part of the continent who fucking knows yeah only five percent of the Sahara has been Studied as far as like like with say with the use of lighter technology They're using it from space and they keep finding new structures that are prehistoric They don't know who made them or when and the throughout the same from space Yeah, it's called a line are from space It's called archaeology from space and the you satellite So this is what's interesting is that they can you satellite with Lidar that can penetrate like I might be butchering this But I want to say 10 meters. I could be off on that, but it's it's a substantial amount of depth from a satellite penetrating through dirt I'm like who would have thought that could even exist right pretty amazing. That is we have good evidence that they didn't have that No, it's I mean, yes, they're orbit would decay Yeah, fly back into because ours do you know out the couple things about gunung for dang worth mentioning The print when they were excavating like mad the president was of the opinion the same opinion that Dr Dany and Naughty would jawaii is that Like not even 90 would jawaii wrote a book even like Plato was right and it like Atlantis is in Indonesia So the president of Java back then believed that that was the case and he hit so he was throwing money at it When he lost his bid to be reelected and somebody else took over He was the one that shot everything down He's in more lockstep with the archaeologist and stuff the mainstream guys So that's one of the reasons it was a changing of the guard is why all of it just stopped So one guy was into it in the next guy. Well, that me okay. There we go There we go. You just open up the window. Yep. There it is. Here. I go Jimmy So the WF conspiracy it is nothing more than a conspiracy theory. I am not at all convinced that there's something here with there I'm trying to suppress ancient history. Let me be clear But there is a correlation between what's going on at go backly tepe and gunung panang that the Minus so this is a government position the minister of technology education research and technology something along those lines in Indonesia this gentleman came into power I believe in 2018 his name is Nikim or Something to karam. I have a slide of him in my gunung panang thing He's a global shaper within the world economic form and he is the head decision maker of excavations That would or would not happen this gentleman at gunung panang now Let me be clear. I'm not saying he's suppressing it all light and I'm not saying that the wf is trying to suppress or ancient history All I'm sharing here is that it just so happens that the gentleman that's in charge of decision-making Let me be clear. I said it earlier They went from saying that there will be unlimited resources and funding to excavate gunung panang It stopped and as of right now There's no plan in place to do it and I'm just sharing that the person who would make that decision or has the power to do so happens to be a global shaper and Klaus Schwab the former head of the of the world economic form I have a video of him gloating about how the infiltrated government cabinets the media all over the world and if are enacting their initial young global leaders The little chay to the zigob nets. It's very good. You can eat the buzz This is the photo of him in the bathroom. No, I would let me see No, please show of him in our bathroom here with the fucking crazy Darth Vader outfit on oh Yeah, yeah, that was that was bizarre wackiest fucking outfit ever if you're you know so on the nose I know you're evil super-villain. He looks like a bond in a bond James Bond villain Get more than more crazy than that like more crazy than a bond. See if you can find that photo Yeah, more crazy than a bond villain like a Star Wars villain. Yeah, like some he's a Sith Lord or something It'd be a crazy person to put that fucking thing on and go out in public unless you're it's a Halloween costume Yeah, it's a bizarre outfit for you to wear and And if everyone's worried about these secret societies and people that are in control and pulling the strings of the world What what are they worried about they're worried about fucking crackpots that dress like this? That's they're worried about eyes wide shut parties like that kind of shit What's the fucking crazy? That's our photo right there. That's the one we have Yeah, right. Yeah in front of the podium at the world economic for wow. What is that fucking photo? What is that outfit you're wearing? That looks like something from some like 1970s dystopian film 100% like Metropolis or something. Yeah. Yeah death race 2000 original That's so that outfit so crazy. Wow. I'm just someone I think it was having to do with the event or at the oh The other you get an honorary doctorate. This is at a university somewhere and you're fucking crazy that that's what you wear there anyway What are you doing? You're dressing like a druid. Well, even got a magic card. I'll even look at that So weird so again Another outfit That's oh, I generated okay So when I look at go backly tepay involving my little wf conspiracy idea it is a bit bizarre that that partnership with the Doge's group was literally announced at the annual World Economic Forum meeting in Davos and I also should share this that I may have been banned from Turkey So this is this is hilarious. So out of my video came out What's the name? Corral. What's the name? Dr. Corral so the head of archaeology in Turkey? Took great issue with my conspiracy theories on it and has he was quote an article saying that I should be sanctioned and Then he followed up with like I will be sanctioned and I'm like Well, how are you gonna keep me on to go backly? Tepay have I been banned from Turkey because American citizens don't need a visa to go into Turkey unless they're gonna be there more than 90 days So there's if I could I could apply ahead of time like in Egypt You can apply for your tourism visa ahead of time and I know if I was rejected He that's what he said is that I'll be sanctioned. He was referring to me and I'm like, okay I mean well, it means travel bans. Yeah, we do not go let him in the country It means I go to the airport to get rejected at customs potential that is possibly what would happen He said it will happen. I don't know that it's happened You get a bit of a flight to Turkey or actually a little bit pricey and I'm like damn it I'm like if I get a land there get turned around. Oh You might be able to make a nice video about it. Yeah, that's true. Yeah. Oh, yeah, that would be actually yeah Yeah, that's a video. I'm sure I mean kind of like helps you Over the target with go backly to pay or at least you are making them uncomfortable Yeah, you're forcing them to consider why they have chosen this it Just for economic reasons which does make sense if so many people are already going there Why should we spend more money? I get well and it makes sense and it's the most likely explanation It's probably true But that means that then this is an issue of either mismanagement or competence because they there's it is inexcusable that Because as of right now their plan is that it will not be full it when the excavator I'll be honest on this It will not be fully excavated in any of our lifetimes and there could potentially be answers Involving our ancient past at go backly tepay and it is entirely inexcusable That we wouldn't dig it up and I don't actually think it will take away from tourism by removing the mystery people are half a million people a year Are visiting it just because and if they dig it up more of it in my opinion. That's more reason to go there Well, what did you show Jamie? I went to the article about the funding I Good on today. Yes It does say that thing about unlimited funding but things it might have been awesome misinterpreted by translation it's coming from the Jakarta post it talks about how the soldiers were using hose to Excavate they didn't like that It mentions the first disbursement of 250 grand was put out Is this from 2014 this is the same article because it shows the thing that says unlimited amount of research funding But it says it was taken from other funding and then it says that there's a Lack of funding right below it archeologist at other sites be moan alakka funding Let me just say this my ass all they got to do is drill a hole and stick a camera through it into the tube to figure out If it's a lava tube or something man made this is not expensive it could get done for thousands of dollars not millions of dollars and If it is a 27,000 year old pyramid structure as Graham Hancock has proposed the data look the data It's not proven it's hotly debated But let me just make this crystal clear we don't know what it is It could potentially be the oldest ancient ruin in on earth and will never going to know the answer until we go looking And it is entirely unacceptable that we're not doing it well there what is happening? There's a thing to get like less conspiratorial but support it from a very real position There's a thing with science with their paradigm say if look at it from a very long time with the the origins of earth Sciences and history it was they were expected to bear out the Bible prove the Bible right then Evolution and then Darwin and then then it was Gradualism prove the Bible wrong there is no major global flood and gradualism They assume that everything happens slowly It's all there's nothing catastrophic in the record and that lasted from the late 1700s all the alright 1800s excuse me all the fucking way up until 1980 when the KT dinosaur killing meteor was accepted before that There wasn't as such thing as punctuated equilibrium, which is what they call it now where Which any kid could figure out is the way the fucking world works? The slow erosion happens on the side of the bank But sometimes there's a big flood that carves a big chunk of the I mean This is no brainer shit and the life moves on a steady pace normally and then every now and again something catastrophic happens So my point is is that if they think that digging something up is going to change a paradigm that they're expected to maintain They're not gonna fucking dig it up this the kind of opposition that they face to overturning paradigms like the Clovis first thing like When Flint was on here and he tried to play that one down not only were careers ruined from that But one thing you'll almost never hear mentioned was Clovis first was version two of this before that It was the full some point and full some first and many careers were ruined by people that posited that the Americans were people before The full some culture and then they found the club. This is this isn't some that it's not some novel time of Well, you know, there was a scientific debate in the few crit. No, no, no This is standard operating procedure The way it's always fucking been done So it's not a surprising thing that they're gonna try to hide stuff. It's not a surprising thing. This is human ego and control It's humans always want to be the experts and they always want to be the one in control of the information if the Information that's new that's coming out counters their control and their expertise Humans always want to be the experts and they always want to be the one and control the information if the Information that's new that's coming out counters their control and their expertise. They they reject it and it's just ego That's just ego. It's just kind of messed up because I mean I know scientists are people but But should all be what we know now? This is what we know now and when new information comes along, okay now we're thinking about it in a different way But the problem is they've published books. Yeah, and these books they've definitively given dates We now know we we are sure that this What are your thoughts on the dating of the pyramids and how do they date the pyramids? They date the pyramids based on whatever carbon that they could find in between the stones You obviously can't carbon dates stones themselves so you have to use some sort of organic material that's around that the best Dating is that the great pyramid is summer around 4500 years ago. That was from organic material taken between casing stones You could argue that the casing stones were restored because they even the Romans restored parts of the Sphinx Right, I don't know how old the great pyramid is but if it was constructed 4500 years ago Then our understanding of what was happening on the Giza Plateau at that time is vastly different than the people that were if you look at any Academic textbook they show people wearing loincloths and barefoot constructing the pyramid and Nah, that's nah well even hieroglyphs that depict moving statues. Right a bunch of guys sandals pulling a sled So that depiction which would be in my ramecium folder Jamie that one statue was only 58 metric tons only So it's crazy this is what they say they say well They pulled it on a sledge which is like a wooden sled and I'm like The ramecium statue is 15 times heavier than that other one. Yeah, this is what they always show they always show these naked dudes Yeah, look at them bare ass. He whoa So just to be clear I know because they want to show them that they're dumb and primitive and that's like dude with the whip He's got some clothes on right that guy close on but that's kind of been debunked right because one of the things They found is that when they studied the remains that were in the enclosures where the people that worked in the pyramid live They're not slaves Well, yeah, they're fed well and it seems like they were highly skilled. They had clearly had to have been I mean, I've tried to to sus to me What's the most impressive thing about it is the accuracy of the pyramid to itself? It's like a perfect square with like two inches of deviation at 756 feet per side That's like tiny fraction of a percentage off you like machine age standards on a fucking gigantic fucking scale right The only thing I could come up with was and I have to test it, but like if you had a concave mirror It creates a little circle of light like a magnifying glass does it will start a fire at a certain distance It's gonna be the same size no matter what so you could calibrate that and if you have to have everything Exactly and set up, but if you shot at a target and filled up a perfect circle, you could know it was exact range That kind of thing would work because you can't measure this with ropes You can't measure the I mean ropes sag and they are affected by humidity and stuff and again It's two inches at 756 feet. That's not that's not you're not you that Taking into account the casings that were removed. Oh, no, it's not this is just the base perimeter of the period That's the there's an outline around the pyramid where it was kind of scratched into the ground For where they would they think that they used water and stuff to do leveling and they generally measure around that to tell to my understanding And any deviation even in millimeters with each rock as you get up to two million 300,000 stones to build the peak of the pyramid any deviation either side would fuck the whole thing up Oh, man, it is just virtually perfect not quite perfect, but it's it is virtually well made by humans Allegedly or Anunaki what do you you know the anunaki one is the most fun because I love those stories I love sitch and stuff. It's just because it's the the funnest Possibility is that human beings were genetically engineered by a superior race that came here to mine gold. It's it's I was telling Jim Actually last night that Archaeologist frequently refer to the Clovis hypothesis as elegant and I often tell him that this is actually Chris Hisch and stuff is even more elegant explains why we want gold and silver. I mean, yeah That's all around the entire world the gold ones the weird one because you can't make any tools out of it You can't make weapons out of it and yet it was the most prized metal and it works really good for me when you get to a higher level of tech All this sudden useful isn't it? It's very useful and then there's also the idea of suspending particles in the atmosphere Like Chris talks about right which is what Bill Gates wants to do today that fucking cook Hey fuck face there's a lot of people living here. You don't get to choose what what when the shades get put on the earth because you have this goofy climate change narrative I don't believe you right. I don't like that you're even talking about doing this How about a global vote as whether not just one asshole created windows 95 gets to do this? He didn't create anything He bought the patent off that IBM guy. I love putting that on blast because it's like I think he has I think he suffers from an inferiority complex I think that he's jealous of Elon Musk and others. I think he his time is shorted Tesla Yeah, and he makes him look like a massive douche I think that he is look he was once the king the richest man on earth and now he's not and I think that that's all he wants I think again power human power and ego and especially people that have enormous resources and control over things They don't want to relinquish that grip. Yep. Well. Yeah, bro He should be living in an all-inclusive writing jet skis. You made it brother You're a little like Jeff Bezos right. Yeah, but yeah, let's go. Yeah, that's me happy That's what I want out of my billionaires. I want Jeff Bezos So people criticize him. I'm like, what are you talking about? He's living the dream also? He's jacked You're the super hot girl friends. He's got a giant yacht fuck. Yeah, flying in the space. I can't fucking cat Dick rocket I can't figure out why he runs the Washington pose because he owns the Washington well He's changed the shit out of it as he yeah, there's a big big to do about it because he released this article that we have to Are release a story rather he wrote a piece essentially saying that you have to take Divergent viewpoints you have to take a bunch of different perspectives who we can't just be this left wing echo chamber And it's the reason why the business is faltering. I mean all of these I Was just reading something about CNN's ratings and MSMBC's ratings post election they've crashed all these left wing cooks on YouTube are Hemorrhageings subscribers where people go you guys are out of touch. You're not accurate. You're delusional and People are speaking with their subscriptions and they're speaking with their purchasing of the Washington post and they're purchasing the New York Times The New York Times just debunked in the most insane way debunked RFK juniors assertion that the Ingredients in fruit loops are different in Canada than they are in the United States. They fact checked it while saying he was accurate So their fact check it's so dumb when you see the fact tweeted it Does the fact check is so dumb? Because the fact check says it's not correct. They have the same ingredients except for these harmful chemicals Mr Kennedy has singled out fruit loops as an example of a product with too many artificial ingredients Question why the Canadian version has fewer than the US version, but he was wrong the ingredient list is roughly the same Although Canada's has natural colorings made from blueberries and carrots while the US product contains red dye 40 yellow 5 and blue one as well as butylated hydroxy Tuline or BHT a lab-made chemical that is used for freshness According to the ingredient label that is the fucking dangerous chemicals that are banned in Canada that we're trying to get rid of in America And then it aren't kicked that so they're literally saying He was wrong, but he was right that made that made my brain hurt just reading Fucking times when a pewdiepie hadn't dressed like a Nazi for a while so didn't have anything to talk about right I don't know what that's about What the New York Times is doing so of course you're gonna hemorrhage subscribers of course You're crazy. You're saying something that's nuts and also What is your motivation? Like what's your motivation for removing potentially harmful and toxic chemicals? If someone is trying to do that for the greater health of the population if we're saying that these things have been eliminated in other countries because They've been proven to be dangerous. What is your motivation for saying he was wrong? Money well, I mean what else could it be? Anti-ology Ideology, you know left-wing rejection or arcade junior because now he's connected to Trump Which is connected to Nazis? It's like you you go down this fucking weird rabbit hole with these people and you're like what are you trying to do? Are you trying to remove all left over credibility? Are you trying to eliminate because you lost so much credibility? Are you trying to kill at all? Are you secretly working for the Chinese? They're all what are you doing? It's probably backed by Monsanto or something because if you look at like you serious crazy That what it's to think that the media was once called the fourth estate in this country is mind-wolding Honestly to think that we used to consider them the fourth estate of government that it was like this Our our father's generation. That's what they considered Ted Topel man. They're fucking well what I'm hoping is that what Jeff Bezos As said about the Washington Post and I know what CNN is considering doing and they've made some sort of a trend towards a more Objective form of journalism, but they're still compromised by their the sponsors They're still compromised by the advertisers. That's they're so compromised that I don't know if they can ever get to where they really need to be to compete with actual Objective real journalists that are independent because I don't I don't think they can so it's it's kind of crazy It's like they're digging their own grave yep every day and then they're lashing out or all the other people that aren't digging their own grave It's like you guys are insane so crazy The donut to themselves and now it's like what is it citizen journalist? How did Elon Musk put it? It's like you are now the journalist or how did I miss quoting him, but is mainstream media now? That is the mainstream media. That's where most people are getting their news now the views speak for itself You know like not just the views is the community notes the fact that you can actually fact check these things And then you have all these brilliant people that are participating in this live debate in real time online about what's real and what's not Yeah, and you're finding all Specifically with the like the the when they found the Twitter files Like Jesus Christ the FBI is involved in this like what what the fuck is going on? This is so crazy the FBI is involved in deciding what's real and what's not on Twitter Unreal and you're you're banning journalists You're banning scientists like this is really crazy. Yeah, and it's bad for society, but you know It's because irreparable harm with misinformation. It cannot So it's bad initially, but then ultimately it's good Because ultimately we learn who you can and can't trust and you say well Who's just honest and accurate because there's a lot of money in being honest and accurate? Yeah, you know This is what's crazy like all these independent journalists are doing really well Well because they don't have a fucking giant building in Atlanta that's filled with a thousand workers, right? So they don't have the overhead for terrible ratings terrible ratings and a massive overhead like you're kind of fucked Yeah, so it's great for us that it leads to the rise of these guys like Matt Taiba that used to be a part of the system And now or independent Glenn Greenwald all these type of people Michael Shellenberger people that you can actually trust They're gonna tell you the truth because there's actually money in telling the truth. Yes, it's a great business model It's corrected and the proof of it and all these other people you know, whether it's Tucker Carlson many many others Like the proof yep, you know There is a course correction and the problem is they're they've dug their heels in so much and they'll write articles like that New York Times article There's so crazy. They updated it. Oh Congratulations, they changed the word wording a little bit here's what it looked like They changed it. They got busted Because it got like 10 million views on They got blasted ever Well, that's why do I have a double things in so this is what they said here Why do we have fruitless in this country that at 18 or 19 ingredients? You go to Canada as to our three mr. Kind of you asked he was wrong in the ingredient count. They're roughly the same Yeah, that's what they changed up, but they're still they're still Missing the whole fucking point so the ingredient count is roughly the same So there's still 19 ingredients in the Canadian version, but it's all just like sugar in wheat and like carrot dye and blueberry Dye and whatever the fuck else they have they found a factual error that they can pull out instead of addressing Right of what he was saying What he's saying is that all these things these dyes are all illegal in Canada and also illegal in other countries It's poison serial is one of the worst things you can consume Delicious And I wonder if it's just as delicious in Canada, which is crazy like I don't need it to be flavored or colored by Fucking die when you can get it from beats or whatever Yeah, the diet the diet things crazy the red dyes for it is actually kind of a big problem There's a lot of kids that have like ADD kind of Symptoms from red dyes for you. I mean you're this for what left alone. Do you own devices near child like I was you just fucking poor You know how he fucking kept it crunch until I had a fucking heart Just the marshmallows Where's the marshmallows Saturday morning cartoons. Oh my god. Yeah, you get cracked out to bowl winkle Boles that sugar high yeah, I mean we didn't even know the sugar was bad for you because again another fucking conspiracy that turned out to be true The scientists got bribed by the sugar industry to play on the blame That's saturated fat. Yep. That's why everybody started using margarine and all this stupid shit. It's like some plastic I love this. Oh, so okay. You know if you leave margarine out rats don't even eat it I was about to say that you you'll see and so will be eating natural butter, but they won't touch margarine Yeah, they eat each other. They don't fuck with margarine like something we said for that. It's glue It's it's chemical it's industrial oil. Yeah, it's like really weird It used to be used for engine lubricant like whoa, it was great on toast This is where so stupid Where's so fucking stupid? It's wild when you think about it the things that we will do Like the milligram experiment I mentioned before the Experiment they did back after the everybody was wondering here in the states why the Nazis were able to convince rank and file normal people to do fucked up stuff So they got guys in a lab coat and they had an actor pretend he was getting shocked as a test subject But the real test subject was the guy they had quote unquote shocking that guy Right, and the guy in the lab code he kept telling him to do it more and and they found about 30% of the people if they were told would shock them all the way up to kill him the guy. Yep, and that that kind of a Appeal to authority the kind of that kind of worshiping of authority has really They're they're gutting it right now and they're paying the price as it's just dangerous because authority has a massive responsibility to be accurate and with that comes humility and the understanding that we don't know everything It's not possible which is why we're constantly studying things and this this need to be accurate and need to be correct and Need to be the only one who has access to this information to educate people is preposterous It's really crazy especially when it comes to something like ancient history Which is why your channel so popular in your channel and Graham Hancock shows are so popular and why these people that Want to hold on to that throne are so adamant about labeling them with every possible horrible pejorative Yeah, but yeah, that's a Really easy way to get them out like I said they're losing authority right now like we're talking about We're talking about mainstream media or legacy media. I guess you could call it fall in a part and stuff What I mentioned about PewDiePie earlier if you remember about ten years ago the ad pop ellips That was I think it was actually a Wall Street Journal article It was a legacy media that wrote about PewDiePie and they fucking like threw him under the bus They like misconstruity when everything else and the effects were very real It slapped YouTube content creators across the board if you look up ad pop ellips You'll you can read all about it. Well, yeah, they've actually dropped some of the bands on X now which is great Yeah, which is I think a sign of the culture shifting also after the election There's a lot of realizing that there's actually a lot of money in advertising there like what do you fuck retarded? Right It's the number one platform on earth for people discussing things It's the future you advertise there because you're trying to you're trying to bleed that guy out But you fuck with the wrong dude. He's crazy. He's got more money than anybody. He's like, I don't care. I'm buying it You put it for twice what it's worth and they're like Twitter has lost 20 billion dollars in value He's a terrible businessman. No, he overpaid He overpaid substantially try to save free free speech Yeah, this was not this was what you would call an activist investment Well, he's just a rare cat who's willing to do something like that There's not a lot of people that are willing to like lose billions on some but when you got 200 billion You know like let's fucking shift this apple cart. I'm so glad he's on the right side of history I got some hero is living hero and X is the future that is gonna be the biggest platform on earth That's his goal right? It's yeah, well, it certainly already is and probably will grow and you know They keep saying people are going to blue sky. Do you know if you go to blue sky and you type? There's only two genders your band instantly. Yes. I saw this reason We're doing yeah, this guy is just the newest echo chamber of the old Twitter Oh, I saw this people in King dorks. Yep. They're gonna go over there and let their brains rot out in an echo chamber I've been picking on all of my friends in the real world that were laughing at I forget the name of the the site that rumble when everybody was like all the right wingers are going to rumble Oh, no, it's like and all you guys are running the blue sky Fucking funny all that work Rumble's been so good to me. They give Chris Povlowski a shout out to CEO of rumble I had the pleasure of meeting him and they've been treating me real good rumble is great. Yeah, they're fantastic I pull on free speech with whether you're on the left or the right whatever it is anything I want Anything I want within as long as it's not violence or something like that Yeah, so I recommend people everything that's legal. Yes, what it's supposed to be and that's what the first amendment is supposed to apply to and This is one of the great things about this administration It's coming in is that Donald Trump wants to apply the first amendment to all these sites He wants to stop all this big tech banning which is by the way was Terrible for him in 2020. I mean it really it's election interference. It truly is because you're you're eliminating one Complete side of the argument. It's supposed to be one side thinks this the other side thinks that they get together and discuss it and you as the Person outside of it gets to see who makes a more compelling argument and The one of wonderful thing about community notes is you get to see whether or not someone's bullshitting right? So let's find out what's right and what's wrong. What's true? What's not? Let's that's what it's supposed to be But the problem with that is then you don't really have control of the election and that's what they found out in 2024 They don't have control of it anymore And you can get beyond saying pay her $10 million. It doesn't fucking work. It doesn't work anymore No one cares no one believes them. They don't trust them. They make terrible life choices And you're like well clearly you're not a person. I'm gonna listen to when it comes to who's gonna run the fucking world There was with This is crazy Eminem. What are you talking about? How much have you locked? I mean I want to sit Eminem down with like a political scholar and like tell me what you know about the invasion of Ukraine What do you know about the coup in 2014? What do you know about NATO moving? Why are these closer and closer? What do you know about the violation of the treaty that we have? What the fuck are you doing man? You shouldn't be doing this This is not the thing for you to be doing here These people have no idea what they're talking about. They're all puppets They're all they're people that don't do any research on their own and they're just told what to think or they're compromised Well, I think they were getting paid and I think that's what's even weirder is that you're allowed to pay people to endorse you for president Which is crazy. Yeah, oh, per two and a half million not a million. They thought it now It's two and a half million. I shouldn't that's Jamie But that seems to be like production costs would seem at least slightly elevated sort of event But the weird one was like the Beyonce one if it's true and you know There's a lot of sites reporting it as it is true But we we tried to look Jamie look this it's hard to find what's true. What's not true? Because there's a lot of money that was paid to staff But it's like unclear what that means and then there's it's on it's unclear where they burned all the money and then There's also the money that went to these activist groups and we're talking about hundreds of billions dollars They paid to people to support the the Administration which is kind of supposed to be the other way around Are these groups supposed to be paying money to prop up the campaign because the campaign believes in them? No, you're paying these activist groups to support you which is just Crazy also it didn't work. It didn't work at all like you went you went through a Billion plus dollars in three months. This is so crazy and you're in debt I think and I think a lot of people made some money in the process That money went somewhere where's the now are the problem with climate change That's part of the problem with everything is that it's profitable to spit out a narrative And that there's a lot of money being moved around and this is money in politics and as much as we can get that out We need to and I think one of the most important things about getting that out is this whole thing about pharmaceutical drug companies being able to advertise Which changed in the 1990s? We have to recognize that before the 1990s pharmaceutical drugs could not advertise on TV and guess what we were taking Way less and we were way healthier No, this is not good folks. This is not good You know and other than ozempic which is like at least curbing obesity in a certain extent What what are these drugs are doing good like what it would if you look at the overall health of people? It's declining Obesity is rising Heart attacks are rising strokes or oh shit is bad We're not moving in the right direction and yet there's a tremendous resistance for change But it's funny to me that they would spend so much money on this election when I mean it It's kind of clear that when one person's platform is do this this this this this and this the other person's platform is not him It fucking I mean that's like you know, that's like of writing somebody else's coattails deliberate You you she's she came in with the platform. I'm just getting it. I'm not Trump So well, okay. Well, that's great But I mean once people have pierced through the veil of Trump's gonna make everything illegal and put everybody that's not wide into camps and shit Once they've got past that what do you have? Well, it's also if you're gonna develop like a real platform like a real You're gonna run for president. Yeah, I would think you would want to do that over a long period of time and be very careful about Treat it like a defense attorney like if you were Prosecuting this as a case you would want to have all of your facts That show that you're correct and have all of your arguments and you would want to have mock arguments if someone comes to you and says What about this? Isn't this that's not the case and this is why that's not the case and you would want to have all your ducks in a row To me It's like a fighter that takes a last-minute fight and they've been sitting around drinking beer and they haven't gone through a ten-week camp Like don't do it don't do it. You're not ready for this Right and if your only strategy is just like a wild punch which is basically he's a liar Like me while you're lying about him every fucking day the Russia collusion shit the very fine people shit the fucking all the thing about you know the thing about Taking Liz Cheney and executing us. That's all lies. You just you guys just lying and you're saying he's a liar But yet you're lying all the time and you're doing it like it's 1995 and there's no social media But you can't do that anymore Especially when the people that are paying attention to the podcast. Well guess what podcast or a hundred times bigger than anything You guys have and people listening to that they know you're full of shit and then your numbers decline even further Yeah, so I think they they were saying that CNN what are the what's how much is CNN down because I was seeing this on Twitter And it's hard to know whether or not they're You know, it's hyperbole or whether or not it's fact But they're saying the CNN's ratings are down like 80% of their peak and MS NBC is some other preposterous number and they're both on the chopping block CNN is talking about mass layoffs of talent Because nobody believes them anymore so you it's counter productive If you use the same voices, which is why they the governor Brian stealthed and they brought him back Which was so odd I'm like, you know, I'm looking for this talent is missing They mean they don't have any talent. They're all going out of business. They're gonna have to rebrand They're gonna have to get entire new management like I'll never watch those programs ever again those networks literally never like they're dead to me now It's propaganda. It's it's at least a percentage of it is propaganda That's unacceptable. That's unacceptable if you're the voice of the news in the world It's unacceptable for you to have a large percentage of what you're saying to be completely full of shit You know, it's funny you can see the the same pattern of attack that they throw at Trump being used against Tulsi Gabbard the last time around when she fucking Dale Kamala and the debate and she was just like you You can stay here and say all cops are bad But you got hundreds of thousands of people in jail and prison this viewers deal NBC CNN a Trump slop ratings Cash here's why so what's the numbers? Was it said does it say the Rachel Maddow show for example easily MSNBC's top rated program though it only airs once a week draw Drew just 1.3 million viewers on November 10th five days after the election a drop of one million viewers from the month before 40 in the key 25 to 54 Demographic the advertised the most covet Maddow's numbers mark the smallest audience since her show has seen her show has seen since April of 2022 and she's the number one show which is like you know If I only got a million people watch her show be so pissed Hannity nearly quadrupled her with four and twenty thousand views to her meager 109,000 she got a hundred nine thousand people in the 25 to 54 Yeah, and that's a bunch of old cat ladies and airports airports, right Outside of Maddow MSNBC has seen an unprecedented plunge. This is a really bad news and what is that? For example on Tuesday November 11th a week after the election's MSNBC attracted its lowest 25 to 54 demo ratings in 23 years Over on CNN the demo number was the lowest it has been since June 27th 2000 when Bill Clinton was president for the overall week of November 6 through 13 Fox News average 2.23 Billion views why MSNBC attracted a poultry 550,000 and CNN just three hundred ninety nine thousand think about how much money is being pumped into CNN So go scroll back up a little bit in fact Fox News Saw its viewership jump by 38 percent overall since November 5th after dominating election night by topping all networks drawn more than 10 million viewers It's so bad that MSNBC's Joe Scarborough and Mika were out his name Crawl to Mar-a-Lago on Friday to kiss Trump's ring drawing scorn for their utter shamelessness after years of on air attacks You know real quick Let me just you know what they're not including is that on rumble Dan Bongino and and Stephen Crowder had the number one and number two ratings on all of election night so they're not they're just mentioning mainstream networks. They're they're leaving out the fact that would a damn budget He had over half a million real-time viewers live and Same with Stephen Crowder. They're very comparable. They were the number one number two Performance in the world really. Yes. So what did CNN have at that night? I can't I'm not entirely sure But it was way less it was way less. Oh, yeah, that can't be good. Look it up I'm I would agree that online. They probably had the highest but to compare the world watching CNN and Fox News and MSNBC that night was less than 500,000 is maybe I'm maybe a sign streaming. I'm referring to must be because what didn't it just say Fox News at the highest ratings? They were five point five million anything to do with online That's okay. I'm like the twenty five fifty four-year-old school just be people. They're like I turn on TV. I was watching online. So they dominated it online. Okay. Okay So either way this is what happened after 2016 as well, you know like when they're or after 2020 right there once he's out of office You can't complain about Trump anymore your ratings crash like your entire your entire business is operated on fear Yep, oh the orange man and hatred. I mean this be real. There's a lot people just tune in just to get angry I'm gonna hate them like I'm gonna enjoy read just a laugh Oh, it's get blazed watch that lady like what a fuck you say like what she's talking about like She spent an entire part of her program comparing Trump to Stalin Hitler and Mussolini in MSNBC compared the Well, like, she spent an entire part of her program comparing Trump to Stalin, Hitler, and Mussolini. In MSNBC, compared the rally in Madison Square Garden to the Nazi rally for the 1930s. Oh, well, they were all in the city. You know, I performed in Madison Square Garden. So that must mean me and Nazi as well. Yep. Obviously when I had a trailer, yeah, he was telling jokes. And you just had a guy on your show talking about the swastika on five continents around the world in a thousand years ago. So you can not see stuff. I know Brandon defended the martyrman guy. And let me just say this, that's more Nazi. I encourage everyone to go watch everyone go watch ancient apocalypse, screaming cooks and Netflix see thing for yourself. But one last thing to mention about that is that even John Hoops had compared ancient apocalypse. He associated it with Sandy Hook. I am not. And this was a week ago, two weeks ago, disgusting. He's talking about archaeology is a canary in the coal mine. And you can tell that because you see this horrible thing happened before 911. And therefore they're connected. And Sandy Hook happened before right around the same time as a 2012 thing. Her go. It's just like Duke. You know, Alex Jones could give you some advice. Your buddy, you're going to get fucking sued. Shut your mouth about Sandy Hook, man. Come on. It's all about what you think. The same thing that they do. Let's say same thing Flint devil did, you know, connecting it to white supremacy, it land this to whites. Oh, it land us. It's really a fun. We're at three hours plus in, but I would feel like we cheated the world. All right. About the reshot structure. Let's do it. I love your video. And I saw. I don't understand Randall's reluctance to accept this as a possibility. It's very fascinating because there's so many details and your video that details the reshot structure, which is an incredibly strange structure. If it's not man made, and if it wasn't at one point in time, it's some sort of a structure that was made by human beings. It doesn't need to be. So this is one of the things that Randall says, well, it's a natural feature. So it can't be Atlanta. Some like, well, who built Atlantis? They said it was the God Poseidon. Well, was Poseidon an actual individual because if you look at the ancient Greek translation, Poseidon, it's Lord of the Earth, which I think is a modern day translation for Mother Nature. And humans have built on natural geological features throughout history. If you were to bring up the reshot structure from space, it's like no other place on Earth. It is a mysterious site. The best, the consensus is that it's volcanic in nature and is a collapse. Volcanic dome, but it doesn't match anything else anywhere else on Earth as far as volcanic domes go. It matches more than a dozen similarities of the most, let me say this, the most consequential similarities what Plato had described as a lost ancient city of Atlantis. And it's made up of concentric circles. If it had water, it specifically matches three of water and two of land. It's made up of red black white color stones. There's an abundance of gold and more, Tania elephants, which were described to being on Atlantis. You won't find gold or elephants in the Azer's like Randall promotes. It also has an opening at the South, which matches the description of Atlantis. There's mountains to the north, which just so happened to be called the Atlas Mountains, which are in modern day Morocco. Well, Atlas, which is very unique name, was said to be the very first king of Atlantis, which also happens to be the very first, the name of the very first king in more Tania, which is where the reshot structure is located. It's also covered in salt. Yes, the water was there. And oh, and there's another similarity is that Atlantis was said on those mountains that were said to be to the north, which are again, happened to be named the Atlas Mountains. Well, there was a river that was said to be flowing from those mountains. And there's a scientific study that say that Tamin, Risset River flowed at the exact time of Atlantis 11,600 years ago, either right through the reshot structure or directly north of it. And, and those are just a handful of similarities. It is by far the most likely location of lost ancient city of Atlantis. Nothing can be concluded either way, but it is something that should not be ignored. It was certainly really fascinating. It is just the fact that there's these concentric rings that match the description of Atlantis. And it's in the same spot. And it's in the, it's the mountains are in the same spot. The opening is in the same spot. I mean, look at that. Whatever that is, it's really weird. Yeah. And if you would imagine a city like Atlantis and what the way it was described, that seems a very likely spot for it. And let me tell you something else. A lot of people say, well, it's not an island. So it could possibly be Atlantis. But what they leave out is the fact that the ancient Greek word for island was nestles and nest on which had five meetings, one of which was island. The other was promontory peninsula as well as land within a continent surrounded by lakes, rivers or springs, which matches the reshot structure. So it's like, you know, a lot of people, and they must say this because a lot of people, and I think all areas should be studied, I'm not debunking the Azores. However, the fact that it's in the Sahara desert and that the Egyptians are the ones that came up with the tail of Atlantis. That's where it originates from which the surprise is a lot of people. Well, Egypt's in the Sahara and so is the reshot structure. And at the time of Atlantis, the Sahara was green. It had one of the largest networks of rivers ever known to exist as well as the largest freshwater lake. And so if they were, if the Egyptians were a columnist of a destroyed civilization, it's not unreasonable to say that it was in the Sahara. And let me say something else. If Atlantis was described as being busy all day and all night and was a trading post, does it make sense to be in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean or is it far more feasible that would be in the Sahara desert, which wasn't a desert at the time? Because if it was said to be busy all day and all night with language, languages spoken from all over, well, and where are all these people coming from in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean and go visit it? It makes far more sense that it would be in that portion in that region of the world. How much work has been done excavating in the normal? Zero thing. Yes, it is. They're there. There's gold in the more teeny and desert and they don't want anyone touching it. It's also a place to go. It's very inhospitable. It's 250 miles inland. And it is, I know people that have gone out there and it is a dangerous inhospitable place. There's no water. It is, it's hard to get to. You can have all the money in the world. You can still die out there. Yeah, it's not just hard to get to. But not just inhospitable. It's kind of war torn, kind of fucked up, kind of the kind of place where you're not going to have to worry about somebody playing a tourist trick on you. They're just going to take your shit. Right. Right. So it's a lot of reasons that people aren't going there. But it's really interesting. Even to me, where I'm a lot more skeptical of us. So I do believe in a lost civilization. I do. And I think that I think it's really interesting to find so many of those same things in the same areas just on canny. And like Jim says, when it's just a stone throw away from me, you have to really, it would make sense that they would have that package. A big chunk of those things so accurately recorded and to find it right there. It definitely is one of the things I, I heart about my channel all the time. There's we need more honest skeptics. This is definitely the kind of thing we need real scientists to go out there and do. We don't need guys to need your can say, well, you attach it to Atlanta. So fuck that noise. It can't be. We don't need guys to say it's definitely Atlantis, but there's no, see here we need boots on the ground. Or you'll have a fucking Atlantis if it really is an Africa be connected to white supremacy. Let me touch on this one really quick joke. If I can hit this really fast, it's so stupid. They're whole Africans are black. They're whole. I'm saying the Atlanteans are black supremacy. This is what John Anthony West said on your show. He said he's like, not only did Atlantis exist, but they were black. African supremacy. They did it. They're there. The way that these guys attach the white supremacy thing is they go back to guys from the 1800s that wrote about Atlantis that had some old school views on race. Now they believed in the biblical races and the way that the biblical races came to be something you'll never find John Hoops or Flint, double tell you because it guts their entire argument. Before the flood, there was one race of humans. After the flood, Noah gets drunk. Three of his sons that are around. One of them picks on him, laughs at him. Two other ones don't. The one that picked on him was ham. He had the African people were considered to be the hamites. The Sam, the Semitic people were in the middle and then the other one, the japophytes, which eventually became the areas were considered to be the white people. That was the European view of race for up until about 150 years ago. So 200 years ago, a guy riding about Atlantis would not have thought it was an area in Atlantis because aliens didn't exist until after Noah. It was one of Noah's sons. So before the flood, there was no areas. So anytime somebody says that the whole of this old school ship believes in you ought to do a scratch of service, you'll find that's not the case at all. This guy didn't believe in a white Atlantis. Ignatius Donnelly did not believe in a white Atlantis. Despite Flint, Dibble, making sure to name drop that fucker anytime he gets a chance. But then we're going to make sure you think that they're going to eliminate because the biblical races are something most people don't know what you're about. Listen, let me just say this one point. I don't care what their color their skin was, but the legend comes from Egypt and their fucking brown. So get, get fucked with your racist argument. I don't care. Like anyway, I don't get fucked. Gentlemen, thank you very much. It's just been a lot of fun. They're truly really been fun. Jimmy, always great to see you. Good to see you guys. Very nice to meet you. Nice to meet you too. Thank you for your channel. Both of you guys, fantastic. D. Duncan, bright insight. Awesome channels. Follow me on X, Rumble, and Instagram. Love you all. I'm going to be at the cosmic summit speaking this summer. If you guys want to catch me there, beautiful. Cosmic summit, yeah. Beautiful. Thanks again, Jeff. Thanks everybody. Thanks for coming. Bye now.