Joe Rogan, Mike, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. Good to see you again, my friend. Hey. So we're great to be here. It's been a while. Four years, January 8th, like, no, January 15th. Was it really? Yeah, that long ago. It's been four years. The last time you were here, right? Correct. I think the last two of you. That was like right after a couple months after I moved here. Yeah, so almost exactly four years. Yeah. Crazy. Well, waiting was great. Waiting? I mean, the time, four years waiting to have another chat with you. So much has gone on since last we met. Well, tell me. What's going on? Where do you want to start? A, Z. Anywhere. Anywhere. Let's see. You know, the family is expanding. Yeah, that which is great. All three daughters have been married and each has a grandchild, which is making me feel old. So I've ramped up, stepped up my hormonal treatment to keep me on edge because I want to be around a lot longer to take care of these kids or to be with the kids. They're just 16 months, but they're still fantastic. Unsillism. I love it. That's great. Absolutely. Love it. But in the world that I work in, in the medical arena, it's been expanding rapidly. The new administration has a part to play in it, which is great, but even before that, the number of results that we're having, the outcome from TBI, PTSD, and what have you has been accelerating because of some of our testing that we do as well as our treatment that we've initiated that's changed since four years ago since last time. What have you added in the last four years? Well, we've added a lot more neutropic, excuse me, not neutraceuticals. Natural products into our regiment. I spent 16 years looking at the science behind things that can get into the brain and alter the inflammation that occurs in the brain. The whole premise of everything that I've been doing for the last 30 years has been based upon inflammation in the brain. And the information is what stops all the chemistry and why we develop anger and problems. I don't know if you saw the article, which is called the influence of media on the mental health of America, which is called the Trump derangement syndrome, but I got so much backlash from having that title. People wouldn't read it because of the title. And it talks about how constant stress from the media, echo chambers, social media, really call this bullshit. It causes cortisol to go up and it shuts down the chemical that protects your brain called fractalkin. And then it starts dumping all this inflammation and causes loss of serotonin, so it becomes more depressed. It causes loss of melatonin, so you can't sleep. It generates another group of chemicals that induce depression. Yeah, it essentially generates this response in your body that prepares itself for a fight that never takes place. Correct. And then you're always thinking you're about to get into some sort of a physical altercation with the armed enemy coming over the top of the hill. Yeah, vigilant states. Just like our army goes through. Exactly. And the thing with the army and a lot of these people that you've worked with is from IEDs and from blown through doors and stuff like that. They get damaged to their pituitary gland. You know, we've talked about it many, many times in the podcast. But I think one of the misperceptions, as you said, and I apologize for that, is that we think it's all due to pituitary gland, but it isn't. And the work that we've been doing, it shows that when you have inflammation in the brain, regardless of how it's developed, whether or not it's IED or slip and fall, or as we talked in the past, even wave runners see ski-dos, or skiing or board-skating, snow-skating, or going to the range of 50 caliber gunners, what happens is it creates this inflammation that shuts off the ability of the brain to regulate the pituitary gland. So you can do all the MRIs as they do at the VA, and they see a normal pituitary gland and says, oh, pituitary is normal, you've got PTSD. But there's no radiological or neuro radiological procedure that allow you to look at inflammation in the brain. So they assume, they can't find any structural damage that it has to be all psychiatric. Sort of like when they used to have to diagnose CTE after you're already dead. Correct. Isn't that how they're doing it now? No, I think they can scan for it. There's a PET scan that can look for the tau protein. That's great. Yeah, tau proteins, hyper-phospholated tau becomes these NFTs, these neuro-fibyl tangles, which is an interesting issue. It's been part of my last year of deep dive trying to find out why is it that you develop CTE or the symptoms relative to CTE? Why is it that you develop the symptoms relative to Parkinson's or Alzheimer's or multiple sclerosis? Well, it turns out that the biochemistry is all the same. Something called beta amyloid, which is the hallmark for someone with Alzheimer's disease. And then these tau proteins, hyper-phospholated tau proteins that they call NFTs, that they circulate around the blood vessels. And they create this intense inflammation, and that intense inflammation causes loss of blood supply damage to neurons. And you develop it. So we've had, using our protocol, we have our six case of multiple sclerosis that was totally put into remission. It took 90 days to put them in remission. It was a lieutenant. Yeah, it's a video up on... And what's the protocol that did that? The protocol is the nutraceutical that drops the inflammation and replacing the hormones that are deficient that protect the brain. What is it in the nutraceutical? In the nutraceuticals, there is corsatin. You know about corsatin. Mm-hmm. It's got EPA, EDA, DHA from Omegas. It has in it glutathione and acetyl cysteine. It's got B12. That's one component of it. The other component has B1, B2, which deals with neural communication. And then it's a PQQ and COQ10. PQQ is a form of COQ10. It's a sister. Mm-hmm. And it's 100 to a thousand times stronger. But it's what it does. It increases mitochondrial function. I know you've had a lot of people here talking about mitochondrial function. And that's a major piece in how to reverse things like neurodegenerative diseases and improve mental functioning. Mm-hmm. I mean, perhaps like you have like alpha brain, you know, has an effect on improving mitochondrial function. And that's what you want to do. That's a key. So you have to drop the inflammation because inflammation causes mitochondria that produce ATP. It causes mitochondrial dysfunction. So in all those neurodegenerative diseases, mitochondrial dysfunction has been ignored in the past. And you need to address it. So PQQ and COQ10 are two very, very potent. When added together, they stimulate mitochondrial ATP production and replication of mitochondria. Coercetin does the same thing. That's why it's so important. So, quercetin, you were explaining to me before that it's a nylon for. Right. It gets ions into the bloodstream better. So it's when you consume it with zinc. Right. This is a paid advertisement for better help. Life is kind of like a book. And every new year is the start of a new chapter. Except in this case, the pages are blank. And you can write whatever the fuck you want. Maybe you're working towards buying a new home. Maybe you want to learn how to guard in or pick up hunting. Or maybe you want to work on your relationships. However, you want your story to play out. It's going to take work, dedication, and a little bit of help. Even the greatest author is having editorial partner to bounce ideas off. And that's nothing to be ashamed about. If you need some help, living the life you want, therapy is always a great place to start. Therapy is for everyone, not just people who have gone through a major trauma. It can teach you valuable skills like how to cope with stress, how to communicate better, how to set boundaries, and more. One of the best ways to get into therapy is better help. It's entirely online. So it's easy to get started and more affordable too. And as the largest online therapy provider in the world, better help can provide access to mental health professionals with a diverse variety of expertise. Write your story with better help. Our listeners get 10% off their first month at betterhelp.com. That's betterhelp.com. But that's one of its functions, but there are five functions that it has. Of course it is amazing. It's an ionophore, which is when we talked about COVID and zinc. It carries zinc into the cell to shut down the ability of the COVID SARS from replicating. Or antivirus, essentially, right? Well, it works with SARS and it works with influenza A and B. It works with rhinovirus and enterovirus gut viruses that you can get during summertime. So what I was just getting at is it's beneficial for people all year round, not just people that think they might be getting COVID. Absolutely. So I take 500 milligrams twice a day. Of course it is. Of course it is. Of course it is. Of course you can't. Of course you can't. Of course you can't. Of course you can't. Of course you can't. Of course you can't. Of course you can't. Zinc because my levels are where they're at. I don't put a lot of zinc in because zinc's involved in about 300 processes in the body. It's antiviral that we just talked about. It's anti-alsheimer's because it turns out that the production of the chemical called beta amyloid, there's an enzyme that regulates it. And it's zinc dependent. So if it's working, it's called a secretase. It's called alpha secretase. It's zinc dependent. Beta secretase is not. So beta secretase takes and makes the beta amyloid that causes the Alzheimer's. The inflammation. And with that inflammation you then start getting the same thing in CTE. So in all these inflammatory conditions, they have the same beta amyloid and cause for CTE. The hyperphospholated tau protein that we call NFTs. Neurofibral tangles. So they're all related. So what Coruscant does is it increases mitochondrial replication in about seven days. Doubles the amount of mitochondria intracellularly. It helps increase and deliver something called IGF binding protein 3. Insulin like binding protein 3. Biny protein 3 is always looked at as being the carrier for IGF1. Insulin like growth factor, growth hormone, turns on and delivered the production of insulin. Like growth factor, which is the main below the neck growth factor for our body. Improves protein synthesis, decreases inflammation too. Okay. As sidetrack, when you're talking about beta amyloid and Alzheimer's, wasn't there a significant amount of fraud that was exposed about Alzheimer's studies that put into question a lot of the ideas that people had about Alzheimer's. Wasn't that something happened recently? Well, in the train of thought on Alzheimer's, you know, they're saying that it's due to the recessive genes. Well, if you look at the real studies recently, 95% of the cases of Alzheimer's disease appear to be due to trauma and aging. Trauma and aging. Only fight trauma like head trauma. Head trauma. Head trauma. Because what happens is trauma stimulates the brain because of inflammation to increase the production of beta amyloid. And it's because there's they found recently another secretase. What secretases are are the enzymes that convert a protein called APP, Alzheimer's precursor protein. And it's a long protein and two enzymes go in and clip it here and clip it here. And that piece is beta amyloid. That's the bad stuff. That's a beta secretase and a gamma secretase. But they also have something called alpha secretase. So if alpha secretase and gamma secretase cut this APP, it generates alpha amyloid, which is inert, not inflammatory. So what did they find recently? Something called delta secretase. Delta secretase and gamma gives you beta amyloid. So how do you generate delta secretase in the body? Trauma, aging. So that's why most of the cases of Alzheimer's disease are inflammatory based. So what are the things that are, I'm sorry, but most cases, is there a certain age where people start to develop it and has there been any cases of very young people that have Alzheimer's? There's a young form of Alzheimer's and that might be directly due to having head trauma and developing this delta amyloid or delta secretase generating amyloid beta amyloid that creates the Alzheimer's disease. As you get older 65 years of age and above, that is could be 5% genetic. But I think what the literature is really speaking towards is that it's all has an inflammatory basis. Remember, trauma in the brain equates out to inflammatory processes. It's part of the brain's ability to try and protect us, okay? Remove junk, bacteria, mold, viruses from the brain and also metabolites of abnormal metabolism in the brain. What was the scandal? I don't know. Alzheimer's research scandal because it was pretty significant and they were saying that it throws into question all of these previous assumptions and therapies that they were providing for Alzheimer's disease and this person had made a significant amount of money. Yeah. It's the antibodies. It's the treatment protocols, the antibodies against beta amyloid. And they found that even though you were against beta amyloid, you were still progressing on to develop symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. But they were talking about fraud. This was like fraud in some of the research. Just with a research. Yeah. This is recently how a retracted paper affected the course of Alzheimer's research. But it's one paper and what was the focus of. Right. Okay. During 2024 landmark Alzheimer's research, yeah. Was retracted due to fraud allegations? Do we waste billions of dollars and thousands of hours of scientists time? Maybe not. Or new potentially hopeful drugs on the market targeting the subject of the paper, amyloid beta. There have been video breaks down the amyloid beta hypothesis, the fraud itself. And where we go from here. So what is the fraud itself, Jamie? Does it say? So you can find an article that's just not a video. They have beta amyloid data. See, they've been relying on beta amyloid as being the focus. And what they're finding is the treatment that addresses beta amyloid and antibody against beta amyloid. People are still getting a progression of the disease. I understand this, but I just want to know what the what the fraud was. Oh, okay. So what is the fraud? Amyloid hypothesis, scroll down a little bit, Jamie. What's the fraud? Where's it get to the what did the paper bullshit about it? Putting it into perspective. Mm-hmm. Do do do do do do do do. Okay. 56 paper lead to. Oh, but later post. Where's the fault defined? Where's the fraud? What's it say? Let me try a different. Yeah, just find out like what was the for this seems like very involved. This is a science journal. Well, you know that in. There are papers that have been written about reproducibility reproducibility is where a researcher does a paper makes a claim about the result. The results of his science. And then people look at that and they want to go and reproduce it to prove it. They found that 70% of them can't be reproduced. And when you looked at the actual scientists who did the original work goes back and tries to reproduce it, 7% failure rate. So there are major publications that have talked about this reproducibility error. I mean, you can go on to, you know, Google Scholar or else into Google and look at reproducibility. Okay, here it is. But over the past two years, questions have arisen about some of my masala. How do you say his name? Masala. Masala. Maslia. Maslia. Maslia. Maslia. Maslia is a research. Science investigation has now found that scores of his lab studies at UCSD and NIA are riddled with apparently falsified Western blots. Images used to show the presence of proteins and micrographs of brain tissue. Numerous images seem to have been inappropriate really reused within the, within and across papers. Sometimes published years apart in different journals describing divergent experimental conditions. After science brought initial concerns about Maslia's work to their attention, the neuroscientists and forensic analysis, specializing in scientific work would previously work with science produced a 300 page dossier revealing a steady stream of suspect images between 1997 and 2023. 132 of his published research papers. Science did not pay them for their work. In our opinion, this pattern of anomalous data raises credible concern for research misconduct and calls into question a remarkably large body of scientific work. Okay, so it seems like the fact that he was reusing the same engine, images, stating that they were new images. So he was stacking the deck in his favor. Right. Because he had a point to make that. That's so gross. 2.6 billion dollars. That's a budget. That's a nationally student. Yeah. Yes. Dwarves the rest of the national institute, the NIA combined. He was in charge of the division of neuroscience. That is so crazy. So the budget of the division of neuroscience alone was 2.6 billion dollars in the last fiscal year. And this guy was a key leader for the effort. Man. How gross. But that's pressure and competition and very ambitious people who have shitty morals. Yeah. Right? That's what that is. Yes. Publish your parish. Publish your parish is the motto. That's the motto. If they don't publish and have a positive finding, they're not going to get funding for the next project that they have. And when someone does publish, like this gentleman who allegedly published falsified data, is there someone who goes over that stuff to make sure that that's not the case? Yeah. The editors of the journal that he's presenting it to. Right. But is there preferential treatment for people that are a stabbos scientist that are thought to be beyond criticism? Theoretically. A gentleman like this who has an enormous position of power and a 2.6 billion dollar budget behind him. Well, but look at the bottom line, which pharmaceutical company was involved in it. Yeah. Okay. Which pharmaceutical? And you know, that's one of the problems that, you know, our FK junior will be generating is that as he finds that this science is 70% you can't reproduce it. Meaning that it's maybe not accurate. Maybe there's a little bit of bias. That's being kind. I'm trying to be kind, yeah, because otherwise it's fraudulent, right? It is. Correct. I was just reading an article about Alzheimer's that was claiming that Alzheimer's didn't even exist until modern times. Statins. Statins cause Alzheimer's. Is that what you're saying? If you hear it. This article was connecting it to our diet, the standard American diet. And they were saying that all the bullshit food that people eat is contributing to this condition. And what I was going to get to you is that would lead to inflammation, correct? You got it because the bullshit American diet filled with crap is terrible for you. And that leads to inflammation. You looked at the inflammatory neurodegenerative diseases. What does everyone have now? It says a low inflammatory diet. Right. That's what he talks about. Also in high impact interval training and high impact aerobics, what happens is you can increase a chemical in the brain called brain-derived neurotrophic factor, which is something that helps to improve neurotoneuronic communication and neurology of your brain. And I don't know if you saw, we have one of your favorite guys, Gerald McClellan. I don't know if you've seen some of the papers that have come out. He had a stroke in 95 fighting a Nigel Ben in London. And during that fight it was a horrible fight if you've ever seen the... It's a crazy fight. So anyway, he had a stroke from that. It's hospitalized for 11 days in a coma in ICU in London. It gets out his sister, Lisa McClellan, refuses to put him into a nursing home, into a hospice health, takes him into the house in Chicago, and for 29 years dealt with him. She develops an organization called Ringup Brotherhood, where Muhammad Ali's niece and son, I think, a part of it. And they take care of boxers who are leaving the ring who have symptoms, punch drunk, or what do they call it? Pre-cocks or pugelistic, dementia pugelistic. And she contacted me and told me about her brother. And I looked at stuff and what we did was we set up a fund and we paid for his laboratory work and his initial assessment. And we found he was hormoneally deficient. So what we ended up doing is putting him on to the hormone replacement and to one of the peptides that we use, which is called NSCIL C-Max, which stimulates the brain to produce more brain-derived neurotrophic factor. He's in Chicago. I'm in California, or here in Texas, in Magnolia. And one of our docs in Chicago took the lead. I just gave her what to do. He's 20% better in four months on the protocol. He's now remembering things. He's communicating. He's on the phone and a boxing journalist, Oliver Fennel, came from London to Chicago and wrote a paper, which is called A Day in the Life of Gerald McClellan, and talks about what happened and where he's gone. And he's had some improvement. That's incredible. Yeah, phenomenal. 20% improvement. I'm sure we talked about Rick Perry before the podcast started. So I'm sure you're aware of his push to legalize Ibogaine and start using Ibogaine for people with traumatic brain injuries. And he was talking about how it regenerates neural tissue and helps people significantly. And then on top of that, the addiction issue where people have addictions and Ibogaine is incredible for curing those. Like literally curing them. And one in one with one session is in the 80% range with two sessions. It's in the somewhere around 97%, which is just crazy. 93 to 97%. I give a lot of credit to Rick Perry in 2022. They had HB 1802, which is the first bill in any state where the state put money into a research project at Baylor. It was for a civil assignment, is where he started. So it was Rick Perry, Andrew Mark, who's part of it, with Dr. Martine, shout out to our friend Andrew. Yeah. Hello, Andrew. And let's see, Dr. Martine Polanco, who I'll cycle back to because the Ibogaine issue is what he helped to develop. So it was also representative Alex Dominguez, who helped to push it through to get the funding for it. And it's at Baylor with a doctor by the name of Lynette Avril, PhD. She's, I believe, the one who's in charge of it. But recently, you know, we have ayahuasca. We've got Ibogaine. We've got LSD. We've got M and T.A. The Ibogaine seems to be really good for addiction and for neuro regeneration, which is what you were talking about to have proven in the neuro function. Downside is the cardiovascular. So it has to always be a very strict, very close observation. And the doctor that I talked about, MD, Martin Polanco, who has clinics in Mexico, uses Ibogaine. And one of our new vets who came on board in one of the other states, set up a 508 charitable organization. The eight is a religious organization. The imports Ibogaine from, I think, it's chilly and gets it here in the states and then sends it to Mexico to a doctor, Polanco, to do studies. So right now, I believe he has the largest group of studies. And one of the things that really has to be looked at is the compassionate use of these products. You've got guys that are coming back from war, who everything isn't working, you know, everything. So you have to start pulling the stops out and treat them. I mean, if you really want them to get better, especially when there's real evidence that there's not just anecdotal evidence that they work, but there's actual scientific evidence of their effectiveness. There's mechanisms. We understand. Right. So I think I showed, might have sent you a preliminary paper I'm working on on the neurotransmitters to identify how each one of the psychedelic assisted therapeutic agents work. in the brain. And the science is already out there. So what does it tell you? The foundation for how they work, why they work and how they work is already there. So why aren't we using it? Well, because of a stupid law that was passed in 1970 to punish Richard Nixon's political opponents. That's really what it is. What's it? Yeah, that's what it is. It was about the civil rights movement and the anti-war movement. And so one of the ways to get at these people, they knew that one of the big shifts of culture, if you go back to like, we talk about it at nausea on the podcast, but there's just a gigantic shifting culture from the 1950s to the 1960s. It's almost unimaginable. The amount of change it takes place. And what you have to imagine as a person today is 2015. Now, you think in time, things accelerate even more rapidly and change is more exponential. It's more crazy in time. And it's kind of sort of true with some technologies, especially today with AI. But if you go back to 2015 and if you were just driving around in 2015, everything is essentially the same. The phones look pretty much the same. The cars look pretty much the same. There's not much difference in your life. If you go from 1959 to 1969, you have a totally different fucking world. You have a totally different world of culture, totally different world of movies, totally different world of music, totally different world of automobile design. You have a totally different world that I believe is inspired by psychedelic drugs. And when Nixon throws the water on the psychedelic movement in 1970 and makes them all schedule one, including things that aren't even psychoactive, by the way, missed a bunch of really good ones. Mr. Bunch of really good ones that are still legal. One of them was a salvia, which is fucking bananas and insanely potent psychedelic drug that was completely legal. So if you look at it culturally, you see this shift. You see the movies get clunkier and goofy. You see the cars start to look like shit. You see the music starts to suck. It starts to be like real frivolous and very surface. It's very, it's cocaine music. Right? It's not, it's not Led Zeppelin. It's not psychedelic music. It's not the door. It's not Hendrix. It's not, it's not voodoo child. You know, it's something completely divorced from feeling. Right? And this is because of Richard Nixon. Okay. So you're basically saying the importance of psychedelics in expanding the visions that we have to advance our culture and society has been removed. Exactly. Yeah. I agree with you. You talked about the sympathetic use. Yeah. There's, you know, there's people, compassion use. There's people that are going to use things and they're going to abuse things. Just like you and I are having a glass of whiskey. Cheers, sir. Yeah. Okay. Playoffs. We're talking about playoffs. You bet we are. Get in on the action with draft king sports book and official sports betting partner of the NFL. Scoring touchdowns is key to winning the playoffs and you can score big by betting on them at draft. or its book an official sports betting partner of the NFL. Scoring touchdowns is key to winning the playoffs and you can score big by betting on them at Draft Kings. The number one place to bet touchdowns. Ready to place your bet? Try betting on something simple like a player to score six. Go to Draft King Sportsbook app and make your pick. New Draft King customers can bet five bucks to get $200 in bonus bets instantly. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to get $200 in bonus bets instantly when you bet just five bucks. Only on Draft King Sportsbook the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-GAMBLER in New York called 877-8-HOPEN-Y or text Hope-N-Y 467-369. In Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling called 888-787-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly on behalf of Boothill Casino and Resorting Kansas. 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance. 4 additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio. All the time. But we are responsible to refill. Yes sir. Okay. There you go. Get in there. You fucking drunk. I took my glue to buy. I did. Do you know you did? I apologize. I finally went back and listened to our first podcast for 38 from August 8th 2012. Damn that long ago. Wild. 13 years ago? Wild. It was wild. And the thing that stuck out was the glue to thio. So I started this morning with my glue to thio. So I knew we were going to finish this bottle. Oh well I'm not finishing that bottle. This is not a chance. Well I have stuff to do. Oh and I just worked out. Did you take glue to thio? I haven't taken it yet. Okay. I take it every night. Sure. If you got some go get me some. I take it every night. This is landal. That's what that is. Oh this I have to suck on this right. No brain risk. You number three. Is this your company? Oh man. That's our product. And that is our core product for fixing the guys with TBI. Yeah. How's the new flavor? That's actually good. Oh thank you. That actually doesn't taste bad at all. When you're eating something out of a tube. It depends on whose tube it is. Yes. In natural. It's not actually even tube. I don't know why I said it too. It's a packet. Like a ketchup packet. There you go. It's not ketchup. But it doesn't taste bad at all. No. But yeah you turn around the glue to thio. Decade to go. Decade plus. Yeah. Long time ago. Long time ago. But yeah because of meeting you I mean I really ramped up all of my nutritional supplements. You know I'm in a big way. Because back then when I first met you how to be 15 years ago right somewhere around there. Yeah. At least. When I first met you I was just basically taking multi vitamins. I wasn't really like strict about it. And then when you start doing blood work and explaining things to me and you know and breaking down the nutritional deficiencies like you need niacin you need this you need that. And I start taking all that stuff and it's it makes a significant difference. It really does. And I talk to a lot of people that are skeptical about vitamins and they talk to their doctors unfortunately. And the reality is that you're very educated in this department but many doctors have a cursory at best understanding of nutrition. Their specialty is their specialty if they're a urologist or they're an orthopedic surgeon. That's their specialty. And most of them are very unhealthy unfortunately. Correct. And they're under the illusion that you can get everything that you need to live optimally with a balanced diet. It's horseshit. Yeah. Absolutely. And you notice it eventually. Look when I go on vacation I've gone on vacation before like seven day vacations and not taken vitamins with me. Feel shitty. Yeah man. Like I feel different. Like at the end of seven days I'm like Jesus I need some fucking vitamins so I don't do that anymore. Now when I go on vacation I take vitamins with me. I'm like what's the big deal I pack underwear pack my fucking vitamins and I just make sure that I have everything that I need. And if I don't do that I don't feel the same. I think it's just the difference between being alive that you need it to be alive. No. But we're not talking about just alive. We're talking about optimization. And if you want to feel better and everybody does you should take vitamins and you should take a bunch. You should take a lot of different stuff. Yeah. Absolutely. One of the times you're talking about our progression throughout time back in the 90s doctors were against vitamins saying that it's expensive urine, expensive flushing. Yeah. You remember that? Yeah. And then what happened? And then all the signs started coming out saying how we needed B12 because our nutrition was devoid because the soil not being rotated devoid in the nutrients to feed the plants to give us our 5. I thought B12 was essentially from animals. It is muscle. Yeah. For muscle but talking about B complex really. You know you can get it in plants as well. but it's the trace elements as well, the minerals. And without having adequate amount in you got to replenish it. Right. And if you don't replenish it you lose important, you know, pathways. What about folks that are getting their food organically? They're getting like they go to a farmers market. They get really good organic groceries. It most of the organic people supplement the animals with quality supplementation food. I mean organic vegetables. Organic vegetables. You know organic, you can't have pesticides on it. You can't have heavy metals. So it has to be nutritionally enriched with positive soil. They might put additives in the food. Ideally like just a natural process of compost and manure and stuff like that. And that's where I use chicken shit on the market. I use chicken shit. It works. Yeah. I've got some great lemons and vegetables. You know that people used to go to war over bat shit. Oguano. Yes. Yeah. Like guano was so important for fertilizer. Not only fertilized, then it became the base foundation for lipstick and... I like that. Bat shit was the foundation for lip oil. One of them. One of them. You imagine kissing someone they got batshit. They had one of wars. Yeah. They really did have guano wars. One of them. Isn't that where bat shit crazy came from? I think that's crazy. I think that's crazy. I think that had something to do with how fever and people would fight in a war over bat shit. Is it fervent? Yeah. Whatever it is. Yeah. It's a good word. I like bats. There's a lot of words I don't use, but I read them. And then when it's time to use them, I'm like, that's the appropriate road. I'm like, how are you in the fucking way with that? Yeah. You don't think that's where the term bat shit crazy came from. It's a wonderful, fun link. I want to rule US agriculture and the world. How fertilizer madness sparked into a terrible war in turn. And to go old. Yeah, man. People needed that for fertilizer. Yeah. This is talk about the cosmetic use of wano. Found a view. The batshits the fountain of youth. It's what is it? The nitrogen composition of it is very good for growth of plants. This is interesting. It says, prior to modern science and agriculture, the wise in house of soil health largely were mysterious, how soil additives functioned or the knowledge of which minerals were needed and went was the realm of the blind beyond animal manure, farmers added soil amendments by the barrel compost, human waste, fish, coal, brat products, chalk or whatever unholy concoction was hocked by the latest charlatan to pull to pull up in a wagon at town's edge and promise a yield bloom. Decade upon decade, the pitfalls of fertilization tormented growers until 1802 when German explorer and scientist Alexander von Humboldt strolled down a waterfront in Peru and felt his nose hairs curl in a ammonia rebellion and an odor emanating from barge loads of yellow brown cake guano. von Humboldt was told the stinking bird droppings covered the nearby chincha islands in deep layers were massively popular with Peruvian farmers. So this is interesting. So that's how they started doing this. So this is an 1800s. Can I read the next sentence? Sure. Okay. A little dabble do you curiosity building the nostril burning von Humboldt took home a scoop of guano to Europe and turned the spigot on agricultural fountain of youth. I he sparked a vertical fertilizer war. He knows the interesting most interesting stuff about fertilizer is shit to me. Yeah. But the moment did you know that soil that they have in the Amazon that was created by man? No. Yeah. It's called Terraprata. And Graham Hancock told me about it. It's there's a very specific soil in the Amazon that they think people from you know, thousands of years ago figured out how to make. And this is like some sort of a compost process. And it's a very dark soil called Terraprata. And this dark soil that exists on the surface layer of a lot of the Amazon was put there by man. And not just put there by man, but created like they had a process that they have not replicated to this day. They don't know what it is or how they did it. But they're very aware that there was a process involved in making this stuff and that it's not a natural process of this stuff forming. At least that's what he said. But let me show him some Terraprata. It's pretty fascinating. Because it's a dark, yeah, darker. Yeah. It's very interesting because you see it. You know, like this is, that's what it looks like. So you see the Terraprata is on the surface. And then you go below it and you just get like regular dirt. But this Terraprata made everything very, very rich. And you know, it grew so much plants. It's just like, do you know that the Amazon is mostly human planted plants that grew out of control? Yeah. That's the original settlers of the Amazon. This is the theory. Right. So they know now that the Amazon was heavily populated. They didn't used to think that. They used to think that it was just this crazy wild jungle. And there's indigenous populations live inside of it. Well, one point in time there were cities. So there's grids. They found indications of, you know, some sort of transportation of water. They had, it looked like streets. They had grids that indicate the structures there all throughout from the use of Lidar. Oh, sure. So they fly. Yeah. So they, well, it's from actually drones. Oh, so they fly over with drones and they scan the area. They probably could use satellites too, but they use drones. They scan the air and even airplanes. They scan the area and then they get these images that show these geometric patterns that exist below. And so they've unearthed a lot of these. And so now they think there were millions of people living in the Amazon. And that what probably happened was Europeans came over and gave them all smallpox. Yeah. That's the theory. Just like they did with 90% of Native Americans. But what was done there was done in a place where they had made this environment with Teraprata and just because of the, you know, the lush rain forest is, so it's rains constantly and vegetation grow so well. That as soon as they were gone within a couple hundred years, everything's consumed by the jungle. And then you had lead thousands and thousands and thousands of years in the future. There's nothing left. And that's what they think they're looking at when they're looking at these large sections of the Amazon that have these patterns and structures that indicate civilization. Yeah. It's pretty wild. Yeah. I start my mornings looking at archaeology. You do. I get, yeah. I look at archaeology. But the archaeology that I look at in Lidar is in Europe because, you know, I collect ancient coins from Europe from Italy and Germany and so more than Spain. And I've seen the photos where they go over and they see the foundation. And as you said, in structures that are man-made structures. Yeah. So it's neat stuff. It just makes you wonder how many of those exist out there, you know, in the Mexican jungles and in the Guatemalan jungles and that we don't even know about. Total Texas texture. Yeah. My end. Yeah. There's probably a ton of them back there. There's probably a bunch of stuff because the Amazon is so huge. And most of it is not explored. Most of it is, you know, there's a bunch of different uncontacted tribes that live in there. In fact, my friend Paul Rosley, do you know Paul Rosley is? No. Do you see what archaeology? No. He's essentially working to save the brainforest and what he does is he goes down there and he hires these people that were loggers to have a new job and the new job is to protect the forest instead. And they've saved like shit. I don't know what the number is, but incredible large number of acres. They've saved this way and they continue to do this and they're trying to work with these people and try to stop them from just destroying the Amazon. I think sting donated a large amount of money to the Brazilian Amazon and a lot of entertainers who don't need a lot of money to protect it. So my friend Paul, he runs in the uncontacted tribes all the time. Really? Many times. I'd love to go there. He sent me a video the other day that I can't share. It's crazy. This is uncontacted tribes. These naked people in jungle in 2025. It's really wild. They live in isolation. Yeah. But well, you know, isolation from what? From us? From us? From us. Yeah. What they lived the way people lived, you know, 100,000 years ago. And I would, God, if I could be a fly on the wall, can you imagine the documentary? We get really good at drones. The point where you can have a bunch of drones that really do look like insects and fly them in there and film these folks. Yeah. And just without them being, but the problem then people would want to go visit them. You know, and then they talk everything out. Yeah. You have to keep it hidden like your video you were talking about because the, that's the reason why he doesn't want the video to get out. He doesn't want people to know that there's these beautiful out there. And there's a lot of them. He said, well, one of his friends was killed. One of his friends was murdered by these people. With the darts, with corrion. With the carrion. They could do that. But they, you know, they shot them with bows and arrows. They just fucking killed them. And, you know, this was a guy that was like giving them stuff too. It's like he was bringing over graphs of food and they're like, you know what? Today, fuck you. You know, we killed a bunch of fish today. We don't need your bananas. Have you seen them? Where the ones of the Indians living in the Amazon's, they're shooting down the, uh, the monkeys for food. Oh, yeah. They love them. They don't need anything. They've, they've already established a culture of, uh, hunting, harvesting and, um, building their homes or the building their, uh, you know what I found out recently? The term Indian is not because Columbus thought that he was in India. I've been told that in fucking high school. So what is it? It's the Children of God. It's, uh, what is the original term of indios? There's like a, a forget the term. Um, but it's not about India. It's just, they called them Indians because there are the people that were living here in this place that they had named. The indigenous, but it's, you know, like everybody thinks like America, you know, like you think of Native Americans, you know, that we used to call them Indians because they thought we landed in India, Columbus landed in India, or he thought he landed in India. Did you really? What's that? Yeah. The Portuguese word indios, but because Columbus was Portuguese. Right. But what is there? There's a term, though. There's a term like the people of God, the Portuguese words, indios. That's what the AI said. Yeah. But there's another term, there's something, something that has to do with indios. See, AI, I don't see AI is wrong about stuff sometime. Where did the term? That's not just, I just typed in the word, the word, right. Just just type in why are Native Americans called Indians. That's not going to get you there either. And what was the, the word? Indian. All right. So I was listening to this guy talk about this in a lecture. I wish I saved it. I, I absorb too much information and don't follow it through on it. The hot with her shredded post. It was this one was it say always in the impression that we use the term India because Europeans were mistaken in the land of India. However, this huff post article explains that it wasn't possible that we use the term Hindu stand for India. That's what it is. And that Europeans use the term India earlier on, which had morphed into Indian. That's right. It was India. So click on the huff post article. The name Indian and political correctness. 2007. All right. This guy was, it was a lecture. This guy was giving. Whoever wrote this could be the guy that gave the lecture. Could be. It happens. Right. Could be. The apple. What is he saying? What's his turn? Because there was something, there was something that had to do. That's right. Los Ninos in deals. Okay. We call them Los Ninos spelling. Maybe we want the children of God. The description by the pajre made something like the children of God. After many years of use, the word India was emerged into this day. The indigenous people south and central America are called indios. So this is what this guy was saying. So it said, stop. Scroll back. Go back. So it said, here, I'm a firm, believe it, the most historians are wrong when they credit Christopher Columbus for corning the word Indian because he thought he was landing ships in India by 1492. There was no country known as India. Instead, that country was called Hindustan. I think that it's closer to the truth. That Spanish pajre that sailed with Columbus was so impressed by the innocence of the natives. He observed that he called them Los Ninos in deals, meaning spelling may be wrong in the Spanish words, but the description by the pajre means something like the children of God. After many years of use, the word indios emerged into this day, the indigenous people of south and central America are called indios. I'm told that as the word wound, wound its way, north, it evolved into Indian. Of course, some will say that there was a place in the East Indies in 1492. And Columbus may have thought he was headed for that region. So how and when did the effort to politicize the name start? Specs some have started with Native Americans enrolled in some of the white colleges. I think they found the word Indian offensive and said about to remake it. They found that the word Indian was often used in a derogatory fashion, such as drunken Indian or rotten Indian. Perhaps the white people would have found it more difficult to say drunken Native American. Almost white people. Yeah, those dirty white people. They're a problem. Finally, when some Indian journalists made it to the newsrooms of large and prestigious mainstream newspapers, they reacted to the word Indian as they did when they were in college. They went to their editors and tried to impress upon them the paper should no long use the word Indian, but instead switched to Native American or native. Interesting. The problem even with Native American is native for how long. So like if you believe the bearing land mass theory that they came across that way, then in a lot of Native Americans, and this was actually tested because of Mormons. So there was a wealthy Mormon who spent a bunch of money on DNA testing for Native Americans because he was sure that it was going to relieve. It was going to show that they were from the lost tribe of Israel because he believed that, you know, the Mormon reaching is that like the Indians and Native Americans are lost tribes of Israel. But then he found out when they did the DNA testing, no, they're from Siberia. Like a lot of them are from Siberia. So that would make sense. They crossed the bearing land bridge. Their ancestors did and they wound up in North America. Well, my people came from a communist with those kids Russia. That's connected. Yeah, that was from there from Siberia. Yeah, we bought Alaska for like 50 bucks. That's like the deal of lifetime. They talk about century. Manhattan might be the better deal. Like financially, it's worth a lot more. But God damn Alaska is bigger than Texas. Alaska is huge. And you've gone there hunting, right? Oh, yeah. I've gone there a few times. It's an incredible place. Alaska is incredible. It's really, it's really wild. Like that's the last real frontier. If you want to get away, move to a small town in Alaska and go, go live next to Sarah Palin. I can see Russia from there. I should become Secretary of State. Remember when she said that she was in Russia, but you can't even see, you can't even see the rest of Alaska Alaska. Huge. What are you saying? Yeah. I loved it there. You know, it's gorgeous salmon fishing. The people are just different. And they're just rugged people. They're more reliable. They're built better. Like you have to like you usually like you know how certain genes expressions are turned on and off due to stress. Imagine rare genes. They're dealing with fucking grizzly bears and moose and shit. I'm sure you've seen this video of this guy goes outside of his house in the morning and two gigantic moose are duking it out in his driveway. Head to head. Head to head. But bouncing off cars and shit. This guy's like whoa. And he lives in a neighborhood. It's like this guy isn't in the woods somewhere like on his own. And he's in a fucking neighborhood. These moose are duking it out. I love that. In my neighborhood, the old neighborhood in Chatsworth, we had brown bears coming in. No, you didn't. Yes, black bears. No, brown bears. No, California. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, but brown bears have been extinct in California since the 1800s. The last guy in their black. Yes. The last guy to die from bear attacks from a brown bear was Stephen Levek. And he died in what's now Levek, California. They name the town after him. And it's right outside of Tohone Ranch. I'll have to say the picture. Well, I'll tell you what it is. It's called a color face bear. So it's a different, it's a different bear. Okay. So there's a brown bear, which is a grizzly bear in the Kodiak bear. Right. And you know, those bears, these are normal, but they're all the same bear. The difference between a grizzly bear and a brown bear is just mostly what they eat. So the brown bears in like Alaska have so much salmon that they have immense amounts of protein and they're the largest of all the brown bears. They're fucking huge. They're much, much, much, much, much bigger than a black bear. Yeah. We had parks and rangers come to our house because one of our refrigerators failed. So we had all this great beef in there. So I had to throw it out. Oh, and there's found it. The next day the bears found it. It was in the, you know, canister and they came there. So I took videos of these what I thought were brown bears coming in. So you're saying they're not. What's the, you know, they're brown color face. So brown bears can be, excuse me, black bears, black bears can be brown. Most of them are black. Some of them are even blonde. There's blonde color face bears that they find up in Alberta, but they're black bears. So a black bear is less aggressive than a grizzly bear. Okay. Grizzly bears a brown bear and they were killing so many people in California that they wiped them out. That's what happened. Well, this one jumped over six foot fence. Yeah. Before it jumped over the six foot fence, it ended up eating chicken and flaming yarn and ribeye and everything. The only thing it didn't eat was the garlic non. Well, tell you what, that bear is going to be back. It came back three times on the third time, uh, parks and recreation came by with a dart gun to try and put it down so that they can transport it to someplace else. Did they get it? No. No. It jumped over the fence. Yeah. I've never seen a bear jump six feet. Oh, they can move. This 250 pounds at least is up. What they said, well, they can move. They move very, very, very fast. It was unbelievable. It'd be amazing how fast they can move. Like when they're chasing after another bear or something's happening, they move very fast. And then there was a jump into our swimming pool. Mm hmm. It was just. Yeah. I had a woman. But in Pasadena, they have a lot of those. A lot of them in Pasadena. Mm hmm. There's a funny video of this guy in Pasadena. He's walking down a street and he turns into alley and he's just staring at his phone and he's walking with his phone and this guy gets to the life 30 feet of a fucking bear. Hey, just like freak, you see? You can find it. It's hilarious. Yeah. I was like 10 feet away. In Pasadena, like in full on Pasadena, not like the outskirts and the buds, the bush, right now. Like actual street city street in Pasadena. Black bear. Yeah. So what do you do when it's looking you face to face? Well, you, you usually make a noise and try to start alet and frighten it and get the fuck out of there. Like, hey, bear, you say, hey, bear. That's what people do. They say, hey, bear, the thing is like bears that have been accustomed to people. So that right there is a black bear. Okay. That is not a brown bear. The one that I saw and I think I never have it on my cell phone. But it was lighter than that. Yeah. They make the, like I said, they get even blonde. So that's a brown black, that's a color phase black bear. So let's see the difference though. Pull up grizzly bear. So grizzly bear is a completely different motherfucker. Yeah. So on the state flag of Cales. That's a grizzly bear. That's a grizzly. Yes. That is the brown bear that is no longer, look at the size of those motherfuckers. See, that's a big thing. The same thing. Wow. See the difference in the size. So that's a black bear. And that's a grizzly bear. Grizzly's are much, much, much, bigger, much more aggressive, much more dangerous. But interestingly enough, black bears turn out to be more predatory towards humans. So when a black bear attacks people, usually it's trying to eat them, whereas when a grizzly attacks people generally, like a large percentage of the attacks are, I'm good, a large percentage of the attacks are people accidentally stumbling upon a mother and their cubs. Mother, that's the worst case scenario. That's a protective. Yeah, you get near a mama bear. That's so terrifying. They, because they just try to eliminate the threat immediately. And they just go after you and fuck you up. They don't, they don't look at you and go, what are you doing? What's this about? They have to protect their cubs. And there's so much cannibalism in the bear world. They eat their babes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Male grizzlies eat cubs and they, they hunt cubs. And so there's so much cannibalism of cubs from male grizzlies that the females are always on edge. Cause everywhere they go, their fear is that they run into a male who's going to eat their cubs. Grizzlies are fucking ruthless. These assholes that think they want to bring grizzlies back to California, right? This is like a movement now to bring grizzlies back. Cause just like they brought wolves back to Colorado, these people are retarded and they've never spent a second in the woods. They don't know what the fuck they're dealing with. They don't know what you're bringing back. And what the consequences are going to be of those things. And it looked, there's places they exist and they're great. It's awesome. Go to Montana. You can see them. Go to, uh, you know, Wyoming, you can see them. Yeah. They're starting to make their way into Colorado. Front of mind saw one in a San Juan mountains. You got video footage of it. Yeah. I know you go with your archery hunting. There's no hunting of bears. Yeah. There's a lot of bears. There's no lower 48. So they're trying to change. Alaska. They're trying to change that in Montana because they have so many bear distances and, you know, and attacks and a woman was killed a couple years ago. She's dragged out of her tent. Uh, yeah. It's scary shit, man. And I'm not advocating for the eradication of grizzlies. I'm just saying that with our modern society, when they haven't existed in an ecosystem to reintroduce that to the ecosystem, you're, you're going to cause chaos. You're going to cause havoc. And if you want healthy breeding populations of them, good luck, good luck. Cause now everything changes. All your livestock changes, your dogs change, your dogs are going to get eaten. Well, anything you have a dog chained up in the backyard, that's meat on a stick. Yeah. That's a bit of a chain. Yeah. It's over. They're going to do that. And they're going to target your garbage. You're not going to be able to get rid of them. They're going to keep coming back. It's their dangerous animals and they're beautiful and amazing and important part of the ecosystems that they exist in currently like Montana and Wyoming, with its elk populations and a lot of food for them. Yeah. Alaska. Yeah. I personally can't see for myself going out hunting for bears or elks or moose. And I know you do that. But there's such incredible animals. They're just incredible animals. They are. Yeah. I just can't see if you don't. Put on down. The way they die without me is way worse. If I get them, I'm going to get them in an arrow and they're going to be dead in seconds. Yeah. If they get attacked by a bear or a mountain lion, it's fucking brutal. It's brutal. And the worst, they mean they might just freeze to death. That's how most of them go. I know. I shot an elk a couple of years ago that was 11 years old and he had almost no teeth left. His teeth were ground down because, you know, they're just, they don't live. I know. I shot an elk a couple of years ago that was 11 years old and he had almost no teeth left. His teeth were ground down because they don't live long and part of it is because they can't grind food after a certain age. Because no teeth. No teeth. Because their teeth are... I mean, they're just digging into the ground and pulling out shrubs and grasses and they're constantly smashing and smashing and over the period of 11 years his teeth had worn down to the roots. So you've gone after bears? I have a hundred bears before. You've hunted bears before. And you've eaten it. Yeah. What's the meat like? It's like beef. It's like a pig fucked a cow. That's what it's like. It's like a weird kind of beef. Maybe a deer fucked a cow. It's good though. But it's dependent upon the diet of the animal. So like the people that hunt grizzly bears and they've eaten grizzly bears or brown bears, they say they taste so fishy. It's almost intolerable. But you could turn them into sausage. You could do the right spices and stuff like bear sausage is great. But you also have to be careful because of chickenosis. So you have to make sure you cook it to 160 plus degrees to kill or to trick anosis. Because I know several people that got chickenosis from bear meat. Heart. Well, it's just parasites in your muscles. And it doesn't have too many adverse effects. It means very painful and brutal for the beginning exposure. You know, the beginning infection. But then the thing is like if you're a cannibal and you eat that dude and you don't cook them right, you're going to get it from him, which is really crazy. One of the reasons why don't you pick that you got after me in the last time we were here. Pig has a lot of parasites. Sure. And a lot of them aren't cooked to the level to kill the parasites. Sister's are co-sists and so forth. And trick anosis. Yeah, especially wild pigs. Yeah. You know what the number one source of chickenosis is for people in America? No, black bears. Not crazy. Think about how few people eat black bears. Yeah. But you know, number one source of chickenosis in America for people that test positive for it. So it's through contamination from food from eating them from eating them. Yeah, because there's a lot of people in hunt black bears. Wow. Yeah. Want to get really get blown away? What you know, it has the state has the largest population per capita of black bears in the country. Wyoming, New Jersey. Oh, way. Yep. New Jersey. New Jersey. New Jersey has an infestation of black bears. New Jersey, we play this video a hundred times, but these giant bears that are duking it out in a beautiful suburb of far rock away New Jersey. So it's like nice, nice normal, not like the woods. Yep. Not like, you know, fucking residential areas. Yeah, not the mountains. residential area, they knock over this mailbox and they're duking out in the street. Big fucking bears. Big bears. A guy recently shot the state record black bear in New Jersey and it was 800 pounds. Yeah, you should see it. Pull that video up the photo rather up with this guy's bear. So a pretty sure that was archery as well. They banned bear hunting in New Jersey with the new governor came into place that lasted for about a year. And then the human interactions bears were so frequent and so that they restarted their hunting program. It's an important tool. Look at the size of 70. 70 dressed. Wow. That's 770 after they gutted it. And they added another 800 pounds for its intestines and organs. And now another 100 pounds rather so they think, so it's field dressed the bear before it was officially weighed in at 770. So it's probably quite a bit heavier than that. Pretty nuts. Mm. Great. So if you see there's other pictures of it where you really get a better size of it. See if you can find some other pictures of it. Because that is huge. Yeah, some other pictures of have it laid out and there, you know, you could see what it looks is a fucking giant bear. But it's because they have so much food there. And a lot of these bears exist. Look at the size of that thing. A lot of these bears exist around humans. And you've gone after black bear. Not that big. Not that big. Not that. The black bears that I've shot are like 200 pounds, 250 pounds. Well, they didn't live like babies. Yeah, I know. But yeah, you eat them, man. And it's also it's an important part of conservation because if you don't control their populations, no one does. This is the thing about bears. They are the top of the food chain. So if you're not controlling them, no one does. And so what they do is they eat each other. That's the only control of bears is the infant side of the cubs by the males. So in the females, too, by the way, you want to hear a crazy thing? My friend Jonathan, he watched this bear in this female bear. Because so the male bear came around, the female bear is trying to fight him off. And she eventually can't. And the male bear gets a hold of one of her cubs and kills it. And she chases him off of her dead cub. Right. Then she eats her cub. Whoa. Whoa. Whoa. That's the real world. Whoa. That's the real world. She ate her cub right in front of him. And he was he came back to camp. He was like, fuck. Yeah. So that's the balance that has to be struck in where is it Montana where they had open season for for elk or for moose? No. Was it moose? No. There's no open season. There's no like which state was open season open season? You didn't need a permit. Right. They had a cold the halt. There's no way. They would never do that with elk. Elk is a very nice moose. No, no, no, they never do that with moose either. They would never do that with it. They wouldn't they do it in some communities with white-tailed deer. And the reason why they do it is because they're completely overpopulated and oddly enough, this happens a lot in the suburbs. Like there's places in the suburbs. Yeah. Where people there's like people who bow hunt in the suburbs because like look, if you're bow hunting, your arrow doesn't go more than a hundred yards. Right. It's not like you have to worry about you shoot in someone a mile away gets hit by a bullet. Right. If you miss. Yeah. You you're your arrow drops it arcs, right? Archery it arcs. Sure. So it drops down to the ground. It only goes so far. And so it's safer if you have competent hunters who are skilled to hunt in the suburbs. And you know, most of these suburbs have wooded areas. And they're infested with deer. So I think it was Pennsylvania. There's states that were bringing in bow hunters in New York and in all their wisdom, these fucking dorks. And in the area around the Hamptons, they have this issue. But the people are so fucking retarded. Well, that yeah. Well, it's just it's the Hamptons because they're rich. It's like if you have regular island, regular island, I would probably say yeah, we should hunt them because they're food. I'm from Queens. Yeah, there you go. So they decided they were going to just try to sterilize the deer and give them birth control. They were going to they came up always wacky concepts. But they didn't want to bring in bow hunters. But wasn't there in the last what? Five years, there was an overpopulation of moose or never. There's never been no. No, no, no. There's been times where they had seasons in winter for elk in Montana. And the reason it was a complete depopulation effort. So they had had this before the reintroduction of wolves though. So the reintroduction of wolves, which is in the 1990s has significantly impacted the elk population. And now it's actually more difficult to get a tag. But back then, they would have certain seasons that would have in the winter. So you'd be able to get these these elk that were out there in the snow moving very slowly in the deep snow. And you just kind of pick them off. And it was basically just a meat hunt. And it was a lot. They killed a lot of cows that way cow elk. And it was just a way for people to get meat. And also they were trying to put a dent on the population because it wasn't sustainable. So they would have an elk herd of thousands of elk where it really should have been like 800 elk with the sustainable sustainability of the area. And the bear couldn't keep up. They couldn't need enough of them. The mountain lions couldn't need enough of them. And then they brought and the wolves were way better than everybody else because they hunt together. And they started really chimping away at them. And now they've knocked the elk population down. I think it's in the neighborhood. They dropped it by 40% of plus. What would you need for reducing the elk population? Well, if you don't have a balanced ecosystem, right, if you don't have enough predators and you have a large animal like an elk, like a bull elk is an 800 pound animal and a cow elk, a mature cow elk is north of 300 pounds, 400 pounds. So this is a lot of food. And they can decimate vegetation. And there is a documentary that's kind of like poo-pooed by people. But interesting nonetheless. It's how wolves changed rivers. And it's all about how the Yellowstone ecosystem changed because of their introduction to wolves and more songbirds came in because there was more vegetation because the introduction of wolves, they killed off a lot of the elk. The elk had been just like maybe overbalanced in the fact that like overrepresented they were eating too much vegetation. It's all interesting. But what you really want is things to happen naturally. And then when there's a problem, you know, really the best way to handle the problem with this like an overabundance of these animals is to bring in hunters. The other solution would be to bring in predators. The problem with bringing in predators is if you have a predator like wolves that has been forever maligned because they go after livestock and they do target ranchers. Like there was an article I read today actually about these ranchers that were kind of optimistic about wolves being introduced in the Colorado and now they vehemently oppose it because they've seen the impact. And one of the reasons why they saw the impact is because the governor of Colorado and all this fucking infinite wisdom, he had a mandate to get these wolves introduced during a certain amount of time and they didn't have the wolves so they got wolves from Oregon that they had captured while they were praying on livestock. So these wolves were already accustomed to praying on livestock and those are the wolves they reintroduced into Colorado. They reintroduced wolves that had already been they had already been like naturalized to killing livestock. And so what they start doing they start finding livestock and killing them again. Are you thinking? But that's the thing it's like you're you're fucking around with nature and you don't know how this calculation is going to end. A good example is Australia. Australia is a fucking mess because they kept bringing in animals and then they'd bring in animals to kill the animals and then they'd have an overpopulation of certain animals so they bring in cats and now they have an overpopulation of feral cats. The point where they hunt feral cats. Like if you look at an Australian bow hunting journal, you know they have bow hunting magazines my buddy Adam Greentree shout out to Adam Greentree. My buddy Adam gave me a magazine from Australia bow hunting and I'm like bro what the fuck is this it's all cats. These guys are holding up house cats because they kill feral cats whenever they can because feral cats have decimated ground nesting birds and they've destroyed just a shit ton of native animals that were in that area. They brought them in to kill some other animal they brought in. It's like you can't fuck around with nature like that you don't know what the consequences are and when you do ballot box biology which is essentially what this stuff is. So the reintroduction of wolves is something people voted on. The people that voted on are living in Fucking Denver or they don't encounter wolves. They don't know what they're doing. It's like the same thing happened in Vancouver. So in British Columbia they outlawed grizzly bear hunting. Why did they do that? Because they mean man, why would you kill it? They call it trophy hunting but it's important to manage the predators and the people that knew this were the people that lived in the rural areas that were vehemently opposed to this ban and then what happens? Well you get ballot box biology, you get people that have no experience with bears. Don't encounter bears don't have to worry about bears and they say yeah let's not ban them anymore. Now you got bears breaking into people's houses and there's much more of them than ever before and people are freaked out. You can't do anything about it. Yeah I freaked out when the bear came to the house. Yeah it was like whoa you should see this fucking bear 250 pounds swimming in my swimming pool. Yeah going back and forth and then the Department of Parks and Rangers came came in to try and deal with it. Yeah they said stop feeding it. I'm not feeding it. I put the fucking beef into the garbage can because it's no longer you know it wasn't frozen. Bear kept on cut. Don't put it there where should I put it? Yeah we should put it in here. We've asked whole neighbors house. We have some guidance and no I don't go use his garbage and I got a bad neighbor. I'm gonna have to put it into there. Yeah you should dress up though dress up like a a flat member or something like that. No dress up as a bear to go into Rolls Royce to destroy. The Rolls Royce. Oh there you go. You remember that? No you didn't see that. Oh that's right a guy was wearing a bear suit and they brought in the bear expert and said that bear would not have gone into the Rolls Royce and sent those scrape marks on it. So this guy was trying to get rid of his trying to get insurance money. Oh what a bit of one. Yeah yeah I've learned right now so much more about bears. You know incredible. Yeah they're wild animal. I mean not wild just wild but fast I love them. Teddy Roosevelt and you know when he did his bear hunting loved it. Bear is such you know the scary way. Bear to run across is. Take a polar bear. Oh white bear. Yeah you know why? No because they don't need anything but meat. At least grasily bears. If you find a grizzly bear that's in a blueberry field. You probably don't have to worry about them. They're going to be. Oh yeah they'll be gorging on blue. But black bears and grizzly bears are omnivorous so they eat vegetation and they also eat meat. Polar bears are just carnivores and they're hyper aggressive. Wow. Yeah they just eat seals and occasionally people but they hunt people. Yeah no way. Oh yeah they'll go after you. They smell you from a distance to hunt you. Bed. Bed. Body older or something. Just you smell. Everybody smells. Yeah. You know you'd be amazed at how much a bear can smell. There was a video where my friend was in I forget what part of it. I think they were in Montana. Maybe Idaho and a bear was 700 yards away plus and the wind hit the back of his neck and the bear started running and he's like that fucking bear wind us. Like the bear caught their smell from 700 yards away. And went after him. No the other way. It was a black bear's run away. Yeah absolutely. Human run. Yeah well in any area where the bears get hunted they run away. Sure. You know like in Alaska if they smell you generally they run away because people hunt bears in Alaska. They don't have any experience with getting hunted black bears do but grizzly bears don't in the lower 48. In the lower 48 it's not legal to hunt them yet. But they're trying to chase these. Grizzly. Okay. Interesting. Yeah interesting. Great new information for me. It's important to know. Yeah. Being kids in a wild world out there. Absolutely. So wild world. And if you know you live in the city and you think it's cute. Let's go for a hike. You know something you mean a fucking mountain lion. Well we have mountain lions where oh fuck that you do. Yeah mountain lions. Bobcats. Dear bobcats. A lot of you have a lot more deer if it wasn't for the mountain lions. And that's what the wildlife lovers want. They want nature to balance itself out. The problem is they eat your cats and dogs too. A lot of them. San Francisco there's like 50% of the problem cats that they caught. They found that their diet was pets. Yeah 50% of their diet was pets. I lost two cats. Yeah. And the reality is mostly right. The coyotes. Yeah. With the ones. They were indoor cats and every now and then they would go out. Right. And gone. Yeah. Gone. Owls get them too. Do they really? They swoop in and pick them up and pick them away. The buddy mine has a friend who works in tree service and they found a nest and owl nest and was filled with cat collars. They're like 10 cat collars in there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We fit owls. We're in Santa Susanna Pass. Oh yeah. A lot of owls. A lot of owls are stupid. No. Yeah. They're dumb. You know that whole thing. It was wise old owl. They're one of the dumbest birds. They don't learn things. They're stupid. I talked to a lady who's a falconer and she trains birds and she has an owl and she's like it's the the dumbest bird I have. She's like this idea that owls are wise. She feels like they're the second dumbest bird. Who's number one? Forget ostrich. See if you can find it. It's in the ostrich family. It's another animal that's in the ostrich family. The ostrich is might be dumber than owls. They're really dumb. Always got their head in the same. Well, they're also big. Yeah. They're big. They don't fuck. But the other, and they kill you. What's kick you to death? What's the other breed that's not ostrich, but it's in the same family? Cast away. It's a cuss away. I think that's what's a cuss away. That's the one that's dangerous. They kill people. You ever seen that fucking weird bird? No. Is that what it's in there? Am I saying it right? Cast away. That's cuss away. Yeah. They're freaky looking man. They're freaky looking. Yeah. They're a big ass bird too, but they kill people. The people have died by being attacked by these birds. And what? Pecks them on their face. I think they claw them. I think they attack you with their claw. It might be their face too. Their face looks like a fucking hatchet. Yeah. Wow. Beautiful bird. Beautiful. God. Look at his eyes. Wow. Common mission at you. Yeah. Wow. Look at the comb. Google Casa-Worry kills people. And where did they found? Just in Australia? I don't know where that one is. A massive flightless emu-like creature. That's the word emu. As the most dangerous bird in the world, owing to the fact that it is it can seriously injure kill a human or a dog in an instant with his deadly claws. Yeah. It's the claws. Yeah. They just rip you apart. So they go for your guts. You know, that's the same. Yeah. Yeah. Look at the tips. Oh my God. They got fucking talons for claws. Geez. They can eviscerate a human being with a single kick. Although there's no record of this happening. Once a cuz of people are dead, they can run 13 miles an hour. So the 75 year old man who was raising one. Inflowor. He tripped and fell on it in the bird. Oh Jesus Christ. It's come to us. Yeah. Wow. Oh, that's a bird. I'm not going to collect. Yeah. What's the dumbest bird, Jamie? So it's what Casa-Worry. It's a, owls are smart when I Google our dumber smart lies. So they're almost as smart as a crow or a raven. Of course. But I did see some stuff saying they're not that smart for their brains or different, but they have really good eyesight and stuff. So yeah, they have. Just no owls are not dumb. Yeah. That's right. Lies. I was talking to the lady. One lady told you they're not. Two different falconers. If you have three, it's done deal. Two different people. And now you like in the last year, I hung out with two different falconers and their animals. Yeah, believe it or not. One of them had an eagle. Yeah. She had a female bald eagle. It was amazing. Dude, we, I caught it on my arm. You know, you put the glove on. You have to put a different glove for the eagle in the other animals because it's cat talons are so powerful. But having that thing land on your arm is crazy. The show bill might be the dumbest bird. Chew bill, even though it makes that cool. I sound. Oh, yeah. Cool. They're cool. Are you ever seen that fucking thing? A shoe bill? Two bills. They make a sound that sounds like gunshots. Like, they slap their jaws together and they stand like that. That's what it looks like. See how the other thing's standing up. The things like five feet tall. You imagine a five foot tall bird with those evil eyes and that giant face. Look at his fucking mouth. Look at that beak. Get a video of the dumbest bird. I mean, there's multiple articles for people. The dodo was really dumb bird. Yeah, dodo. But can you do Google shoe bill makes noise, shoe bill noise? Yeah. It's really cool. It sounds like a machine gun business. Black kings. So they kind of shake the bottom of the top of that beak or that bill back was in full shut the fuck up dude shut this dude up shut this dude up. How crazy is that? Now, man, I can't imagine. Imagine that getting a hold of your face. Imagine that or fucking massive. A vintage lower down. It's a big animal too, man. They're big. What's the height of it? I think they're like five feet tall. Five. Fuck. And then nuts. Wow. And they look like they're from a different time. They look like they're like you went back at 3.5 to five feet tall. Yeah. They look like they're from dinosaur times. Yeah. It doesn't even make sense. Like look at that thing. You ever heard of a terror bird? No. Terror birds used to exist like more than a million years ago, right? I work in human, you know, anatomy and human science. I work in meat fighting. Oh, yeah. I went in. You collect it out of each other. And I want to complain about what I was expecting to find some elk sticks out in your front. I've got some. Yeah. First time I had it. Plain. Yeah. Well, not complacent. But I asked them. They said it's not available. Jamie Google terror bird like yeah, the image with a human being. Where is it right there? So that is what they look you still look like. Imagine that. Whoa. A nine foot to 10 foot tall giant flight flightless bird. And they called them terror birds. Terror like T or or or or terror. Like he'd be terrified of you. I fucking can giant bird. Look at that. I'm scared shitless killing horses and shit. Terror bird. Yeah. It was huge. So where can we get what they don't exist in. When did they die off? Look at that. Like whoa. That crazy. Imagine seeing that 10 feet tall. Wow. Holy shit. I'll take two, please. Look at the size of it. That's what they used to look like. That's a recreation. Obviously. Yeah. Obviously. I don't know where that is. Based off of the fossil ones. Yeah. Yeah. Fossil room. What gear did they go extinct? 55 billion. Yes. Okay. I think it was a couple million. Yeah. 55 billion. Yes. Okay. It says right there when the terror bird go extinct. Senozoic era. What date was that? Okay. It was January 66. Oh, a lot more. A lot longer. 66. So the current geological age of Earth. Oh, it's the current geological age beginning 66 million years ago and continuing to the present. So when did the terror birds go extinct? Does it say when did they go extinct? How do you pronounce that word? I think it says a whole lot. How do you pronounce that? PA for a ruse. Citus for roost recidus. Well, how would you say it? You're a terror bird. I would say a terror bird. Oh, it's only thousands of years ago. One of them survived until they placed the scenes. Whoa. I mean, they could have been a longer driest. You know, holy shit. One of them survived until six thousand years ago or night. Well, between 96,000 and 6,000, I thought it was millions. It's a late place to see. Wow. 100,000 years ago. We're so lucky. Yeah. These are all male around. Man, aided up, right? No, I don't think any end of the calls were here. They were European. I think there's probably a bunch of assholes want to bring those back to. You know, they want to bring back the mammoth. That's probably next. It's pretty like they've been working on that, right? Yeah. Yeah. They'll probably just call it a different name. They won't call it a terror bird. They call it something cute. Yeah. You know, the conservation bird. He's going to make sure that all of them call it big bird. Big bird. Yeah. We're going to bring back big bears. Make him yell at us. People love him. I don't know big bird. I'm believable. Yeah. So natural world. So speaking of which, we're talking about ridiculous shit. And you are a doctor. I wanted to bring this up to you because Jamie and I were exchanging text messages yesterday about these mummies that they found in Peru that have three fingers. Nylians. Yeah. Well, they don't know what they are, but they have three fingers and not three fingers because they cut the fingers off. They actually, they're structured. Exactly. It's three fingers. And their cranial capacity, they have a large head, which a lot of times they think was due to, you know, they would form their head and like press boards to move their head stretch out, which they definitely didn't summarize. Chinese do the question is why were they doing that? And then were they doing it to replicate something else? That's it. So the thing about these is that they had a cranial capacity that is larger than most human beings. That's alien. It looks like a fucking alien. That's a fucking, that's correct. But is that real? Here's the question. Okay. Three fingered alien mummies. Click on that article and see where they're getting this. I know it was in, yeah, New York Post. So three fingered alien mummies found in Peru have fingerprints that do not appear to be human. So the fingerprints that it has, instead of spirals, I think they're lines. And Google, Google, go and scroll back to where we look at that image. That's X-ray image of their fingers. So these are like real bones and features. Yeah. So this isn't just a statue that someone made. Right. This says real bone structure that is exact to like what a human being has, all those little tiny muscles in the midhand. Right. I mean, that it all looks normal, but weird with the three fingers and three toes. And so if you scroll down, you'll see more images. So this is what it looked like when they found it. So the body is covered. Go back. So I could read that, please. It says the body is covered with diet. How do you say that? Diatomaceous earth. Diatomaceous earth. A type of white powder made from the sediment of fossilized algae found in the bodies of water. The only possible explanation for the unusually straight fingerprints could possibly have something to do with the way her skin was preserved. He said, noting that it's very odd. So the US medical examiners traveled to Peru last able to study the bodies with the lack of human fingerprints is puzzling. He said it would be extremely premature to make any statements about the mummy's origins. So they know for a fact that these things are biological and they're not created. Have they done any sort of DNA? Look at the picture of what it actually looks like. That's fucking crazy. Yeah. That does look like an alien. Yeah. I mean, that's exactly what people expect to see at their bed in the middle of the night. Yeah. You said it looks like an alien. Yeah. It is an alien. If it's real, it's so hard and not no disrespect to the post. But, you know, people bullshit. Not those, those, those I think are proven to be horseshit. But if you scroll up, scroll back to where you were, back to where you were, that thing. Okay. I want to know what that is. Like, what is that? If it's got three fingers and three toes and it's got an alien face, it looks like a gray. It has a tiny slot for a mouth and tiny dots for a nose. It looks like the archetypal angel or architiple aimed alien rather that people see in like close accounts of the third time, third kind. And what was that other movie? The Whitley Striber movie communion communion. I didn't see that one. That's a weird one because Whitley Striber is also a fiction writer. And he wrote this book about his own personal experiences with aliens, which I want to believe him. Yeah. That's classical impression. Yes. Face wise of an alien of a gray as you 100% even with the shape of the eyes are kind of slanted, like not like a humans, like they're at angles. Just like they always, they always show them what these kind of, they look, you know, they look guys, the harmonized large, you know, you probably aliens all over this fireplace. But that classic look is exactly what those mummies look like. So they have straight think, go back to where you just were. Three figures. Jesus Christ, how he pop ups and that crazy. He says the humanoid three fingered alien mummies have straight fingerprints that do not match those of humans. According to an attorney who reviewed one of the controversial specimens. Oh, an attorney said that. You believe him? I don't know. This is the rest of this game from this, because this guy didn't believe. I was saying, so he's like, we're going to go look. So Joshua McDowell, a former Colorado prosecutor and current defense attorney, examined one of the tiny strange bodies named Maria with three independent forensic medical examiners from the United States. Scroll. He and the experts are shocked to discover that the fingerprints and the ET live corpses were in perfectly straight lines. They were not traditional human fingerprint patterns until the daily mail. But what did they do in analysis of the tissue? Like the day you find out that it's actually a biological tissue. Can you scroll down further? It doesn't say anything like that. So I was trying to go to a different article. of the tissue. Like the day you find out that it's actually a biological tissue. Can you scroll down further? It doesn't say anything like that. So I was trying to go to different articles to find better. Some are forensic prosecuted and were criminal defense attorney. I've seen lots of fingerprints and these were not classic fingerprints. Look how weird it is. Look at that image. That's so crazy looking. Yeah. And also, how did I just find out about this yesterday? Like, I talked about it before. I know, but I never saw it look like this. What I saw were those other ones that I think have been proven. I might be wrong. But I think at least allegedly had been proven to not be real. And that the person who was exposing those, those little tiny ones that were like laying down straight, that guy had a history of doing some deceptive stuff allegedly. Yeah. So. But you believe that they're there. I mean, you believe that the aliens are here. I do not not believe do not not believe. So I don't just believe. Yeah. And bivalent as to the fact that they I believe that they're here. I wouldn't say I'm ambivalent. I am open minded. Okay. But you won't say yes. Yeah. I'm logical. Yeah. I think there's a lot of deception going on. Okay. I think there's also the possibility that what we're dealing with is not as simple as we like to think. Yeah, these things. So these things I've heard are bullshit. I know might be my be wrong. Well, trying to find out. Well, so that's that. That's information that that Jane that journalists that unveiled the bodies and the guy who exposed the bodies, the guy who exposed the bodies, I think was the one the guy who came up with it. That's trying to figure out how. So there's an issue of them being found in Peru and taken to Mexico. Oh, it's already that issue. Okay. And then where they said they were found near Naska in 2017. I'm trying to be like, okay, who found them? Yeah, that was the thing about that that alien look in one with the three fingers. That was even more interesting to me because that's that area where these credible patterns that are made on the ground that you can only see from space or not space at the air. Right. You can only see looking down on them. So it's like why would they even make those things? And some of them look like the images look like animals and stuff. Yeah, spiders and weird stuff. And some of them look like maybe even a person. Mexican doctors have examined two bodies and featured elongated heads and three fingers in each and same thing, three fingers. They found no evidence of any assembly or manipulation of the skulls. But other scientists have panned the discovery as an elaborate stunt. Milesson, 70 who touted the purported extraterrestrial is the most important thing that has happened to humanity has denied any wrongdoing. Scroll down. Look at that. How fucking weird? Yeah, I believe that there are aliens. Why do you believe that? Why do I believe that? Why would we be the only people on a planet when there are millions and billions of planets out there? And we've reached a level of technology that allows us to send a ship to the moon anticipation with musk to go to Mars and so forth. Right. How about there are other people on other planets who have accelerated? There have been millions of years longer than we have. Why isn't that they're able to come to us to see what we're doing? We're going out to other planets to see what was on another planet. I believe that there are other people out there. According to the UFO official, not all, by the way, as you say, according to UFO official, not all. I'm sorry, looking at you. You believe that? Yeah. The analysis showed that the humanoids are not related to any known earthly species and that one third of their DNA is unknown. Here you go. We'll take it and map it. Let's make a new one. Yeah. Let's look at this. Get those masks on guys and introduce some simmian biology into them and turn it into a new kind of alien. Yeah. Just do it 23 and me. It says, the specimens are not a part of our evolutionary history of Earth. The University of since distance itself from all saw and claiming its scientists took no part in the research and never came in contact with the full corpses. In no case, we make conclusions about the origin of these samples. The University's National Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry with Accelerator Sentence Statement. Okay. The presence of carbon-14 allegedly detected in the specimens, proved the samples were related to brain and skin tissues from different mummies who died at different times. What does that mean? Yeah. From one individual, is that saying from one individual, the presence of carbon-14 allegedly detected in the specimens, proved that the samples were related to brain and skin tissue from different mummies who died at different times. So they're all different, they come from different times and they're all different little mummies. So that's what they're saying. So what they're saying is that the carbon isotope dating is showing that that's what it is, right? Is that what they're saying? Okay. So how do you account for the fact that in Egypt and in the Mayan rooms so forth? Hold on, this is our buddy, Ryan. Us Navy pilot, Ryan Graves, who attended the hearing to share his personal experience with alleged UFO sightings, later slammed mouse-ons presentation as a stunt. He said yesterday's demonstration was a huge step backwards for this issue. Graves wrote on X, formerly Twitter. I am deeply disappointed by this unsubstantiated stunt. Well, he's a very legitimate guy, Ryan Graves is very intelligent. And if he's saying it's a stunt, now I'm super skeptical. He's a hit. Okay. He has a history of making controversial claims about other alien remains that have been wildly discredited, widely discredited. Okay. In 2017, he participated in TV documentary about other specimens recovered near Prus Nascalon, which experts have said to have been concocted out of modified mummies. So one of their talking about that other thing when they're saying that. That's all older than the one we were looking at. The one we're looking at, when did they find that one? When they find that, anyway. That's, it's said the same time. That's what I was trying to get into this and the sources aren't great. It's all, this is, they're all coming from the same area around the same time, but they all look different. Yeah, that looks super different. That one looks more like the way something you'd find dead. Like the way it's like, even the way its legs are rotted away. Like it doesn't look fake. The one video we watched or you sent me was getting more towards like, they could have been found in a burial type site that other groups used similar things. Where did they find this one though? This is the one I'm interested in. It doesn't say specific. But the fact that they did an X-ray and they show the actual fingers and toes. It looks just like real fingers and real toes with actual bones. That's crazy. Cubiform bones, the phalanx, you know, they're consistent with, you know, looking at a human hand. Right, but it's consistent with a human hand that would have three fingers, right? It doesn't have, yeah, there's not missing digits. So you say it's genetic abnormalities, so they only have three fingers? It could be. Well, there's a group of people in Africa that have like bird feet. Have you ever seen them? No. They have toes. It's like a genetic mutation that exists and it's thought to be like a prized thing. And these people have like two toes and their feet branch off like this. And there's a bunch of people in this village that have these feet that are like this. I forget what they call them, like bird feet or I forget how they describe them. Yeah, these are the folks. So see that? Yeah. So now if you found these guys and there's not just one of them. Substantial minority of vidoma have a condition known as extra, you say that, you're the doctor. Ectodactylia. Ectodactylia, which means the middle three toes are absent and the two outer ones are turned in, resulting in the tribe being known as the two tote or ostrich-footed tribe. So go to images and see what that looks like. It's really wild because there's like a bunch of them hanging out together. Look at their feet. So now if you found a body that had those, you would say, oh, those are aliens. No, but look at that alien. If you go back to the one that was original with the eyes and the face and the size. Yeah, definitely. These are grays. Okay. Well, it certainly looks like what I would think a gray would be. And the fact that it doesn't have a thumb is odd too. But that is also one of the things that people have said about these things. There's also these, they always have said that they have very long fingers. And you look at his fingers in relationship to the size of the body. They're very long, long fingers and very long toes. Yeah. I mean, how do you account for the fact that there are multiple, you know, from the Syrians to the Egyptians to the Aztecs, Toltecs, Mayans, where they have on their, on their structures, they have imagery of flying saucers, helicopters on alien, you know, there is a couple of with the, they look alien. I think they helicopter one I think is a fraud. You think it's all fraud. I think that one is. Why I think that's a photo shop. I think it is. But yeah, I'm pretty sure that's been shown. But the planes that they found that are like wooden carved planes like this look like airplanes that if they found in tombs, that's fascinating. They have a rudder. They have tail. They have wings. And it looks like a plane. Yeah. So how do you, that's crazy. How do you account for that? Well, I don't know what we're looking at. And I think there's more to reality than we see. I have a feeling that our senses are extremely limited. And that there's other dimensions that we don't have access to that might have access to us. I don't necessarily discredit the idea of something traveling from another planet. Right. I think we might be dealing with that too. I think we might be dealing with a bunch of different civilizations and entities that are at very different stages of evolution. So if life exists all throughout the galaxy, we know a bunch of things. Right. We know that planets have certain ages. We know that some planets are very old and some planets are much younger. And we know that some planets are much closer to the sun and some planets live in a very hospitable environment. We know that some planets like ours are essentially in a shooting gallery because there's 900,000 near earth objects or more that are flying around slamming into things. And if it wasn't for Jupiter, we'd be fucked. If it was a for Jupiter is an enormous gravity and mass pulling everything into it. That's like basically our catcher. It catches all the shit that flies into our solar system and slams into Jupiter. And of course, the moon itself is pocket marked with. So imagine a planet that doesn't have that issue. Imagine a planet that has a different environment where there's not a bunch of shit flying around. And they think that flying around stuff is largely the part of collisions, like planets colliding with each other in the distant past. And that's actually how earth got formed. You got a bathroom? Yeah, go, go, go, go, go, go. This is a good time. I'm less investigating this stuff. Jaimi's investigating. Yes, I'm excited. Investigate. Let's say go, go, go, go, go. Go, Pete. Come on, buddy. Thanks. To the left. To the left. Yeah. This dude's already lit. He's had three giant glasses of whiskey. He's 78 years old. Yeah, I got a clear picture of that egg too. I've got to hold my brain works that good, but I'm 78. You know what I'm saying? Like that too. He doesn't even know any notes. He just pulling all his information out of the ether. So the guy who took him remunerate. Which the egg? No, no. Fuck the egg. This is the NASK MOMI stuff. Oh, yeah. He said he removed as many as 200 sets that remained from the cave. Whoa. Some of the bodies have been smuggled out of Peru to France, Spain, and Russia. In an interview with Reuters, he said, this is from... What would you do? Let's ask this. What would you do if somebody got you one of them MOMI's, if someone say, hey, Jaimi, give me that money that you won from Shane? Oh, look at that. Whoa. The same thing though. Three toes. Yeah. Look how long the fucking toes are. I think that's where the X-ray comes from is these. Oh, it's the same guy, the McDowell guy. Oh, the same guy keeps finding him. Yeah, it's the same people. Well, Suss, right? They found about eight, I think, as a woman were saying here. And then the McDowell's father is saying they're having a hard time getting them to the US to do more studies. Oh, yeah, super hard. Got the fucking shit. I've already seen this. Let me call Elon disappearing. He'll shoot a rocket over there. Pick those things up quick. Let me see the skull again. Have they done an X-ray of the skull? Why wouldn't they do that? I had an X-ray. I don't want these. Oh, Jesus Christ. Holy shit, dude. It looks like the small ones, though. Yeah, but whatever. Look at this. Look at the eggs. What? What is that? Like the ribbons. Imagine if you found out those like anal toys and they just freaks. I do believe one of these they were saying was made up of different animal parts. Come sit down and put a microphone on. Yeah, so we're looking at X-rays of one of them was bullshit. Look at the fucking X-rays of the skulls, man. Like your doctor. Look at that. That looks like real shit. That looks like real. Yeah. It looks like real bones. It completely different. Yeah. X-ray shows it. The cabarian, the space for the brain. What is that thing across his chest? What's that thing? Instead of the sternum, it's their form of sternum. Yeah, I guess, right? It's like some sternum holes are two sides left and right together. Maybe it had surgery. Yeah. Maybe surgery and plant Jesus. Yeah, maybe that's it's like neural laces from. So this is I thought I was like digging more misses a slight, this is from this year. Look at that one. Look at that show that to Dr. Gordon. Mm-hmm. Look at the same thing. Different finger, the long fingers, long toes. Same thing, three. Yeah. And real similar in the way they look. Pro-less. So all these are coming out of Peru. They all came from the same area. That's well, when you disappeared, they said they've gotten close to 200. I need to spear him on. Here, well, they disappeared. It just went to the bathroom chain. Yeah, but now you've got your ears. Come on. It's just that bad. It's like he left you. Yeah. Look at that X-ray of the skulls, the skeletons, they'll rather. Those look so fascinating. Yeah, those look really. It looks very weird. This is what I was seeing too. The videographer isn't known. They don't know who shot this video. Mm-hmm. Well, it says the videographer behind the new footage is unknown in no small measure due to the thorny legal and ethical dimensions of handling these allegedly historical and culturally priceless ancient remains. That makes sense. I don't know exactly shot the video with their context clues in the longer version. One source who had also given, also been granted the tape told DailyMail.com. They call them Houghueros, who has long been involved in promotion. These Nascamamis was convicted of a assault on public monuments for taking artifacts in 2022. So if you take these artifacts, they go after you. The man received a four-year suspended sentence was fined about 20,000 Peruvian souls, 5,190 US dollars, according to Reuters. A clear example of the high risk extra legal measure some have taken to seek either truth or profit from these aliens. That makes sense. So it's dangerous to pull them out. You can get in trouble. So then I think that what I was getting too was the journalist. Has a lawsuit? You take it to Peruvian government to court, hoping to negotiate with Peru as he put it to be allowed to export the samples to be done in America. The lawsuit is already in for $300 million. Wow, explaining, he's pursuing monetary damages to repair his enterprises damage reputation, but it tends to spend the cash on a museum for the mummies and hookers. I want a Ferrari and a doctor McDowell himself has also recently pled with Peru's government in open letter published in one of the country's top newspapers asking for official permission to study these specimens at top flight scientific facilities in the US. Well, I like that. I like that at least he's trying to get them if it's true that he's trying to get them studied. But you imagine if you were one doctor who did find these things, you would receive a tremendous mass gap system and assholes like me, like making fun of them. West Hollywood, you're doing it. Interesting stuff, man. So when you look at that as a doctor, does that look like horseshit to you or is it real? No, it looks real. I mean, the X-rays that you were showing, you know, the fact that they came from Naska with all those lines and I know about it. And Machu Picchu, which is a really amazing place that they for today. Don't really understand how they built it. Correct. Alisim went there. Ah, Machu Picchu. Yeah. So she was joining on. She was true. Cocolives. Cocolives in a candy and so forth. But I gave her diormox. I gave her diormox so that she can actually, actually, diormox is the tablet you take to boost your throat. Port of the smushrooms get for that, too. There's a lot of things cooking. This is a pharmaceutical pill. But you know, in my mind, knowing that it's Naska lines and the association of possible aliens and then finding these, you know, these corpses coming from Naska, you know, you put one and one together and it makes sense that sort of it also makes sense that if you're going to hoax things, that's where you would hoax them. Correct. I got it. And that's skepticism that you have. Port. Well, I'm just being rational. I'm not being skeptical. I'm honestly not skeptical. I'm kind of open. So you don't believe that it's real? I don't know if it's real. Yeah. I like to think it's real. But that's the problems that I really want. So what do you do? You say it's not real, but I don't. I don't say nothing. Okay. I just talk shit. Yeah. That's what cats are here. I don't know. I'm not an expert in biology. I don't know. I mean, the skeleton looks real to me. But what do I know? If I was going to make a fake skeleton, could I do that with a bunch of like discarded bones? Maybe. What I'm skeptical about is the way the joints, they extend fingers. Well, not just the fingers. Yeah, but they look like ours, right? Like the same way. If you go back to that skeleton again, please, if you look at it in the X-ray, what you see is the bones, they're formed that are very similar to the way ours are formed, where at the end of it, not not the one of the actual skeleton Jamie. Yeah. So like, look at how the bones are at the top and where the joint is, that looks like how our bones are. Like the hinge in the joint of the elbow looks exactly like how a human is, except it's one bone instead of two, which is, let's be honest, probably a better design. Yeah. You know, the two bones that little are some great ones before. Yeah. A little one. A little owner. Yeah. I broke the fibula too. Whoa. Yeah. Small one. Yeah. The small one on the leg. And check it too. No kickboxing. Not even checking. I just, we're kicking at the same time. Let's put it this way. It hit my shin. It looks suggestive. Okay. Of being something that might be real. It definitely looks adjusted or something. It might be real and very unique, right? Very different than our anatomy. And it's our prejudice that says that, oh, we're the only people here. Well, I don't think that. What do you think? I don't know. Yeah. I don't. I think there's, I think the possibility that something could be so advanced, that all of our ideas of how it got here and how long it's been here are just silly. I think we might be just like these people in the Amazon that my friend Paul Rosley is running into. They don't know that he goes on the Joe Rogan experience in a previous 15 million people. They don't have any idea. They have no idea. So what do they say? They see some guy with clothes on like, what is this asshole doing? And, you know, he's out there in the Amazon and, you know, and then he takes a picture. And this is, they're experienced with him is probably kind of similar to our experience, but except like much more exaggerated with aliens. Like, if you came into contact with something that's a million years more advanced than us, like what would that contact be like? Would it, what, I mean, are we so limited in our understanding of how you move through the universe that we assume that everything has to use rockets and everything has to burn fuel and shoot things into defigravity by, you know, by pushing against it. Maybe not. Maybe there's much more advanced propulsion systems that exist. These are the hands. They're dissecting it. They're dissecting it. Whoa. What the fuck, man? Whoa. Yeah. Dissection. That looks like weird bones in a hand. That's creepy. That's so creepy. Look at their skin. I mean, obviously modified, but how fucking weird? How weird. Look at the bones underneath it. That's crazy. That is so crazy. And you're going to tell me someone put this together as a joke. Well, I don't know. I mean, I'm looking at this. I don't know. I don't know who's a part of this, but when he peels that back and you see those bones again, that is fucking nuts. Yeah. That's so wild. But also, why those bones so clear for a mummified thing, those bones look in my mind, they don't look mummified. They look like more recent. But what do I know? And almost looks wet. Go back to that image. Yeah, it was wet. Shine did a thing with shiny too. Right. So is that because they put something on it? Or is that what happens when you cut that thing open? I'll try to find longer videos. Oh, you know. I'm putting like distilled water on it during the process of dissecting it. Yeah, did I say that maybe they're trying to clean off the bones and they did something to it to brush it and so we'll water out there. You know, whatever that is, how old did they say that that was? That's a good question. Did they carbon date it? Or see, that would be the thing to do is the carbon date it to find out whether or not it fits that old, then it should be petrified and therefore it shouldn't look like that. Right. Right. Like if it's a million years old. If it's a million years old. So it's only 500 years old. It's totally different. It's totally different. So the way that the bone can look. Yeah. It's weird as shit. Yeah. But the thing is like there's so many people that essentially make a living off of line. They make a living off of bullshitting. You know? Yeah. There's a lot of that going on. Yeah. So religiously, I mean, look at from a religious standpoint, what's the impact of acknowledging that there are other species in extraterrestrials? What's the impact on religion here in the United States or here in the world? It depends on which religion you're talking about. But this matter. I think the Vatican has been pretty open to the idea that we're not alone and that God could possibly have created other life forms. So I see that's true. I'm pretty sure that's true. I think the Vatican gave a statement within the last decade or so about this. Yeah. But they probably know some shit, right? Yeah. They probably have it. You know how to avoid an ancient... You've seen some of the Russian studies that I mean, where they had aliens who crashed in a flying saucer and they abused the aliens. Vatican astronomers says if aliens exist, they may not need redemption. That's cool. Jesus gave them a Falcon long pass. Let's hit be those who come from other planets. They may be a different life form that does not need Christ's redemption. Vatican chief astronomer said, that makes sense. I mean, if they come from somewhere else. Difficult to exclude the possibility that other intelligent life exists in the university, noted that one field of astronomy is now actively seeking biomarkers, and spectrum analysis of other stars and planets. That's true. They definitely have done that. These potential forms of life could include those that have no need of oxygen or hydrogen. Just as God created multiple forms of life on earth, he said there may be diverse forms throughout the universe. That makes sense. That's an open mind to religious person. It's not in contrast with faith because we cannot place limits on the creative freedom of God. That makes sense. Yeah, if you're going to be logical and be a believer in God, that's the way to do it. To say, look, if God exists, we just might be too limited in our understanding of the world to think that we think that God just made us and this is it, but it might be God has made life all throughout the universe. If you believe in God, you have to accept the fact that he's on other planets. We're not the exclusivity. Maybe God is the universe. Well, that's what they've been saying. God is the universe. The universe is God. Yeah. Which makes sense because the universe is a creative force. It makes things constantly. It's constantly making stars, there's stellar nurseries and planets. So what should take on Bigfoot these days? I think Bigfoot is mostly nonsense. That is a historical memory. I think for sure we know that Gantopithecus was a real animal that co-existed with human beings. And we know that it was the date of a gigantic pithagus. It's more than hundreds of thousands of years. But it just makes sense that if human beings have been around for that long, and that thing's been around for that long. And then 200,000 years ago, two million to approximately 300,000 or 200,000 years ago. So it's recently as possibly 200,000 years ago, but that's essentially based on what they found. Now they're constantly finding new things. Right? So like they didn't even know Denisovans were a thing, which are a new type of human. Except the gigantic pithwise. No, they're not gigantic. They're just a different like there was Neanderthal, homo sapon. Denisovan was another branch of the human tree. And they didn't discover them. I want to say 2010, when did they discover Denisovans? I think they discovered them in Russia. And they found them in China. And so they know that there's that. And then there was another species that they found recently that's even more recent. That's large-headed people that were, they had larger heads than us that existed with us. They had like big fucking eyebrows and big heads. What about that? They're what? 17 feet tall, 16 feet tall. What's that? Gigantic humans? That's it. They're, you know, I don't know. It's that. It's the problem. Here's the problem. You don't know what is real. What was Denisovans? When they discovered that? Well, they discovered that. They were, they lived this thing 75,000 years ago, but how far old would they differentiate? They were like Neanderthals. When they discovered Denisovans fossils. That's how I'm trying to figure out. They had it's, it's one piece they found. Right. But it was pretty. It was pretty. 2014. Yeah. You're right. There's a lot of shit that's coming on the internet. The last thing that I was reading in that last, but one of the things that I read was they found a bones of people that were like giant people. Giant people. Yeah. I've joined that before. I've never seen any of it. I wouldn't dismiss it. You know, there's giants in the Bible. There's giants in historical record. The life. Talk about that. Yeah. Yeah. It's completely possible that if you have pygmies and you have, um, you know, no, no, no, but they have it people on the island of florias. No. You didn't know about that? No. Um, hold it. Yeah. I think they call them homofory, fori esesis. And what these are is these little tiny ape-like humanoids that lived alongside people. I think they've dated them to 100,000 years ago might be earlier at the one point in time. I think they thought it was 10,000 years ago, but I think they pushed it back. Um, but these were like another branch of the human tree. And they were really tiny and they used tools and they hunted and they think that, you know, that they were probably wiped out at least partially. Yeah. Homo, florias, and cysts. florias, and cysts. And that's what they looked like. And they lived alongside us. Um, so they think that might be a case of island dwarfism as well. You know, like, uh, there's a thing that happens to mammals when they're on islands where they get smaller and, um, weirdly enough reptiles get larger. That's why you have Komodo dragons. Love them. Pretty cool. Right. So there's homo sapien and there's homofory eses. Minds for lizards. There's like a bunch of different types of humans that existed. And we were the most clevered and the most vicious. We went, huh? Far below the fittest. Yeah. And the smartest. We're the smartest. We're the ones that are the most. The Calvarian. The size of the skull has got bigger. But the thing is, these ones that they found recently, see, you can find that article, the large headed people that they found recently, another totally new branch. They're large headed. Large thing height is, same height. Same height as ours, but larger heads probably much stronger. Like, you know, Neanderthals far stronger than us. Yeah. Dubbed large headed people, hitting mad at group once lived alongside homo sapiens in eastern Asia. According to science alert, fossilized remains unearthed from sediment layers dated about 200,000 years ago revealed individuals with disproportionately large cranial volumes. So see, click on that. We have images. 2024. Just last year. Yeah, real recent. Yeah. Real recent, they found this or they. It's proportionally large cranial volumes. So, click on that. We have images. 20, 24. Just last year. Yeah, real recent. Yeah. Real recent, they found this or they've come out with this. I think they had images of what they look like, what they think they look like. Like someone did like a detailed, oh, large, hey, if you we get regular folks. Is it regular folks? Unfortunately, big heads. I got him. Yeah, homo, juliesis. Yeah. So this is another branch. Look at the size of that fucker. Jacked. New humans. Yeah, wild. Big heads. Larger heads and bigger brains. There you go. Bigger brains in us live 200,000 years ago. It's funny because we have them like with like a stupid stone tool. Like maybe they were smart. Maybe we just fucking wiped them out. Look at the size of our heads though. Jesus Christ. Crazy. Look at that one there. He's got a six pack. You guys stand there. We have the one down where he's walking like big foot. Click on that. This guy's Jack. Yous. Imagine running. I said, I said, he's fucking in his. Look at that. Yeah. Imagine running that dude. No. He's dead. Yeah. He's probably why. Look at him standing there. Yo, this is your baby photos are helping. That was awesome. Yeah. Yeah. I just have a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit. Look at that. Make that baby. Spees here. Come on on this, do you know? Look how fuck it. Oh, the whole little little low in this spinyard. Bro, could you imagine? Yeah. Walking through the jungle and running into these dudes, like a bunch of them. Yo. Oh, what do you want? Look at imagine. Yeah. There is so much more to be found. You know? Well, just in our own history, right? The history of earth, the different forms of life that don't exist anymore. And you know, there's so much variety that it really does make you wonder. Like, what are we seeing? We're seeing these alien bones that they're X-Rang. What are we seeing when people report that they're experiencing contact with these entities? Are they from another dimension? Are they from another planet? Is everybody crazy? Is everybody just making things up? Yeah. I don't know. How do you account for all the people that said I've been taken? Yeah, it's very compelling. I've been taken. It's very compelling, but here's the question. Where they physically take them. Here's the question. The realm of dreams is a gigantic mystery. And the realm of dreams is hyper-realistic sometimes. I had a hyper-realistic dream last night. I wish I could remember what it was, but it's one of those things. It was crazy. But I got up in the middle of night, it woke me up and then I got up to pay and I was like, what the fuck is wrong with me? And then I went back to sleep. But while I was experiencing that dream, I remember being aware that it was a dream eventually, but while it was all going down, I was like, this is a crazy dream. Like thinking like this is so vivid and so realistic. So if you live in a dream for the rest of your life, you are still alive and you are still experiencing things. You're just experiencing things in a non-physical way, the way we interact with reality today. So you and I are interacting with reality with a couple glasses of whiskey, cigar, we have a wooden table, we're talking into microphones. But the reality that you interact with in dreams is it's not tangible. It's existing, you're experiencing it, but it's in some other realm. It's some realm of the mind and some realm of consciousness. And maybe what you're doing is accessing a dimension of possibilities that is entirely created by consciousness. And maybe there's multiple layers to that and things can come from other places to us that way. It's always been interesting to me that these people that have these abduction experiences. It seems like the vast majority. I've read Abducted, which is John Max book. And I'm aware of the Betty and Barney Hill story. And this is Travis Walton, the guy who got abducted in there. There's a black and white couple. No, the Betty and Barney Hill. Benny Barty Hill. Actually Angela Hill, who's the granddaughter of them, is a UFC fighter. Oh, really? Yeah. She was on the podcast and didn't tell me that until after the podcast was over. I'm like, damn. Yeah. What's your grandfather? That's so crazy. Her grandfather was Barney Hill. But so these people all have very compelling stories. Now the difference between Travis Walton story and the other stories is people saw Travis Walton go up to that UFO. Travis Walton disappeared for five days. Travis Walton came back from being in the woods for five days with this crazy story. And the other people, most of them, it happens at night. Right. And so when you're dreaming, like who knows what the fuck is really happening? And if you're lying in bed and you get abducted by aliens and they return you to your bed, like what really happened? Is there a video of you disappearing? Or if we had like a video in that room, would you have the same experience, but your physical body never goes anywhere? It's like, what are you really experiencing? Yeah. That's the question. And I'm not doubting that these people have something happened to them. But we do know that when people are dreaming, there's an endogenous release of psychedelic chemicals. There's this crazy experience of dreams and of vivid dreams and lucid dreams. So what is that? And if that is something that can be traversed, is that something that someone can enter into? Is it possible that other intelligence that's different than ours? That's more advanced than ours that lives in a different dimension than ours has access to the mind in these exchanges. Yeah. In the subconscious. Yeah. And maybe physically. I'm not even dismissing physical contact, but I'm just saying that many of these cases where people claim to have been abducted happen at night. I don't think that is a coincidence. I think that the realm of consciousness is, I think we're very arrogant in our belief that we understand what's going on. We don't. How we interface with reality. No, we don't. We know we have consciousness. We count on because every time I come here, I'm pretty sure the same garbage is going to be on this table. It's going to be the same. But I don't think we're really sure with how consciousness interacts with the world and how much of it is real. I agree. In the subconscious space, you know, the question is, is that when the extraterrestrials invade our space, our psychiatric space, and therefore in in gives to us in our brain, the perception of everything that we perceive, meaning the alien, the maybe even pictures. What else would be? Everything. But maybe that's what Bigfoot is. Yeah. But it, you think so? Maybe. I mean, maybe something conscious, maybe something you're experiencing that's from somewhere else. Like, maybe it's your consciousness interacting with reality in a completely alien environment that is guaranteed to give you a heightened sense of anxiety, the woods at night. A lot of these people are experiencing these things in the woods at night. Maybe there's a level of consciousness you reach under those circumstances where you interact with things that you ordinarily cannot interact with. And maybe that's why there's a lack of physical evidence in our dimension. Like, the physical evidence in our dimension is very limited. One thing that's compelling and maybe the only thing that's compelling is dermal ridges that they find on these footprints. So they find these footprints in muck, like whether they step in mud and rock and stuff, and they leave behind not just footprints, but footprints with dermal ridges like fingerprints, which is very difficult to fake, especially in like the 1970s and the 1980s, or some of these things were required. So it's like, I don't know what we're dealing with, but there's enough people that talk about that experience and it makes you pause. I don't believe, but I don't disbelieve. And as far as Bigfoot being an actual large ape that lives undisturbed in the Pacific Northwest, I'm very skeptical because there's too many hunters now. And too many people with cameras and too many camera traps, there's too many cell phone cameras, you know, where they trail cameras, snap things that are going by, wildlife biologists use them. We know of like a couple of jaguars that exist in the United States, and the reason why we know about them is because the trail cameras. So the fact that there's zero trail camera footage that's, yeah, it doesn't, the Bigfoot thing is like maybe. But maybe you're interacting with something that's not physical. It might be something that's interdimensional or something that you, you might be looking at the past. You might be interacting with whatever experience this thing has had many, many, many, many years ago. It's like left echoes. It might be echoes in space and echoes in time and that under certain states, you can briefly access these echoes, briefly access these things that may have existed or might exist in other dimensions. I'm not ruling it out. Yeah, I wouldn't bet the house on it. Wow. I wouldn't bet the house on it. Yeah, that's something. I do think there's a lot of bullshit artists too though. I've talked to a lot of big, sick people that are bullshit artists. The balance that obviously you're talking about is the fact that there are so many people who are trying to present the factual evidence that it exists causes you to doubt it. I believe that there's a possibility of all the things that we talked about from Bigfoot to aliens and so forth. But there's a tempered perception of it as being reality that it might be there, but we would rather deny it as opposed to accept it because what happens if you accept it as 100% truth. What is the mindset? Well, you can't accept it as 100% truth in what you have. You have 100% evidence. Yeah, you want to have physical evidence, but we don't have it. So, you know who really believes in Bigfoot? No. Jane Goodall. Oh, okay. Which is a growing lady. Yeah. Did you ever heard her talk about it? No, why does she believe in it? She believes from all the eyewitness sightings and the possibility and her time living with primates. Right. So you can find Jane Goodall talking about it because when she talks about it, she talks about it. She talks about it. She's a great enthusiasm. It's really interesting. I enthusiasm with facts to back it up. Well, just the large number of people who have stated that they've seen it or experienced it or, I don't know. Yeah. One thing though is like when she was saying this was quite a while ago, like more than a decade or two ago. And I think that, you know, over time when there's still no evidence, people get more and more skeptical. I've talked to a bunch of people that have had big foot experiences. I don't necessarily believe any of them. I don't disbelieve them, but I'm like, there's not ones to I've talked to UFO abduction people. Right. I believe them. I believe you believe them. Yeah, I believe Travis Walton. I talked to that guy. He does not seem like a bullshit artist and he hasn't changed his story in like, fucking 30 years. Big foot. People. He talks to me. I would I'm romantic. I would like big foot to exist. I've met people who swear they've seen big foot. And I think the interesting thing is every single continent, there is an equivalent of big foot or Sasquatch. There's the Yeti, the Sighari and Australia, the Chinese wild man and on and on and on. And, you know, I've had stories from people who have to believe them. So there's something I don't know what it is. I've always opened my mind. What about? Yeah. Oesily mythological. I guess I should say like the Loch Ness monster. The Loch Ness monster obviously does exist. It'll be. Alien beings, which is a universe. I don't. I think that it doesn't make sense to think where the only intelligent form of life, this wall that was built between us, where we're just the only really intelligent capable of this step and the other. Different thing kind between us and the other animals, that wall is broken down and the chimps help to break it down. Do you think the chimps helped to break it down? Well, her experience with chimps, you know, she's been embedded with chimps. Yeah, I definitely don't not believe. I think I said, I don't disbelieve. It's not like I say aliens aren't real. You have foes aren't real. It's all lies. All the people are lying. I don't think that at all. I think the, I think reality is weird. I think it's weirder than our senses are capable of detecting. That's what I think. Absolutely. I tend to be more on the side that they exist until you prove that they don't exist. You know what's really weird is underwater aliens. Underwater extraterrestrials or underwater. Oh, the city's APs. Yeah. I don't know about cities or cities under there. Yeah, cities where they have their spaceships at the trenches in the trenches. Yeah. I've never seen any data. No. Yeah. But I have seen that at the point. There's videos to see things moving underwater at very high rates of speed. In fact, some of the whistle blowers and again, how much that's real. But some of the whistle blowers from the government have claimed that they have detected things underwater that are enormous like the size of a football field and they're moving 500 knots underwater with, which no visible means of propulsion. Correct. They think that this is where they hide and play inside. It just exists in the water. So those videos that have come out recently of the Navy aid theaters who have chased UFOs that have gone into the water and they've seen these large reflections under the water of huge spaceships and so forth. I haven't heard any of like I've heard there was the commander David Freaver, the tiktak event where there was this thing that was like 20 people wide. It looked like a tiktak and they think there was something under it in the water. There was a disturbance that looked like, you know, like an underwater submarine that's emerging or reaching the top of the surface. And then when they were flying near it, it went down and then there's been other people, other pilots that have actually seen large physical crafts in the water. But again, I've never seen any photos that are compelling. So chasing the UAP, that's fascinating. Is that real or is that the thing? What do they call them? Extra medium and intermediate. Trans medium. They call them trans medium. The trans, which means they can fly in the air and they can fly through the water. They have seen things dunk into the water. They have video of one, but it's very grainy. It's very grainy night vision, thermal vision of this thing, dunking into the water. And then they don't know what happened. Then it came out of the water. It was flying around again. They don't know what the fuck that is. They're just guessing. And looking at the physics of it, the fact that it was able to do a 90 degree change emotion. Oh yeah. And down into the water and then coming up. How do they crazy for that? You don't. Yeah. One is the tiktok. Because the tiktok, they have a bunch of different types of data. They have, first of all, the pilots who saw it, they have the video of from the pilots cabins. They have this radar footage that tracked this thing going from above 50,000 miles to 50 feet in like one second. They don't know how to fuck anything can do that. Then it takes off. When they video it, this thing taking off from their visual, from their recording, their screens. It takes off at such an insane rate of speed. They said anything biological would be just be turned to jelly. Yeah, kill because of the g forces being sane. It's just insane rates of speed. And no visible means of caution. It does it from a completely stationary perspective. And then it takes off. Yeah. Yeah. They've talked about dimensional, the fact that those unidentified flying objects, they go into a different dementia dimension as well. They're in a stated dementia. Yeah, this is the one that goes in the water. So look how grainy this is. It's like, what am I looking at? So the fact that it's grainy means what? Well, they're just looking at it from a long distance with aircraft. So optics. So these are weapon optics. So graininess means it's less dark. Dark. Well, it's dark out. And this is how they're seeing this thing. And then it just goes into the water. And if you hear it, you hear the recording, hear the recording, Jamie. Yeah. Listen to them freak out when it. Yeah. They're tricky. Right into a water. So the thing went into the water. And then also when I was two tech. Yeah. But the thing is how many of these things are ours? Not zero. How many of these things? Have you ever seen that underwater drone that the United States has developed? No. It's kind of one cool. It looks like a UFO. It's a UFO that flies underwater. It goes underwater. It's not. I don't think it goes above the water. I think it only goes underwater. But it looks like a spaceship. Yeah. But with the rate of acceleration and the ability to change direction, you know, those are things that are in the reality in the real world, you know, the physics behind it, as you said, everyone if that went in that rate of ascent or descent and movement, it would kill everybody inside. Right. Momentum. But then the question is like, what is it doing? Is it actually experiencing G force at all? Because if it's some sort of a gravity propulsion device, it might be experiencing no G force. And it might be just pushing space out of the way as it moves forward. We don't understand. That's like, do we have that technology? It's a good question. Yeah. It's a good question. If we have that technology, then it explains it all. Yeah. As long as we don't acknowledge the fact that we're at that level of technology, then you have to account for where's it coming from? Right. There's definitely a lot of questions. I mean, I definitely don't claim to have any answers. Yeah. What is this one? But it's cool. That's a ray thing. Oh, yeah. Look at this. This is the one that goes. This is a drone that we developed. It's like a Manta ray drone. It's really cool. It's not so many. It's pretty big. But look at it. It looks like a fucking UFO that goes under the water. And it flies through the water. And also, like, what are we looking for? Are we looking for foreign subs? Or are we looking for aliens? Both. I wonder. I wonder. I wonder. That's imagine if they knew some stuff was under the ocean and they don't want to tell anybody because they don't want to freak people out. Duh. Yeah. Duh. Yeah. I've seen articles where it talks about cities, communities, underneath the ocean, and the sanitrade and that sanitrade's fault was that fault line called not the fault the, uh, that's out of California? No, no, no, the deepest, uh, marriage is the Marianne of trench. Yeah. That there are cities down there? What are, what? Little website, cherry. Well, I think I know what a zogger at the moment. You know what I'm talking about? Yeah. Yeah. You're not the reason you say suicide, man. No, or I began or Raya waska. No. Normal. So just know. I haven't heard anything about cities in the Marianne of trench. Jamie have you heard anything about cities? Yeah, look it up. Oh, I know. I'm headed. You know? I'm heading on the seats, you channel. I haven't smoked anything or taken any pills. You've been drinking whiskey since that's nothing. Come on. Quite a bit of that whiskey. Ah, nothing. That's a lot. Glutithion. Yeah, I don't know if it totally helps. You sound a little hammered. You think? Yeah, give me another one in the glutithion. You need another one? Okay. How many you got? Yeah. How many do you take? I took one early this morning and it just took another one because I figured we'd finished the bottle. Jesus, you with the finishing the bottle. Absolutely. You're going to die from that. Nick who's sitting outside, hit and I sit down and we'll drink a bottle. Yeah. You know, over a period of about four hours. You might want to go to a A-A meeting. You think? I've been there. What is the Marianna Trench Cities all about? No, it's not to Marianna. It's one of the trenches that are out there in the world. Just Google Trench. Yeah, underwater and over. And you're full of people. Yeah, that's a good one. You're going to go right to Reddit. Yeah. You know what? I'm just on this discussion about bears and Marianna Trench. And UFOs and abductions and so forth. Fun stuff. Yeah. It reminds me of 438 where we were talking about every fucking day. I mean, you blew me out of the water with that. I'll tell you the truth. We were there for three and a half hours on the first one. And when I left the studio because I thought it was in Woodland Hills. I thought it was only supposed to be like 30 minutes or so. Oh, yeah. But I left and I sat in my car for an hour to recuperate. For that first visit with you. It was just way beyond that. Yeah. Yeah. If there really are things that are monitoring us and checking us out, it makes sense. If life exists and it's more advanced than us somewhere else, whether it's in another dimension or another planet, it completely makes sense to me that they would visit us. Yeah. Really how fucked up we are in terms of nuclear weapons. How old are we? Sure. And if we're on a path, a predictable path of evolution that almost all intelligent life goes on, there's probably going to be pitfalls that they could help us navigate. I would think so. I would hope so. Jane Goodall studying the chimps. Let's imagine they're still studying the chimps 500 years from now, 1000 years from now. 100,000 years from now. Let's imagine civilizations still exist. Chimps still exist. We've protected it. We've done a smart thing. They still, what if they start making tools? Whether they start making weapons, whether they eventually start going to war with each other, what if one chimp figures out gunpowder? What if they brains keep growing like ours allegedly did? Sounds like us. Yeah. Right. Imagine if we were observing emerging intelligence in other primates, other knots. How would we handle it? Like how would we handle it if all of a sudden chimpanzees, not all of a sudden, 100s of 1000 years now? What would our future society do if in the future chimpanzees start developing weapons and buildings and planes and doing all the shit that we do when we're far more advanced than that then? Is that plenty of the apes? Well, it's not because like you would think that they would become a different thing. You know, they would become like we did, right? Like we used to be Australia-Pithicus, we used to be all these different hominids. What if they eventually become like more hairless, they start wearing clothes? That would be fucking real interesting to see how human beings would handle that. You know, like what would we do a million years from now if hominids kept advancing down an evolutionary plane and they eventually got to a place where they were like ancient humans? How would we do? If we were like super advanced like, oh, you guys can't go to war, don't war. We stopped war a while ago. You guys need brain chips. The war. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. Interesting. Well, I mean, it's interesting because like what's different between us and any other people that have ever lived is that we've figured out a way to optimize your health in a very substantial way. In the past, someone who was my age, I'm 57, some of those my age, your body is probably broken. Your body is probably like beating down, your hormones are dead. You know, you're probably like real tired all the time. You know, and I'm not, you know, because of vitamins and hormones and all the different things that I do to keep my body healthy and exercise. We live in a different time. And because of that, you stay vital. You have vitality much longer than anyone ever did before. So you can explore things and you have more curiosity and energy for thought more than anybody ever has before. Yeah. Yeah. With the wow. Yeah. Yeah. You do see, Peter. Nope. A good. I was going to do some. He does it. He does it. Jamie Brack has every night with different details. He does. Yeah. I can imagine. No. One of the greatest fallacies is that as we age, we don't need to do anything to reinfigureate our body. Right. And so we're going to be doing a very important hormone or key exercise exercise important because of, as I said, about the brain to right neurotrophic factor, you can increase it to improve brain. This guy out of the USC, Caliph Finch, Phillip Finch, who talked about. He believed that the reason for why we age and we dies because we lose our hormones in our brain. And therefore, extremely important or it's a Scotch. Yeah. That's what you need more of that. No, I need to clear throat. Yeah. Look at that. I got my voice back. Yeah. So in, as you said, you're 57 years of age. I'm 72 years of age. And I think the reason why I'm at 72 with the level of clarity and functionality aside from my back is the fact that I've always 30 years. I've been a hormone replacement, nutrients, pseudocles, getting in good vitamins, so forth. Our body loses it over the course of time. And you need to keep replacing it and the people who are listening to this have to might understand that you need to supplement. You need to be proactive on your quality of health. Otherwise, you start losing it and exercise not just for that, but also just to maintain your physical presence, your strength, your bone density. You know, at my age, people say, I still have my pecs. I still have my, you know, triminess and fitness. I don't know about general energy. Do you still do martial arts anymore? No, I stopped doing the martial arts. What I do in place of martial arts is I dig holes. Yeah. And put plants in. You're hard to wear the holes. Digging holes is hard work. Yeah. I remember one time you sent me an email so it's to be careful because I was using a big pike to cut holes in the ground. I end up with lemons and a make lemon cello, pomegranates, make pomegranates, wine and so forth. I was sending a trend here. Yeah. And I see. I see there's some comp quads. Did you ever get the comp quads? I did. Did you eat them? Yes, I did. High in vitamin C a lot of. A lot of quads are really good for you. Awesome. Much more high in vitamin C apparently than even oranges. Orange is right. Every morning I have three of them. That's great. Three of them. And it's great. Do you take liposome little vitamin C as well? I take liposomal. I take liposomal vitamin C. See, yeah. Yeah, I take that stuff too. That's such a great thing too if you're sick is high dose intravenous vitamin C. It's a big one. I beat IV. IV. Yeah. I had a skeptical friend of mine who dismiss his all kinds of quackery. He was real sick with the flu. He couldn't get over it for weeks. And I told him, listen man, I'm going to hook you up. Do this. Get IV zinc in vitamin C and high dose vitamin C in B12. And he was better immediately. He said 24 hours later because he couldn't kick this fucking flu. He said I had it for two weeks. In 23 years, I've been sick 16 days. That's amazing. That's it. I never got a, well, let me be honest, I got COVID for 12 hours. 12 hours? 12 hours. Test twice positive for COVID. I was a Wednesday. Let's see, it was Wednesday. I think we were having Yum Kippert. No, we were having Pesach Passover. And I got sick that night and 24 hours later, no symptoms. That's amazing. Nothing. Coruscitan, zinc, little Ivermectin, you know. That's crazy. You shouldn't talk about that publicly. No, I should have met him. Yeah, I've ever met an horrible shit. Yeah. You can talk about it now. Oh good. Now, you know, fucking people are taking it. Yeah. I think I sent you the Yvermectin paper with Yvermectin Fanden dissolved. Mm hmm. I have a 76 year old veteran who was diagnosed with a Gleason seven, you know, Gleason is a grade of cancer of the prostate. And it was Gleason seven. He went on 12 milligrams of Yvermectin every day for eight weeks. And at 12 weeks, you got a PET scan done, a special PET scan done, looking at abnormalities in the prostate. They couldn't find anything. That was amazing. It was PSA prosthetic specific engine when he came when his initial one with the cancer was 12.6. He's now at 5.3. Say your phone? I don't know. What does this cell phone sound like? It does. What do you think about all the people that are very scary? You had a Samsung phone. Oh, it's definitely yours. It's significant. Is that a Google phone or a Samsung phone? Google. Google, you like that? Yeah, I'd like it. They keep on trying to get me out of the first grade, the first generation into the seventh. Until it dies. Oh, yeah. I use it. Yeah. Right or die, huh? Yeah. I don't like the software they put in there. Google just gave me the new... the first generation into the seventh until it dies. Oh, yeah. I use it. Yeah, right or die. Yeah, I don't like the software They put in there Google just gave me the new pixel nine Excel pro it was sick and then they gave me a pixel fold It was like a gift when I went to the inauguration thing. Yeah, it's pretty so you were there I wouldn't hope the fold seems crazy. I've predicted enough to watch YouTube videos on a regular phone. I need a fucking tablet You've seen what Huawei's made. Oh, why way they're banned in America. They're too awesome and also they spy on you But Huawei has developed a threefold and apparently Samsung's gonna come out with one next year It's a threefold though. It literally comes out to like a 10 inch tablet It's and it's very thin Wow look at this Wow. Yeah, so look at that. I said That's a threefold. Yeah, that's the threefold threefold Yeah, and Super thin amazing cameras They they were so advanced. I was trying to get a Porsche design Huawei phone they they were working with you know, Porsche design makes a bunch of things they make like watches and sunglasses they don't just make cars like Porsche designs like a separate entity of Porsche and Porsche design work with Huawei to me like the ultimate cell phone and I was ready to buy it because I'm a dork You know, I'm really into technology. Yeah, and I was like, oh, that thing's crazy Let me get it and I think I had a hundred mega pixel phone camera on the phone And this is a while ago and a 500 millimeter am 5000 milliamp battery, which was also crazy But then they banned Huawei products in America So you can't get that trifle back door right to the CCP. Yeah, allegedly, but it isn't tick-tock to like isn't all things There's a lot of back doors a lot of data getting scooped up in my cybersecurity people keep on telling me don't use Zoom Because it back doors into the CCP. Oh boy. Yeah. That's great. So I haven't used it. So I use like Microsoft Yeah, I don't trust anybody anymore. No, I'm there with you. Yeah. Yeah scared of all of it Yeah, but I think it's all inevitable and I think I think if you look at the the what's going on? I can terms of like what's what's the direction that technological progress moves us into? Well, it's the direction it seems of more More connectivity, which means less than less privacy So we're gonna have to work that out because when quantum computers can crack all in coding It's like any encryption that exists quantum computing is gonna crack all that so you're not gonna have real encryption anymore So like what happens with Bitcoin and digital currents? What happens with all that stuff? What happens with your bank account? I don't know Where were weird times? Yeah, we're gonna scared me was in the Wi-Fi they now could go back and using AI use the transmitted wave Form to see who's in a room. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah accurate 3D representations of the people moving around Yeah, so I turned off all my Wi-Fi extenders It's just like we're living in an ultra-servaled world and I think The good news is that the new government is Yes, emphasizing privacy and freedom of speech and the other government was emphasizing cracking down on what they called misinformation and disinformation and more control of what you say and do and where you go and the Way to get more control is more invasive technology and that's what scares the shit out of me. Yeah Is people it's not necessarily the technology it's people taking advantage of the technology in order to have more control of the population Which makes their job easier Yeah, that's the reason why I only use my Cell phone when I travel otherwise. I don't use it people call me say were you Said I use myself good for you. Yeah, it's off all the time my friend Adam Curry He has he's a super paranoid maybe maybe not maybe not paranoid Maybe super aware of like digital surveillance and all that stuff so he has a D Google phone He has a phone that doesn't have Google on it and it's What are those what's that operating system that they use for that stuff? Do you remember Jamie? Yeah This and your friend must have a phone that's coming up. No, no I just asked him the other day. You said no, we were talking the other day at the inauguration I was saying but dude every other day I get an article about a Tesla phone. He was laughing. I hope we don't have to make a phone He said I hope we don't have to make a phone. It's very difficult to make whatever is Promoting it. That's it graphene OS so graphene is D Google phone so they take these pixels and they D Google them and they put this graphene OS Which is a completely different Operative system. Yeah, and then you have another phone called the unplugged phone That uh, Pixel 7. Yeah, yeah, that's it and so they use these things and they work just like a regular phone Yeah, and you can get them where they don't have 5G because some people think 5G is bad Yeah, no, I still work for a 3 and 4 and I don't update the software because updating the software gives them more access to you I got to go again. Well, this is wrap it up. We're at four o'clock. Okay. My words. I love you to death. You're an awesome guy I appreciate you very much. Thank you for all your research and all the work you do and spreading information and knowledge Yeah, I really appreciate it I appreciate the fact that you've supported me over all these years in the work that we do with our veterans and they've been receiving the benefits of the work that we've done and You know stop in the suicide is the goal for the Millennium Health Centers. That's that's it and tell everybody the website so they can find it The educational one is www I don't You said no, no, no, no, no, you cube. You just type in the TV. I help now help out org org And then is warrior angel foundation still warrior angels foundations there, but they've melted into Yeah, this is Proved brain health by fixing the root causes. Yeah, this is biohack yourself and I'll give a minute on it Family called lolly group and if you were in Washington for the For the inauguration the biohack group, which is the lolly group, which is Anthony and Teresa lolly They're the ones who put together biohack yourself which has been picked up by Robert if Kennedy Jr. has been there representative for media because they're he trusts them because all they want to do is get the Science out there that's real not the bullshit that's been thrown at us So they've been pulled in and there were 32 of us quote experts is what they call us who participate in this program so What they're doing is really cool because it's presenting the the science behind What you've already experienced with us and what I continue to promote for brain health for well-being and longevity anti-eiji beautiful. Okay. All right. All right. Thanks. I appreciate you always appreciate it. Thank you