Thank you, John, for doing this. Um,  all through the COVID experience, um, tragedy, I had this kind of recurring  question in my mind, which no one's ever answered, and I think that you have gotten to the answer  or close to the answer. And the question is this. Why were public health authorities in  the United States and acting in concert with the media so intent on discouraging Americans  from treating CO? There was this persistent and very aggressive and at times really vicious  campaign to get people to stop thinking about how to treat this illness which we were told  was going to wipe out a huge percentage of humanity and just to accept the vax. But no  treatment at all cuz that's fish tank cleaner. It's horse tranquilizer. What was that? And I'm  going to stand back and let you tell the story. What was that? Well, the short answer is that  it was to stamp out the heresy of what is called vaccine hesitation. So vaccine hesitation, there's  a huge literature on it. It's a psychological analysis of all of the factors that would  cause anyone, a man, a woman, a young person, to hesitate to get the vaccine. And I want to  emphasize this. You Google vaccine hesitancy, you're going to get a million search results.  So what is vaccine hesitancy? And I think it's best understood not so much in scientific  terms, not in empirical scientific terms. It's a form of heresy. And this was the thing  that my co-author Dr. Peter McCulla and I, we had conversations about this for the last  five years. Why is it heresy? And conversely, why is the vaccine a kind of in the minds of  so many people something like a savior? Well, a liberator and a savior. And I I hope I I'm  not out of line by showing you this on the cover of the book. I know this kind of sounds  like a a uh you know uh plugging the book, but there's a reason for this. That Do you  know what that is? I don't. That is a 20 silver coin issued by the Vatican in the year 2022  commemorating the CO 19 vaccine, specifically the messenger RNA vaccine. Actually, Mhm. And you  will observe the traditional Catholic iconography, the the three the Trinity. You could you could go  into, for example, the the art history museum in Vienna. There's a Raphael painting Madonna of the  meadow and it's this tripartite figures I think in Madonna in the meadow it's the Virgin Mary Christ  and John the Baptist. So that three and then here you have the the cross when somebody looks at  that if particularly if they're Roman Catholic they immediately have all of the iconography and  all the feelings and and thoughts. That's the most resonant image possible for sure. So if you look  at the num mystic catalog, the the coin catalog for the Vatican, it it issues different medals  and coins and so forth. It is described as a boy prepares to receive the vaccine. Not really.  A boy prepares to receive the vaccine. This is his first vaccine. Sorry. Excuse me. You got it.  Yeah, I mean the grammar, the number of words, it's identical. A boy prepares to receive  the Eucharist. So what Francis did with this, and I don't know if he's the guy making the  decisions, is let's take the existing religious iconography, the idea of Christ the Savior, the  one that will protect you or at least your soul. And how are we supposed to interpret this other  than well it's the vaccine that's the savior? So I saw that and I thought well that's rather  remarkable. I wonder if there are any other indications of this overlaying vaccine iconography  on top of existing religious iconography. And I just started finding them everywhere. Really?  Well, there's that famous, not famous enough, but still famous Diego Rivera mural that I believe  hangs in Detroit paint in the 30s which presents the vaccine as a kind of eucharist. Right. The in  that iteration, I think that's a funny painting by the way. I'm glad that you mentioned that. In that  iteration, it would seem that the central figure is the Virgin Mary. She has the sort of Christ's  child like in a manger. There are these different animals around the manger like the nativity. What  he's actually doing with that is the different animals around the na the nativity scene. There's  a horse, there's a cow, I think there's a goat. That's in the way it's described is a reference  to the serum that back in those days, I think this was in the 30s. Yes. That's a reference to the  serum that is for example extracted from horses um with dtheria. The cow is obviously smallox.  So, it's taking the nativity scene and it's making it a celebration of this great um  human achievement, but they're everywhere. So really there this kind of iconography I mean  it's a big it's a big world and there's a lot of images obviously but we found uh a church in South  Africa and I think it's a a Roman Catholic church. might be an Episcopal Church of England, but I  think it's a I should remember this, but there's a huge banner hanging from the facade that said,  "Even the blood of Christ cannot protect you. Get vaccinated." And what's interesting about this,  it shows for real, for real. Speaking of heresy and it the the subliminal quality of this piece  of propaganda is remarkable because blood it's all black script except for the word blood. It's  blood red and then the word vaccine the script is in blood red. So you see the equivalence  but it's not really an equivalence. There's the association of equivalents, but in fact, the  vaccine is more effective than the blood of Christ in protecting the beneficiary. So, what is this?  Um, this is Well, it's shocking. I didn't know any of this. Yeah, it is shocking. Are there churches  in the United States that have spread this? Well, I've not seen anything quite that crass, that  extreme. And of of course this is, you know, the context. It's South Africa. Somebody at  that church seems to think you have to hit people with a sledgehammer in order to to get  them to overcome their vaccine hesitancy. Um, but one of the things that Dr. McCulla and  I discovered was very alarming that the so-called Biden administration, it's called the  I believe it was called the COVID vaccine core, which dispersed billions of dollars to various  recipients. The major sports leagues, the NFL, I think Major League Baseball, they received just  an outright bribe. I don't see how else you can characterize this. It's just Uncle Sam is going  to give you a bunch of dough and you're going to basically force this on your league. And and  there's a reason for that that we will get into. But also the mainline Episcopal mainline Episcopal  Protestant evangelical churches, Roman Catholic churches, all of their clergy received money  to I don't know how else to put it, push the vaccine. And there were very few um pastors or  or priests or recctors uh what was it in the Episcopal Church recctors who refuse and you know  but how how I mean that right there strikes me as a as a violation well of the first amendment which  prohibits state religion but also of their their duties as Christian leaders. You can't take money  from the government to push something like that. I mean, I don't understand. Are these people  still in leadership? It was only 5 years ago. I mean, I would I would You're asking questions  now that Peter and I have been asking for 5 years, and we've been profoundly puzzled by this. It's  very confounding. and you know ultimately well I want to mention the NFL as as well and then um  the the tennis league the professional tennis league as well. So Aaron Rogers, the Green Bay  Packers quarterback, he goes on to Joe Rogan, and he describes this sort of struggle session  that the NFL that the the the management, the the administrators of the Green Bay Packers  put him through. Extreme isolation, shaming. I don't know if you saw the interview, but he's this  kind of goodnatured, tough guy who's just sort of speaking in a matter-of-act way with with Joe  Rogan. And I began to realize whether Aaron Rogers conceptualized this way or not, it's very apparent  he was perceived as being guilty of heresy. It it's like I mean the most obvious example  of this is like Martin Luther in Germany. It's like you're I think he was in a Dominican or an  Austinian frier. I can't remember which order but he posts his thesis on the door of the  castle church in Vittenborg and it's like the game is on. Okay, you just committed heresy.  You know the story. the the holy office, the pope himself excommunicates him and there's sort  of no hope for him. In the case of Aaron Rogers, I believe it's the same psychology. It's you're a  very prominent person. Now, in the case of Martin Luther, he's hanging around with I think a  Saxon Duke. Um, you can't do this if you do this because now people are looking up to you. If  you commit heresy and you get away with it, the whole stamping out of vaccine hesitancy will be  imperiled. Does that make sense? It makes absolute sense. So this this you know just under the thumb  just make your life as miserable as possible. Everything serves the imperative the imperative  which is the way organizations work. They all have an imperative. Usually the imperative is  self-preservation expansion accumulation of power whatever but whatever the imperative is  whatever the goal is everything is subservient to that. That's just that's how people are.  That's how organizations are. It doesn't answer the question why is giving people the vaccine the  only thing that matters. I think that's and I I'm jumping so far ahead in the story and I and I hope  that you can shed some light on that question, but it all goes back to the fact that public  health authorities, political leadership, clergy, everyone with any power at all in the West, not  just the United States, decided the only thing that matters is getting this needle into the arms  of our populations. That's it. That was it. Um, you know, but why? Well, let's let's start. Yeah.  Sorry. I said I would shut up. I'm not. Well, this Christmas, give the gift of sleep with  eight sleep. Everybody needs good rest for most of their days, but few know how to actually  get it. Eight sleeps pod 5 is the answer to that. Pod 5 is a smart mattress that automatically  regulates your body temperature throughout the night. It's proven to deliver up to an extra  hour of good sound sleep every single night. That will change your life if you get it. Plenty  of people on our staff use the Pod 5 and they are very psyched. That's why they're so focused and  well-rested. I can see them humming around right now. The full body feeling of comfort. That's  what keeps you in the sack and fully crashed out. We recommend it strongly. So, we are all  in an eight sleep as we've told you. They've extended their biggest sale of the year. Use the  code tucker at this address 8.com ei.com/tucker for 400 bucks off the pod 5 Ultra. And there's  a reason eight has won the men's health sleep award. The coveted sleep award because it's  awesome. 8.com/tucker. Let's start with the annunciation. Yes. Okay. So, the annun the  annunciation um happened in April of 2020. So, um Bill Gates makes the rounds. CNN, MSNBC.  So, call it the angel Gabriel. He he makes the annunciation. Um, he says, you know, the world is  all, you know, turned on its head and, you know, we're going to have a hard time going back to  normal and the economy is um, you know, a mess and um, so it's a kind of depiction of the wasteland,  you know. um fertility, the the the happiness of the kingdom, it's it's all just going straight to  hell. The only way we're going to be able to go back to normal is basically when essentially  everybody on the planet gets the vaccine. Okay. So I hope I'm not pressing on this metaphor  too far but the enunciation. So all is bleak. The world is a mess. You know normaly has been  completely turned on its head. It we can only go back to normal. He actually uses that phrase.  We can only go back to normal when everyone gets the vaccine. Well remember this is April of 2020.  There's no there's no I mean the the the clinical trial for the Madna vaccine which Madna made  with had had developed with the NIH with Anthony Fouch's NIH I mean it had just gone in to human  trials I say just it actually went into human trials very quickly we can talk about that as well  but how does Mr. Gates already know in April that this is going to come quickly enough a usually  takes years to develop a new vaccine quickly enough and that it will be safe and that it will  be effective. Well, the answer is he already knew it was a fatal complete. It was a foregone  conclusion. It's coming. It's coming quickly and when everybody gets it, then and only then  will we be able to go back to normal. So consider all of the assumptions in this proposition. It's  it's just perfectly astonishing. The Department of Defense and Health and Human Services in July  of 2020, they say, "Well, we've already inked the contract. We've already in signed the contract  to purchase I can't remember how many hundred million doses of Fiser Bionex vaccine." And you  think you've already written a like it's not we don't have it yet. It's not been developed fully.  Human trials for phase two haven't even commenced. This is a fade to complete. It's already been  decided and it's already been decided by the second richest man in the world that everybody's  going to get it. So it's done. It's a done deal. So when Dr. Peter McCulla writes an editorial in  The Hill in in August of 2020 saying this is just a big gamble. Our public health authorities,  our military, our health and human services, they've all decided that this is coming. But it's  a complete gamble. This is a new technology. It's a genetic technology. We don't know the long-term  effects. We don't know how it's going to affect children. This is a gamble. And what happened to  McCulla when he started talking this way? Same thing with Aaron Rogers. Relentless persecution.  Relentless. you know, fired from his job at a major university hospital, sued um all of his  uh editorships of various academic journals pulled. Um his professorships pulled just,  annihilated, sued, encumbered with attorneys, you know, the whole thing. So, you're probably  asking, okay, where is all of this going? Let me just give you one more example to make my point.  I think professional athletes are considered, particularly in the eyes of young men who are  potentially the most dangerous people to those in power. Like if the young guys kind of get together  and say we're not putting up with this, you know, then we've really got a problem because they're  harder to control. So I think the attitude of professional sportsmen is of particular interest.  So NovakJokovic has recovered from COVID 19. He had the illness. It was symptomatic. PCR  confirmed. He's done. He got through it. It's not surprising that a man of his physical uh  conditioning got through it without a problem, but he's done. He's he's his body has been infected.  His immune system has mounted a response. It's overcome the the the infectious agent. Then he's  recovered. There's no better immunity than that. I mean, if you want to understand how vaccines  work in theory and in practice, it is to induce the body's immune system or stimulate the  body's immune system to respond to an invading uh microorganism. So, there's no better vaccine  than actually getting through the illness. Why do we have vaccines? The the thought going back to  Jenner is there are diseases which are extremely dangerous which could cause horrible disease and  and mortality. The idea of a vaccine is induce natural immunity without putting the recipient  through the trials and and and the danger and possible death that he would experience if he  just got the bug. Okay, does that make sense? Of course it does. So this proclamation, vaccine  immunity for CO 19, it's better than natural immunity. That is primaasy totally preposterous  and absurd. No one that's ever spent any time studying immunology would believe that for one  second. So no epidemiologist could believe that. No immunologist. Well, well, how could you? I mean  it just on the face of it is totally preposterous. But but this is what we were told. Now it's very  interesting because I immediately perceived this just from reading a textbook of immunology. So I  knew like this is on the face of it insane. It's only been in the last few weeks. I mean I mean  the last few weeks. Here we are kind of getting in 2025 in 2025 that Sanjay Gupta and Paul Offett  who's um a very prominent vac vaccinologist had made the rounds and said you know something that  that that really wasn't correct to smear natural immunity in the case of CO 19 that technically  wasn't true. How could those men still have jobs in medicine? If you watch this show, you know  that we love Pure Talk. It is amazing wireless service with absolutely the best prices. And all  the time we've been telling you about Pure Talk, we've never seen an offer like the one we're about  to describe. And here it is. Unlimited talk, text, data with a 30 gig hotspot for just $29.95 per  month. Not just this month, every month for life. This is Pure Talk's top tier plan. $29.95 a  month. You will save over 50% a month every month for your entire life and you stay in the exact  same 5G network that Verizon and AT&T offer, but for $1600 a year cheaper for a family of four.  That's wild. It's provable, by the way. This isn't some false claim. It's not disinformation. It's  real. Pure Talk's customer service, meanwhile, is located in the United States, not in  Bangladesh. Nothing against Bangladesh, but you're talking to Americans, you can  understand. They can switch you in just minutes. So, you keep your phone, keep your  number, and you start saving in a really big way. Unlimited for life, $29.95 a month. This  is a short-term offer. Long-term consequences, short-term offer. Puretalk.com/tucker to  switch today. puretalk.com/talker to switch to America's wireless. Pure talk. Taxes and fees not  included. Go to the site to get all the details, but those are the basics. I don't know. That's  to me it's really these are social questions. is questions about the system in which we live.  How could you defend a system that allows that level of dishonesty and levies no penalty against  people who promote lies? I just don't understand that. Because the factual truth of the matter  is secondary perhaps even tertiary tertiary is secondary or perhaps even a distant third place  to to the orthodoxy to maintaining the orthodoxy and and and what I want to you know so I'm I'm  telling you the story I mean realizing this is something that came about through I mean we're now  5 years into this years of reflection and and and conversation and and debate with with my co-author  doc Dr. Peter McCulla. And so the question is um could it be that we're constantly being told  follow the science? Science is the thing that governs rational decisionmaking. We're always  being told that. But I think the big realization is most human affairs and decision making, it's  actually not outside of something like Newtonian mechanics like the weights and balances on  an aircraft or engineering a building or you know all of the things in which mechanical forces  can be measured and engineered in accordance with the the force that's being exerted on it. Apart  from, let's keep it simple, Newtonian mechanics, there's so much in human existence, the way  the body works, the mysteries of of why do some people get sick, why do some people don't?  Why do some people live longer than others? all all of these questions. We call it medical  science, but in fact it is so multiffactorial. There are so many different known and unknown  factors at play that none of this can be measured. So what the medical mind has done is I I think  perhaps without even being fully conscious of it, it's basically adopted orthodoxies um a doctrinal  view of medicine. And if if if you if you look at the history, can I just ask you to pause? I hope  that people watching this, if they didn't fully understand what you just said, will rewind it  and listen to that again. That's the That's the best explanation I've ever heard for what's gone  wrong. What you just said right there. One starts with presuppositions and then that's how you  interpret the world. Your interpretive framework begins with your presuppositions and that's how  you actually view the world. Now I come out my formal training was in philosophy and this was I  mean I I won't bore the audience with rehashing academic philosophical debate but there was  a very very big debate in the 18th century between what philosophers called empiricism the  foremost representative of this was David Hume and then rationalism the foremost representative  being um Deart Renee Deart. So Emanuel Kant, this sort of unusually scholarly guy living  in Kunigburg, Germany, which back then was part of Prussia. It was actually a Hanza city,  a free city and in the Hanziotic League. Very, very thoughtful, contemplative guy. I mean,  apparently that's kind of all he did was contemplate. and he came to the conclusion which  he presented in a book called the critique of pure reason that in fact it's not it's a combination  of both in order to interpret the world to make any sense of it at all. It's true that we have  sensory data coming in and you can pay attention to it and observe patterns but you can't really  interpret it unless you have certain categories that are already in your mind. Exactly. This was  our breakfast conversation this morning and it, you know, it has such effects on the way we live  and understand things. It it it does. And and so, you know, we live in a in a world now in  which um I think an increasing number of Americans of of our citizenry, those who are are  awake and have some sense that paying attention, if they're paying attention, if they have  been paying attention for the last few years, and COVID 19 is an interesting story because  I think what happened with CO 19 much of the fraud that was presented to us was so extreme and  so crass that it prompted it sort of Kant talked about reading David Hume he said it it awakened  me from my dogmatic slumber and and and I like that phrase it's like people began to think our  government is acting so weird and people with any familiarity for example with immunology um I  Hope I'm can say something slightly vulgar. Um, they're thinking this is such colossal [ __ ]  that like what is the government doing? What what is this weird priesthood of vaccinologists  telling us? It's just it just can't be true. So, I think that awakened a lot of people from their  dogmatic slumber about our institutions. And now we're in this weird moment where a lot of American  people have started to view the US government in a way that a a wife with a philandering husband  might start to view his representations. Like she's caught him 10 times running around on her.  He swears up and down that he's seen the light, that he he tells the truth, that, you know,  he's sworn off the girls. But at that point, even if he has sworn off the girls, the trust has  been totally demolished. So, we're in a weird, very unhappy moment right now. In which, well put  in which weird and unhappy. That's exactly right. in which we just don't believe anything that our  institutions tell us. And and I don't rejoice at that. I don't see how this republic is going  to survive if we don't have some faith in our institutions. I agree completely. But the question  is how can it be won back? Anyway, that's that that's another question. Um so um vaccines like  other things that we've seen in medical history um are now an object of orthodoxy. And you go  to medical school, you read your textbooks, you attend your lectures and you are told this is  the reality of this product of this technology and that's it. It's axiomatic. There's no questioning  it. There's no examining it. There's no critically evaluating it. There's no even going back just  to ask, well, is it optimized? I mean, so a car manufacturer could say, well, it's axiomatic that  a car has to have functioning brakes. And you say, well, are they optimized brakes or the materials?  Is is the the calipers? is all of that the best brakes that we could put on a car to make sure  that a good reaction time, the driver's not drunk. If he hits the brakes, the car is going to  stop. Are they the best brakes? Well, you can't ask that about vaccines. You you can't say, um,  well, some of these vaccines, you know, they go back to the 1930s when they were developed.  Are they optimized? You can't even ask that. So what is that telling us? The other thing is  don't ask any questions and observe that since 1986 the vaccine manufacturers have received  full liability immunity in the event that their products injure or kill. Christmas season is here  and although it's a bit of a cliche, it really is important to keep Christ in Christmas. Should we  focus on cookies and presents or on the reason we're doing this, which is Jesus? Obviously, the  point is Jesus. That's the whole point. That's the only point. And all of the decency and good cheer  of this holiday comes from Jesus. The Hallow Apps Pray 25 challenge reminds us of that. It features  Chris Pratt, Quent Stefani, our friend Jonathan Roomie, and many others. This 25-day challenge  guides you through Advent and helps you keep your focus on the true reason for the season,  Jesus. Experience the nativity story where Jesus brought peace and calm to a world in chaos. That's  exactly what we need right now is peace and calm and still. And Jesus is the only one who brings  it. Period. Hallow is thousands of prayers and meditations and music to help you connect with God  all through Christmas and after, including several Christmas original songs and albums. There's a  whole world on hallow. It's like unbelievable. It's changed our family's life. Check it out.  You will not regret it. Get 3 months for free at hallow.com/talker. Experience greater peace  and stillness this Christmas. So, this is a very notable moment in this story that I I found rather  stunning. So, that 1986 vaccine injury act was questioned in court. The case was Bruowitz versus  Wyth. There was a girl who was badly injured. I believe it was a pertasus vaccine, developed  encphilitis, severe brain damage, basically destroyed the child for the rest of her life.  So the parent Sue um Wyth, which um had in the interim um been acquired by I'm not going to say  who they'd been acquired by. I don't want to to risk um you know saying the wrong but but Wyth had  been acquired by one of the major pharmaceutical companies. The case was bruisith versus Wyth and  and the question was and it went to the Supreme Court is the liability protection provided by the  1986 vaccine injury act childhood vaccine injury act is that constitutional so the court ruled  in favor of Wyth and Mr. and Mrs. bruised with were told you know sorry um uh there's nothing  that can be done the act is upheld but there was a dissenting justice it was uh justice soayor  and she wrote a dissenting opinion and it's an excellently reasoned dissenting opinion it shows  how far the liberal mind has come since 2010 she writes the most reasonable sensible descent  presenting view of vaccines. And what she says is liability, product liability, being subject  to tort litigation is the primary incentive for optimizing the safety and the efficacy of the  product. If you just tell somebody, oh, looks great, you know, it's been around for 30 years.  Cool. Everyone has to get it. Zero liability. What is the human nature being what it is? What's  the incentive to improve it? Well, there is any none. I mean, what are are we to expect the CEO of  Fizer, which has very long civil and criminal wrap sheet for fraud, for um concealing bad safety  data, for overstating efficacy? Are are we to believe that suddenly the corporate board of Fizer  is going to develop such a strong conscientious approach to business that they're just going  to say well we don't have any liability but I think we ought to just get busy optimizing it  anyway that it it's it's not a it's it's not a realistic No it's not it's not people respond  to the systems in which they live and work. So, um, I'm not even blaming Fizer, though. You know,  obviously I'm opposed to Fiser on every level, but it's not Fiser's fault that that's the law passed  by Congress. Right. Yeah. Right. So, I mean, this is our story. Um, we started off um a first  phase of this was something that hit Dr. McCulla so hard. And there's an interesting coincidence  here. I had heard about him. I had heard about his Senate testimony on November the 19th,  2020. A very good man, um, Senator Ron Johnson, organized Senate testimony, a Senate hearing to  discuss the question of early treatment. Is there anything with a good safety profile that could  possibly help to keep people from falling badly ill, going to hospital and possibly dying in  hospital? Is there that's what doctors do. Is there anything that we could do to help? Now,  the first principle is safety. But what these guys were looking at were FDA approved drugs with  some of the best safety profiles, you know, in the business. hydroxychloricquin. It was FDA approved  in 1956. There's a wide uh uh range of indications for it. The most common one in the states for for  decades was rheumatoid arthritis. People had taken hydroxychloricquin against rheumatoid arthritis  for a decade and suddenly we're told that it's dangerous. So it was actually the eye doctors, the  retina doctors that first recognized that's not true because one of the things that retina doctors  have to look out for is if someone has been taking hydroxychloricquin every day for over a decade for  treating rheumatoid arthritis. Sometimes retinal doctors will see a a a toxicity that starts to  affect the retina. Okay. Every day for over 10 years, we're talking a fiveday course of hydroxy.  So, so this is again it's this is absurd. And and one of the things that I think you've talked  about, you've touched on in your other programs is a tyrant will often and and where tyranny comes  from in the human mind and and and how it develops and takes over institutions is a a subject  we could discuss. But one of the things the tyrant does is insists on total absurdities. And  what happens to the people is they either accept that it's patently ridiculous or they become so  demoralized that the government is making this assertion that they just give up. It's like, okay,  um, you know, I I guess I'm just going to have to tune all of this out and, you know, go surfing in  Mexico or something. Like, just forget it. It's And I think that that's actually intentional.  So, I don't really like partisan politics, but remember that this is happening during the Biden  administration when the first vaccine mandates get underway. So you look at the Biden administration  and starting with the president himself, I mean, we're told that he's sharp as attack. So either  you come to accept that and you think, well, you know, I I guess he's, you know, he's he's  sharp as attack, I guess. I mean, that's what we're being told. or you're so demoralized by  that monstrous um absurdity that you just say, "I guess we're done. I mean, I guess the Republic is  finished." That there are people apparently behind the scenes pulling the strings, the marionets that  run the show. I don't know who the hell they are. I don't need to run a foul of them. So, I'm done.  I'm I'm checking out. And I I think this vaccine ideology and religion that has been erected,  it's a species of this just demoralizing anybody that asks questions. We're going to eliminate the  inquisitive mind from the public. And it's also I agree with everything you're saying and I think  it's profound. It's not just on display during COVID. It's just like a feature of tyranny always  and everywhere. It's the basis of the novel 1984. But I think it's also worth saying that when  you participate in these humiliation rituals and when you go along with it, you change. There's  something about you that dies for sure. You are diminished. And you know, you hope it's not  permanent, but it seems to be. But whatever, permanent or not, it's absolutely real. And  people who went along with that are different people. Well, this takes us to the big theme. So I  I did I did want to quickly mention Jookovic just to give you an even more luminous illustration of  this. So he gets through CO, it's PCR confirmed, he's fine. The Australian authorities give him the  green light. They say you can get on a plane and fly across the Pacific to Sydney to participate in  the 2022 uh Australian Open. Okay. Well, you know, you've flown to Australia. I mean, it's kind of  it's not exactly the most pleasant experience even if you're in first class. It's very long.  It's it's so long and you're going through all of these time zones and your internal clock is  turned on its head and um I mean it's kind of a rough voyage. It's not what Captain Cook went  through but it's you know it it kind of sucks. Um so just consider the psychology of this. You're  professional tennis player. You've been given the green light because you're co recovered. who  can compete. And you had to go through a bunch of hurly burly in order to get to that point. You get  on the plane, you relax, you take a deep breath, you start thinking about your game, like what are  you going to do when you get to Sydney? You know, who are you competing against? And this is what's  running through your mind. You you then arrive in Sydney. You get off to clear passport control  and customs and you're pulled aside and they say, "You know something? Um, we've decided to resend  that special dispensation to you. You're going to have upon landing, he hears upon landing,  you're going to have to go into quarantine. So, I don't see any way of characterizing this apart  from sadism. That was a sadistic action. That was turning the screws on him. And then one  of these people that participates in this, I remember one of the the most revolted  I I've ever felt was this BBC reporter in the most condescending, smarmy, repugnant  way, then does a struggle session interview with Chookovich. Um, are you really going to stake your  entire career? You could be the greatest ever. You could be the goat, Jookovich. Are you really  prepared to set all of that aside just so you don't have to receive the vaccine? Bow down before  me and all of this will be yours. It's true. Well, there you go. All right. So, you're seeing  where this is headed. Yes, I saw it then. bow down before me and all of this will be yours.  This is totally the oldest offer there is. So, you know, I grew up in the Episcopal church. I  didn't really take religion seriously. I mean, it's not a serious religion. I grew up in it,  too. I know. I started getting interested in kind of as a scholarly, you know, the the the  helenic Greek in which the Bible's written. kind of came at it more of from a philosophical um  approach and um the the deeply religious concepts um were something I hadn't spent a lot of time  with. Um this contrasted me with Dr. McCulla. He's very religious person. And we're having dinner  one night at his house and he says, "John, how do you explain this?" He said, "I I don't think  I mean all these guys like money. Everybody likes money's fun, whatever, but I don't think money is  sufficient to explain this." I agree completely. there. He said there must there must be something  else. Totally. That this is the fabled red pill when you realize it's not really about bribery. I  mean, that is heavy. Well, let's put it this way. Um, if you trickle down the the pyramid, I think  a lot of your infantry, they're like, "Oh, money, you know, pay off the guards. Yeah, it's fine.  Yeah, I could use that." you know, um, but you start getting to the top to, you know, to the  inner kind of precidium of this thing. Are they bribing Bill Gates? Right. Right. Exactly. So,  um, but what is it? Like, like what like what are we bumping up against? Exactly. And we can't quite  see it. I mean, I remember I've been obsessed with this for 5 years. all this other stuff is just  these are just symptoms of something very deep. It's it's true. So um um I um my first interview  with Peter McAlla, buddy of mine has a studio down not not too far from the hospital where he was at  the time vice president of of in uh of internal medicine. Now he was on the way out like they  were about to scoot him out. No, actually he'd already lost his job as vice president of internal  medicine at Baylor University. He then got a job at what was called Heart Place, which was happened  to be on the Baylor campus, but a different institution. He was about to lose his job at Heart  Place, but at the moment he was still there as a cardiologist. And he came down to this little  studio that belongs to a friend of mine and we shot this beautiful interview. the lighting, the  camera, the audio. I mean, it was just absolute pro. And I removed myself from the interview. It's  just like this Kiaro Skiurro lighting on on Dr. Makulla. He's wearing a beautifully tailored suit  and he's just on it. I mean, every question, cites all of the peer-reviewed literature. um you know  is totally circumspect in everything every remark every no speculation just the facts supported by  the evidence cited. I put it on my YouTube channel and the studio the guy that ran the studio he had  some friends in the independent media that helped to kind of get this thing going. I mean, he he  distributed the tape to the guys at the Blaze, the guys at um uh I can't remember, a bunch of  independent media um podcasters and networks and stuff. So, this thing starts to go viral  and I'm thinking, well, this is great. I mean, he spoke very cautiously and he spoke very well.  And about 4 hours later, YouTube takes it down with no explanation. So I called Dr. McCulla and  I said, "We've just bumped into something that is really big and it's really dark. It's like a black  hole." Like you, you know how you see a black hole in space? It's actually light is bending into it.  You can't see it through an optical telescope, but what you can see is that the gravitation of of the  black hole is so strong that it's actually warping time space so that light is bending into it. I  said it's like we've just bumped into a black hole. We can't see it, but we know it's there.  What the hell is it? And so this is actually what began the discussion. And ultimately, I don't  see any other conclusion that's plausible. And I'm not saying this is the conclusion. I I I try and  stay within the realm of physics and and empirical observation. So, I'll ask you, how else could you  explain it other than what you just said a moment ago? This appears to be No, you go from physics  to metaphysics the more you think about it. That's it. So that's that's what I told Peter. I said,  'I think we're going to have to leave the realm of physics and enter the realm of metaphysics, even  though it's something I I'm not comfortable doing. Exactly how I think if you grew up Episcopalian,  like the one thing you don't want to talk about is uh you know, the supernatural. You just don't.  It's true. It's deemphasized. It's embarrassing. There's a kind of social stigma to it. Were you  handling snakes in your trailer park? I mean, there's just a whole suite of uh disincentives  to even think about stuff like that. It's kind of interesting, but I I feel I feel you on this.  Yes. Well, so I grew up in the Bible belt. I grew up in Dallas, Texas, and um this was the era in  the 80s of a guy named Robert Tilden. He was this completely bizarre charlatan who would speak  in tongues. and and it would always end every um uh episode by saying, "And by the way, if  you send me a check and close a prayer with it, I'll see to it that your prayer is answered."  Now, the bigger the check, um you know, I'm not saying that, you know, my intercession  is necessarily going to be affected by the sum, but you know, it might well be. So this is the era  in which in which I just complete true corruption. Just total charlatans, false prophets, wolves and  sheep's clothing. Um guys who themselves weren't in control of their, you know, personal lives kind  of masking all of this, hiding it from themselves with um this embrace of religiosity. So, and I  remember my mother who grew up in the Episcopal church just saying, "This is just the way these  guys wear their religion on their sleeves. It's it's it's just so unsemly." And so, this is what  I grew up in. Well, I I I know precisely what you're talking about. Yeah. So, not our kind of  people. No. So, I thought, "All right, you know, kind of kicking and screaming. Well, let's enter  the realm of metaphysics." So what I did was when I was in graduate school, I just because he was  canonical, I I read the novels of of DStoyvki. Yes. So I was like, I'm going to have to go back.  You read The Grand Inquisitor in the middle of the brothers. All right. So there it is. Yeah.  You read that and you're like, first of all, this is a truly deep culture. This is not a gas  station with nuclear weapons. No. I mean this is like wow. No and remember remember he himself  had done 10 years a hard time. Yeah. He faced a false execution. Right. Yeah. Right. I remember  reviewing that and thinking God that's hard. It's like eight months of solitary then talk about  sadism. Like talk about Jookovic is, you know, flying first class to Sydney and then he's arrives  and it's like, okay, we have something in store for you. It's like you're going to face death and  then it's called off at the last second. This is just terror. Oh, after, you know, marching all the  way from Siberia to Moscow takes like two months and then you get there and like we're going  to execute you and then Oh, just kidding. No, it's heavy. And then um and then you know the  you know we were talking earlier like the the the just the the misery of being separated from from  women for months on. He's then sent to six years of military service in some provincial town and  site. It's like we're just not going to end the punishment for attending some liberal, you know,  uh, you know, group of guys talking about the latest ideas out of Germany. Like, we are going to  make you really suffer for this. So, it's not that it's not that Doski hadn't experienced this on  his person. like he had he knows what he's talking about. Okay. So, the Grand Inquisitor. So, for  those of your audience that are un this is what I was going to talk you're a step ahead of me. So,  Aloy the youngest boy of the brothers Karamazov. This is a scene within the novel. Right. Right.  So he's talking with his brother Ivan who is the sort of rational imperialist empiricist who is  reading all these ideas out of France and Germany. I mean I think it's probably around the year 1860.  Exactly. So Ivan says I have a story for you and um I think it's kind of charming. I think it's  kind of original. It has a certain flare and it's almost in a playful way. He says, "So, second  coming of Christ, he drops down into Sevilla, Spain, in the midst of the Inquisition, the dark  days of the Inquisition. He's walking down the street around the old Sevilla Cathedral. He's sort  of blessing people and groups are gathering around him and oh my goodness, you know, it he's returned  in Sevilla, Spain during the Inquisition of all places. Suddenly, the Grand Inquisitor himself is  drawn out of his office, goes down to the square in front of the cathedral and says, "Arest that  man. Arrest him. Arrest him. He's an impostor." So, this is where it has such literary power. So  the inquisitor puts Jesus in jail and he comes into the cell and he looks at him and he says, "Is  it really you?" And Jesus sort of looks at him and I think he just simply answers yes or or nods.  He says, "It really is you." This is this is just remarkable. He says, "But I always kind of thought  this might happen and so I have a message for you. I cannot allow you to come walking around on earth  like talking to people." He said, "It's it's not it's not something that we the church or the the  rulers of the church can allow." And he says, and I'm going to be fair and I'm going to tell  you why. He says, ' Do you remember back when you were presented with these temptations by the  opposer? Do you remember? Yeah. He says, "You see, what he offered to you was the ability to assume  responsibility for all of these people to make rocks into bread and water into wine." And you  all you had to do was just make the deal. And you could have then assumed all worldly power in order  to just take care of these fools, these humans with all of their flaws and their ignorance and  their limitations. You could have just taken care of them, but instead you chose to ask of them to  maintain their responsibility and their free will. This was an absurd decision that you made.  Humanity, humanity is not capable of assuming this burden. You asked too much. So what  we are going to do is we are going to do the deal that you should have taken. We're  going to take care of them. We're going to make sure that they're provided for. And in  return, they shall give us their obedience because it's obedience that we need in order  to run this ship properly. So that's why I'm arresting you and that's why you're not going  to see the light of day under my watch. So it's a great scene. What do you have to say to  that? So in the scene, the Grand Inquisitor, Jesus stands up. He walks up to the Inquisitor  and he kisses him. And it's like it's such a cool scene because this is an old, vain, cynical guy.  He's he's just so accustomed to everything going his way. He doesn't believe in anything anymore.  But that kind of melts his heart a little bit. And so he leaves he then the the inquisitor then  leaves the cell and leaves it open. So anyway, Ivan says, you know, what do you think of  my little story? And Aloisha then says, "It's kind of interesting. Let me think  about it for a moment. I'm happy to see you, brother. I think I have to go." And then Aloy  gives Ivan a kiss and Ivan says that's plagiarism. Anyway, I I I love the scene, but but why am  I getting kind of a model in telling this? Um there's a reason. I think this is a very plausible  explanation. Those who rule this world, there seems to be a perception. There are certain things  that are non-negotiable that we just won't accept any resistance. And one of those non-negotiable  things is apparently vaccines. Everybody has to get them. No one can question them. He who  questions them will be relentlessly persecuted like a heretic. Is there you've made the case  for that. I believe every word that you have said I think the last 5 years stands as testimony  to the truth of what you said. But we still are eliding the qu the core question which is is there  something about vaccines that makes them you know really important the most important thing to the  people who run the world what because it is the world it's not it's the world it's the whole it's  the whole world right so what and this whatever this thing is about vaccines has been noted for  close to a hundred years I mean Diego Rivera painted that mural and what's interesting about  it is a funny picture. I agree. And Dave Rivera had very little talent. Um, by the way, I think  the Christ child is a self-portrait. I'm I'm sure that it is. And he's a ludicrous figure and, you  know, got more claim than he deserves. But he was, if nothing else, sort of an indicator of what the  people in charge thought. He was their sort of pet muralist, right? So they understood then 90 years  ago that vaccines were at the center of some like what is it about vaccines? Is it the piercing of  the skin, the the blood? I mean is it a is it a kind of ritual? I mean well clearly it is but  is there something inherent about the vaccines? I think that the the entire edifice of our  everything that pertains to public health policy um which includes the ability to invoke a public  health emergency, right? Um to quarantine people to put them under house arrest in effect under  house arrest. I mean, I remember I went to this march in in Washington DC in January of 2020  opposing the vaccine mandates and I wasn't allowed to enter a restaurant in DC. I couldn't stay in a  hotel in DC. Um, I had to stay in Virginia. Um, so it's a way I think this is just one way of looking  at it. if you refuse to get injected. I mean, it's kind of the ultimate. I mean, people could  say, well, if you come to work, you have to wear a uniform or I mean, there are these different sort  of restrictions on personal freedom and personal space that we sort of accept is just sort of part  of a reasonable set of expectations to participate in institutional life. But getting injected  and you don't know what's in the injection, you don't really know anything about it. I mean,  when you go to get your vaccine or your child vaccinated, the the package insert isn't presented  to you. There is no informed consent. I mean, it's just the pediatrician says you got to get this  for your kid to attend school. So, here we go. you've you've you know free will contemplation  of the reality of it's just not even in it. You just agree. So I think it's the ultimate form of  obedience. I mean what what could be I mean well consider that if there's a vaccine mandate we can  lock you up. We can we can shuffle you off to some shitty hotel in in Sydney for 2 weeks. we could  prevent you from playing in the tournament. So it's the ultimate the ultimate method of control.  So it's not I guess so you're answering the question I think by saying it it almost doesn't  matter what's in the vaccines or not. It's not inherent to the to the chemical formulation of the  product. It's not that mRNA technology whatever its effects are. That wasn't necessarily the  point. It was the ritual of forcing people to do something against their will without their consent  and once you've done that you are in control. It is a it's a rape basically are or a kind of  inverted communion. You have to take the communion or you can't be a part of this congregation.  Well and communion itself I'll say this as a believing Christian is not I mean right. So we you  Jesus said this is my body and blood shed for you forgiveness of sins take this in the remembrance  of me. The human mind cannot understand what that means but we accept it. We accept it right and I  think the Catholics call that a holy mystery maybe or something to that effect. Meaning that it the  fact that you don't understand it is part of the point or acknowledging that you can't understand  it is part of the point and that there in lies its power. Right? It has immense symbolic power  and I I think that you participate in communion and there is a mystery you know there's debates  in theological sus is transubstantiation or just symbolic or the thing about a vaccine is um it's  injected into your deltoid muscle and you don't know what it is. Now what was particularly so it's  it's the ultimate in terms of your your physical body never mind the symbolic value of this it's  meaning and I think meaning is perhaps the the ultimate thing that we're seeking in this life but  this is a direct injection into your physical body and or that of a very small developing child. So  what was really spooky about the co 19 vaccine and and remember there were different iterations  of this there were attenuated um vaccines there were inactivated vaccines that's to say SARS KV2  cultured and then attenuated or inactivated but the what these guys really really were interested  in was this gene this genetic product messenger RNA and I think this is really important and  we go into this in our book. Messenger RNA, the actual molecule was discovered in the 60s in  France. And there's something very important about this that I think goes to the absolute heart of  scientists, the longstanding dream. It's the it's the myth of of Prometheus or or Lucifer. And I  actually think that Lucifer should be viewed in some ways as a kind of he he's a close stepbrother  of Prometheus and in some interpretation. He's a bringer of light. You know, if it weren't for  Lucifer, you'd have this dumbass guy and girl sitting around eating mangoes or something and  they they'd never awaken to the reality of the world. They would they would just be stuck kind  of I mean it sounds kind of nice just kind of perpetually in love walking around the garden but  the idea of Lucifer is no you have a brain use it explore discover you know learn about your  limitations maybe you can even transcend your limit your limitations so I think that's the  idea of Lucifer the bringer of light now I'm not saying that Lucifer is a great guy. I'm saying  this is I think part of this scientific archetype um to transcend the limitations of our mortality.  So um now you ask what about these guys in Silicon Valley, the masters of the universe now? I mean  the electronic world that we wouldn't we wouldn't be having this conversation if it weren't for  the great lords of technology and PaloAlto or Menllo Park or whatever. So I think that a  lot of those guys you might say and I don't say this to criticize them. I I just think it's a  description. You might say that they're suffering from Luciferian pride. It's pride that you know  I have discovered the way the universe works. you know, I can I can take electrons and create  a picture and send the P. It's almost like magic. and I actually know a professional electrician  and you can ask him about electricity and um and you know I'll ask him a complex question and he'll  say well um I would characterize that as that's a FM frequency. I was like um what do you mean FM?  Um like frequenc frequency modulation. He says, "No, that's what we call in electricity [ __ ]  magic." I mean, there are certain things about our use of electricity that it is just it's  just remarkable. So, and but it's opaque even to the people who know the most about it, right?  So, this was actually and I went and looked this up because I'm very interested in electricity  and what exactly it is. And there was a huge debate in the United States um at the time of  electrification, not like TVA electrification, but but 19th century, you know, Edison popularizes  the light bulb. All of a sudden, this amazing, no more oil lamps, we can stop killing the  sperm whales, all this stuff. It's like great. But there were people in the United States, sane  people, and a lot of them are Christian clergy, who were asking questions, and you can look it  up, like what is this exactly? And of course, none of them ever got a straightforward answer.  And to this day, no one can really answer that question. What is this exactly? Because no one  really knows exactly what it is. I'm not attacking electricity. I'm just not I'm just noticing. And I  just find it so interesting that you can like base your whole civilization on this thing, but nobody  even like a master electrician can explain every part of it. Right. There's So who's in charge? The  reason that's interesting is because if you don't fully understand something, are you really its  master? Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. So, but this idea, yes, we don't and and I think  so I'm going to come back to messenger RNA. But what I want to say about the great lords of  tech is um I recently had the great privilege of meeting one personally and I really liked him. He  he was a brilliant man, a stunning intellect. Um and I've long admired him. It was a confidential  meeting, but I've I've long admired him. I've read his biography. I I think he's a miraculous guy. I  mean in terms of intellect I suspect I know him. Yep. Um but what struck me during our conversation  in which he couldn't be couldn't have been more gracious and polite was and it's this is my  subjective perception and I I was with Dr. McCulla in the meeting. There's nothing we could possibly  tell this man that he doesn't already know. He already knows everything. It it it doesn't matter  h how much Dr. McCulla has studied and observed and has worked 16-hour days examining all this.  This very distinguished, very impressive man, he already knows it. Okay, now I know who you're  talking about cuz there's only one person I know like this. Yes, he already knows everything. Um  and one of the things he knows is that vaccines are safe and effective. Yeah. So um again we're  back to these axiomatic things. It's just and you believed that he sincerely believed that. I think  he did. I mean I I think he has some interests in believing that. Um, I mean, it's not just it's  probably not just intellectual intrigue that has caused him to believe this. Can I say one thing  about that? It's it's not it's it's too simple to say that when people have conflicts like the  one you're describing, if if in fact that's a real conflict, it's too simple to say it's only  about the money. There is a phenomenon that I have lived personally over decades where if you're  too close to something and you're benefiting from it and you like it, not it's not just about money.  If you like it, if you like the world you live in, which I did, it's very hard, maybe impossible to  see its real character. It's true. You're you're um you're in it. You're swimming in it. And you  know everyone in it and you like them. Yeah. And it's not just like they're paying you to say  nice things about them as you like these people. They they can't be part of something. You you just  whatever they're part of, you can't fully see it. That's all I'm saying. You you you can't. And and  you know, something that that has been a matter of great controversy and strife and anger and high  emotion. um that has come up in public discourse recently is the ancient anthropological constant  of tribalism. Tribalism. Um, and if you're not a tribalist, if if you don't see the world in terms  of tribe, then, and I beg your pardon for being academic again, but I I think Vitkinstein, the  great linguistic philosopher, would have said, "You don't understand the conversation." In other  words, tribalists, guys who hate each other and are involved in reprisals and and this this  kind of um this kind of zero someum, you know, race to the bottom. Well, Albanian mountain feuds.  Yeah. Serbs versus Croatians. Exactly. Yeah. Um, so I I was went sailing um down on the Dalmatian  coast. Um, pulled into a gas station just north of De Brovnik to get some gas for my car. And  um I walked into this gas station and the whole gas station was like a shrine to the villain of  the Serbs. There's a Croatian guy just north of De Bronik Sloban Mallovich posters or something  just well okay to be fair some lunatic Serbian artillery guy had actually direct hit on  his gas station. So, okay. All right. Um, I I get it. You know, back during the the the the  Yugoslav war. Um, and why these jerks decide to shell Deb Brovnik? It's like one of the I mean,  it's like, what are you guys? Clearly, these guys had just completely lost their minds. Why are  you shelling the Bronick? Why did you just Okay, a gas station. Okay. All right. So, just blow the  [ __ ] out of that gas station. So, you know, here we are like 16, no, 26 years later and the whole  gas station is a shrine to Serbian villain. Um, so can you imagine every day walking in to your  place of work and there is everywhere on the wall a reminder of the injustice that you suffered 26  years ago at the hands of the Serbs. So I could I just this was fascinating. I was like I got to  talk to this dude. So he he spoke broken German. Some of the Croatians from the old Austrohungarian  Empire, they can still speak a bit of German. And I said, um, why do you believe that they shelled  De Bronvnik? Like that doesn't really make sense. Like what is the strategic value of shelling De  Bronik? It's just like a world heritage site, you know? It's He says, he looks at me, he says,  "What reason?" He says, "There is no reason in these monsters. They're insane. They're deranged.  They're demonic. There's no reason in any" And he's furious. It's like just can you imagine? I  can picture this scene. Yes. Yeah. Um, so it's hard for me, somebody who's I don't have a tribal  allegiance. I mean, I you could say, well, you know, I have a kind of sentimental affection for  my English ancestors, right? You know, I I think I related to Sir John Leak was I think he was Queen  Anne's admiral during the War of Secession. So, and there's a book about Sir John, and you know,  I've read the book and it's like, well, he sounds like a cool guy, but the trials and travails of  of his struggle in the war of Spanish secession, I mean, it's like, who cares? Yeah. So, I can't  get into the internal logic of this conversation about, you know, this tribe did this and and then  then that and then we're back and forth and who killed more than the other guy. And would you say  it's true that people without a tribal identity are at grave disadvantage against those with a  powerful tribal identity because they don't they don't understand what they're what they're looking  at at all. You don't understand what you're looking at. I don't understand. Totally agree.  I have exactly the same views. Maybe it's the Episcopal Church taught us this or something. But  yes. Well, I remember during before my grandfather died, he fought in Italy. He, you know, slept on  the ground for two years and and he slung it out with with um with Jerry in in Italy. I mean, like  hot combat. And um and my my greatuncle um Bobby Witel was killed um in Italy. And it was very  traumatic to my to my great-grandmother. But the thing that so and my great-grandmother by the way  her family was originally from Germany. So there was this kind of you know confusion about that.  And I remember talking to my um grandfather and he said one of the most disturbing things I remember  he said we we there's a machine gun nest and we kind of were able to maneuver and get close and  somebody tossed a grenade into it and the grenade went off and then the guns fell silent. He said,  "So then we entered the machine gun nest and the soldier manning it was just a boy. He didn't even  have a beard. He was like a 14y old. And he said the Germans were moving all of their manpower to  the eastern front always. Yeah. To to to fight the Russians. And so they had just pulled back these  positions in northern Italy north of Florence. And they were very clever. He said they kind of  set these things up where just a little kid could operate it. He said, "They had these fascinating  little little maps and then you could actually with a lever you could identify with binoculars  where are the Americans and then you could move a corresponding lever to put the gun to sight the  gun." He said, "It's very ingenious." He said, "But I remember thinking this is just faking  awful like like it's like a little kid." Um, so and this was my only the United States would do  that though. I think and this might be wrong but it's correctish. I think in 1941 December when the  war started the largest ethnic group in the United States was German. Yeah. I think that was the if  you ask people you know what's your ancestry? I think German was number one. May have been number  two after English but I it was right up there and the whole country. So what other country which  is fine. I'm very anti- Hitler. Okay. But where else in history could you say to a population,  go fight your distant relatives in the land of your ancestors and have them go do it? Only in a  country where tribal identity had been discouraged to the point where it disappeared completely.  Completely. And and by the way, that also happened in the First World War where millions of Americans  of German ancestry changed their last names, call themselves Dutch. The Pennsylvania Dutch  are obviously German, but they were so ashamed of their own tribe that they pretended they weren't  part of that tribe. And I'm not criticizing it. I'm just saying I don't think that's ever happened  in history. No. No. The the American adventure or project has been unbelievably successful  until until I don't know 2000. Y. So, why do I mention uh war and tribalism and all of this?  Um, if you're in the vaccine ideology and you've completely 100% been indoctrinated in it, it's  like there's I can't talk to you. It it's it's like you're in another tribe. And I think that  is perhaps the point of the whole thing. Let's divide. Let's stamp out vaccine hesitancy. And  then those who who take the the communion who who receive the boy who receives those who receive it  will then be permanently separate from those who are hesitant and refuse. So it's like you've just  created a tribal identity. And he who hesitates, he who refuses, well, if he's in Washington DC,  the nation's capital, he can't stay in a hotel. He can't have a steak dinner with Senator Johnson  near Capitol Hill because he's not vaccinated. So, I think that's that's what this is about. But I  want to get we might be running short on time, but I I do want to talk about messenger RNA. So  this Prometheian or Luciferian intellect and the pride that is taken in that there's no grander  expression of this than messenger RNA. So the original idea was well if if if you think about  messenger RNA there there are there's a trinity of the way proteins the building blocks of life  or proteins. Okay. So there's replication which is a DNA strand replicates itself. There's  transcription which is the DNA using RNA which is one half DNA strand to send information outside  of the the cell nucleus into the external part of the cell the sort of watery part of the cell.  RNA then instructs that's called transcription and then translation. That RNA instruction then  tells the cell what to do. And I mean it's like you're talking about electricity. I mean if you  start studying molecular biology you think oh my god like this is this is so fascinating. It's so  interesting. Like and Francis Collins who is the head of the NIH when CO came. He wrote a book  in 2006. Do you remember this book? Of course not. No, I was not even aware he existed until co  I all of this went way under my radar. So Francis Collins wrote a book called the language of  God. And what he claimed was with the human genome project with all the advances that had been  made in understanding molecular biology, DNA, RNA, messenger RNA, that scientists were reading the  code in which God had created life. So you're probably wondering why I mentioned the Silicon  Valley guys. So code, you code things. You you enter a code, you transmit the code, and then and  then that initiates an operation, an instruction to do something. And we're headed this way in  a big way with artificial intelligence. But the idea is it's like God is a divine coder and using  nucleic acid he coded up there in the celestial I don't know the celestial laboratory he coded  life and now the human intellect has reached a point where we can read the code okay so that's  interesting okay so I read the book God's language That's cool. I mean, maybe we're reading  God's language. I think Einstein said, "I want to know God's thoughts." Okay, so far  so good. But what these mRNA vaccine guys did, they went one step further. We're not only going  to read the language of God, we're going to start writing in the language of God using messenger  RNA. We will now use pseudo eurodonated messenger RNA to instruct the body to produce the the  proteins, the building blocks of life that we want it to produce. What could go wrong? What could go  wrong? I think now it's just good to interject in one sentence and remind everyone that Adam and Eve  were not expelled from the garden for ignorance. Right. Well, just the opposite. Well, so but but  but now, okay, I'm glad that you that you raised this because now we come to a point that I think  lies at the heart of the human condition. Um, how do we recogni? So, we are curious. I mean,  when I was a boy, my mother said, you know, your problem is you're so curious like you just like  if somebody tells you you can't look at something, the first thing you do is look at it. Somebody  tells you don't go in onto that piece of property. Well, then, you know, next minute you're climbing  over the gate. I mean, it's like, what is it about telling us you you can't look into that? Yeah.  Just one piece of fruit you can't have. That's it. Otherwise, you're set. It's like it's perfect,  but you just can't have this one thing. But consider the contradiction of of that because to  go back to the Grand Inquisitor by Ivan Karamazov, it's a paradox because in a way what the Grand  Inquisitor is suggesting is just give us all of your free will. Yeah. And we'll we'll take  care of you. It's like we're going back to the prelapsarian state where you're just taken  care of. You don't have to ask any questions. You don't have to try and figure anything out.  You're just told the way the world is and you accept and you obey. So this is the tension and in  in being human and the messenger RNA stuff where the whole thing becomes so fantastically absurd.  And this is another really important point that we try to convey in our book. There's so much  these guys don't know. So they get these little glimmers of insight. It's like, "Holy Toledo,  can you believe can you believe what we just observed?" Where it becomes very childish and very  intellectually challenged is the next thought. Oh, now we've figured it all out. Now we can assume  the helm. That's right. It's like why do you just on the face of it that's preposterous? Like  you just figured something out. You just got a glimpse of something. You need to recognize what  that's telling you is how much you don't know. You don't know that there's so many things you  don't know. But the irony is that the scientific process science is designed as a counterbalance  to those very human instincts. I know something, therefore I'm an expert. That's called hubris.  And the process itself is again designed to rein that in to show you how much you don't know. That  that's the whole thing. So how did that not work? My my my favorite um medical historian is Oliver  Wendell Holmes senior. very very interesting guy and he once made an observation which I've  thought God if you could just frame that put it on the wall of every library excuse me of every  laboratory he said science is the topography of ignorance exactly from a few elevated points we  triangulate vast spaces of unknowns so that is a person who's actually using his head. He's  actually thinking. He's not just saying, "Oh, look how smart we are. Look at all of this  brilliant stuff that we just discovered. Now, let's start making a thousand  assumptions that are totally unwarranted. I'm going to ask you one last specific question  about messenger RNA. So I think as you said a number of times, we don't really know its effects  and we don't know certainly where it's going long term. But the one thing it strikes me we should  be very concerned about is the possibility that it changes people in a way that they pass on to  their children that it changes their genetic code because that's of course destroying humanity as  we know it. I is there any indication that that is happening or could happen? Yes. Um there are  a few things that I would say to that. The first highly alarming thing is there is evidence that  it actually impairs fertility. So that's perhaps a paradox. It's actually preventing you from passing  anything on to your kids because you're not having them. So that's one thing. The second and there  is there's real evidence of that. Yes. Yes. So, how in the world is it still legal in the  United States to inject people with that? Well, fertility is just the start of it. How  how about that's all I need to know. That's all I need to know. And that that's  almost enough to make you think, you know, we have to kind of we have to we stop  this now. For sure. Well, Peter McCulla has been proclaiming this for a while. No,  but for real. Like, you can't have that, right? Okay. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. I'm trying to  get my emotions under control, but yeah, that's really I'll I'll tell you something else. when  you talk about young people, so fertility. Um, in July of 2021, the New England Journal of Medicine, to their credit, published a peer-reviewed  case study of a young man, an adolescent boy, who developed myocarditis, inflammation of the  heart. Now, consider the symbolism of this. A young fit boy develops myocarditis, inflammation  of the heart, shortly after receiving a messenger RNA COVID shot. I actually had dinner with Dr.  McCulla that night. He was very alarmed by this. He said, you know, I I mean, I've been practicing  cardiology for 30 years. I very very rarely see myocarditis. and this this preposterous assertion  that well it's just a little bit of heart damage. He said this is ridiculous. You need your heart to  keep beating every second or millisecond for the rest of your days. That poor muscle, it can't you  can't afford to damage it. There's no minor damage to your right. No. So, um he said this is really  a disaster. And so what is the the the reasonable thing to automatically recognize in the summer of  21? It's very simple. We already know we're over a year into this that young athletes are not at risk  of severe COVID illness. It just they're just not. It's it has zero statistical significance as a  purported threat to the health of young athletes. And one might I might add, you know, young  athletes are kind of the hope. I mean, they're sort of not that they're athletes, but that  they're young and strong and have full possession of their abilities and faculties and like those  are the young fellas that are going to perpetuate our civilization. That's our country, right?  That's our country precisely. So, why would you do anything? Why would you take any unnecessary  risk that could damage young people? It's it Okay, you could say in a nursing home um our riskbenefit  analysis is that you know take the risk with the vaccine because these people are very frail if  they get we could argue that maybe we should have a disc but just to say all the young boys and  little girls should get this shot even though they're not at risk of co 19. It's the opposite.  It's the most unnatural thing ever because the progression of nature is is really simple.  You go through phases in life and at a certain point that's all you care about. I'm only 56. I  already don't care about me at all. And I mean that not cuz I'm so selfless. I'm not selfless.  But because that's just it's just natural. At a certain point you pivot from worrying about  you to worrying about your children and your grandchildren. What comes after you? That's I  mean that's the life cycle. Animals are this way. This is the most natural thing ever. And when  that's subverted then you know it's from hell. It's true. So, it gets it gets dark. So, doctor,  it gets darker. I don't know if I can handle that. I mean, it that's dark, but it's about to  get darker. So, the editor of the New England Journal of Medicine, who's also an adjunct  professor at the Harvard Medical School. So, in terms of institutional prestige, it doesn't get  any more prestigious. I mean, you're talking about number one public medical professional probably  on earth, professor at Harvard, editor-inchief of the New England Journal of Medicine. I  mean, that's like the Pope. His name is Dr. Eric Rubin and he was also an adviser on the F FDA  deliberative committee to decide whether we should approve the messenger RNA CO9 vaccine for young  people. I think the original decision is people under the age of 18. We have the transcript of the  deliberative committee meeting. The question is, should we appro should the FDA and I'm the in  effect he's the most prestigious advisor in the room. Should it be approved for young people?  So this is his reasoning and I just quote the the the transcript. Okay. So the question is do  we approve this for young people? He says two things. First of all, the risk benefit analysis  is different from what it is for older people. And he doesn't need to spell this out. Everybody  understands is older people seem to be at greater risk of getting into trouble with the illness  itself. So yeah, we have a different um you know risk benefit profile when it comes to young  people. Now that's a euphemism. I mean there's a big difference in the risk benefit profile.  Young people aren't at risk of this at all. And we have something else. We have a signal.  He said, I'm not sure if it's 100% real, but I think that it is. He's referring  to myocarditis and young people. So, the signal I believe is real. So, you have a a  bad safety signal and then you have in terms of the the risk of the illness for young people, it's  nil. So, he said, so it's a tough decision. Um, but I think in the final analysis, we won't really  know until we just start giving it. Reuben said that. Those are his exact words. So, how was he  punished for that? That's the orthodoxy. He's so not punished. No. No. I mean, it's like how  could you show your face after saying something like that? I don't know. I don't as like someone  at top, you know, the public health infrastructure in America. How could you? And so no, so there was  no shame, professional shame attached to him for that. He wasn't sanctioned by anybody or fired.  The to be clear, there's still this the FDA and the CDC technically acknowledge that a adverse  side effect of the CO 19 vaccine is myocarditis, particularly in in adolescent males. Okay. So, but  that is so qualified with the assertion, but it's so rare that we needn't really concern ourselves  with it. It's a a very lowrisk outcome. So, that is the assertion in order to prevent there  from being any repercussion. Now, Senator Ron Johnson held here a Senate hearing in May of this  year. I actually attended with Dr. makulla and the question was has myocarditis been deliberately  obscured the risk has it been covered up by the US government the same agencies who approved it  for young people and the answer is yes and I think that this is very very important there isn't going  to be a public acknowledgment from the same group of guys that they've made catastrophic errors in  all of this that will never be admitted. It will never be acknowledged. It won't. Well, then you  then you have at that point no moral authority, no credibility, and you can't continue in the  same way that you did before. Like normal people will say, "I'm not listening to a word you say.  I'm not going to the doctor." That's where I am personally. But it's not just me. It's it's like  any person who thinks about this. It's like, how could I ever believe you again? Do you remember  what I was saying earlier about a large percentage swath of the American people no longer believe  anything their government agencies tell them, it's the same. And mRNA vaccines are still being  given to young people. Right now, yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. Um, I don't want to marinate in rage, um,  because it's not good for me and I don't think it doesn't elevate the conversation. But let me  just just circle back to the original question just to make sure we settle it. Do you think  there's evidence that the changes to people to their genetic structure wrought by these  vaccines could be passed on to their children? um the McCulla Foundation of which I am  the vice president. Um we just published um I I should say we posted we we did an  exposition of a paper that was recently published in which a patient and it it's a  published paper. It's a published case study. It's it's not a question of speculation. It's  been published. Now molecular biologists I'm sure could debate about this but the finding is  a person who had cancer of the bladder which is a very severe cancer in that tumor. So in the the  bladder cells that had become displastic that the the when when cancer begins to develop. Remember  I was telling you about the coding? You get coding errors and it it it starts forming these malignant  cells which are chaotic and that don't work and but they keep replicating. That's the problem  with cancer. It's like this dysfunctional thing that just keeps replicating. It's kind of a horror  show. Now, I don't pretend to be an oncologist, but the finding is is that messenger RNA was found  in the the cancerous cells of this tumor. So, it seems to be integrating. Now, the question is,  is it integrating in a way that is can be passed on to the offspring or is it so dysfunctional that  it's killing the host before it can be passed on? And and I don't know that we yet know that.  But remember the science is the topography of ignorance. I mean there's a lot about this  that is is very very concerning. There's also a study that this messenger RNA seems  to have um transcribed into liver cells. So, you know, to really get to the bottom of  this, you would have to have molecular biologists who aren't entranced by this, that would have to  really be willing to seriously evaluate it without presuppositions. And I just don't know that we're  there. That's the problem where we are. It's it's if you received the vaccine, if you approved it,  if you if you um told your patients they need to get it, are you really going to be an unless you  have a kind of damisine moment where you're like, "Okay, I totally screwed all of this up." Like  100% I'm an idiot. All of my assumptions were wrong. But there aren't very many people with with  decency or integrity in medicine. Apparently not. Apparently there aren't. I don't think so. I don't  think these are complex concepts at all. They're very human concepts. There's nobody who hasn't  screwed it up and learned that his preconceptions were wrong and he's given terrible advice or hurt  people unwittingly. There's not one person who's, you know, past 14 years old who hasn't had that  experience. And it is incumbent on us. It's our it's our obligation to admit that. And like  if people with the power of life and death, physicians can't admit that. Then we we need  to eliminate the profession. You can't have that. That's the one thing you can't have.  Dishonesty, lack of concern for other people, like not acceptable. Where's the AMA? So get a  load of this story. Why did I become interested in this whole this whole story of of medicine and  doctrine, medicine and and false orthodoxy. This goes back to when I lived in Vienna. I lived in  Vienna for many years um as a true crime author. I I became interested in and and and sorry your  life story which we haven't gotten into but I would encourage people to look it up. So you you  start as a Germanspeaking philosopher and you wind up as a true crime author. I just I just love the  course of people's lives is so amazing. Well well I mean talk about money. I mean I mean one and  and the the power of money to to direct people's attention. So I I think I would have liked to  have been a philosopher. Um two things happened. I didn't like hanging around with academics  and B I I mean I I don't mind not being rich, but I didn't like being poor. Oh, I hosted  Fox and Friends weekends for four years, so I I I know what it means to have to make certain  compromises to pay the bills. So, I get it. So, so I got interested in forensic medicine and I got to  be pals with the pathologist, the forensic doctor at the Vienna Institute of Forensic Medicine. and  she wanted to get some of her papers published in English. And she said, you know, I can I know  the basic medical terms, but I don't know how to write in and in in a good nice flowing style.  This was before all these translate things. So, you know, I'll do my basic translational and  make sure the medical terminology is correct, but could you put this into a paper that somebody  might want to actually read? So I did a few translations for her and I I got to be pals with  her and I got to where I was hanging out at the Vienna Institute of Forensic Medicine, you know,  once every couple of months when I was researching my first book and I became so fascinated I even  thought about writing a screenplay about this. So, there was a professor of anatomy at the University  of Vienna Medical School in the 1840s, and I'm I'm sorry that his his his name is suddenly slipping  me, but he was an anatomy professor. And every day he took his students to the the Institute of  Forensic Medicine for anatomy class. They would do um anatomical studies of cadaavvers. And  then from the anatomy class, the students would then go to the obstetrics department  of the University of Vienna Medical School. And there the head of obstetrics was a guy named  Professor Ignat Semlv. Okay. So the year is 1848. A pivotal year on the continent. Right. Right.  So think about a revolution. It's interesting. So was it 48? It might have been 46. Anyway, 1846,  47 or 48. Some of his pals with the professor of anatomy. The professor of anatomy is doing a  demonstration is using a scalpel on a cadaavver and then accidentally cuts himself. That injury,  that wound then becomes horribly infected and he dies. He gets sepsis and he dies. Some of us start  thinking that's interesting because his the that the disease progression with the professor. It  reminds me of what these girls in the maternity ward are suffering. It's called childbed fever.  Exactly. Could it be might there be a connection? Now remember this is before the germ theory of  medicine. I I think an Italian had had proposed it but it hadn't caught on. So some of says could  it be that the corruption that is transferred from the cadaavver to my friend with the scalpel that  the students they're coming directly here from anatomy? Could it be they're transferring the same  corruption from the body to the genital tracts of my girls in the maternity ward? Could it be that  if I have them wash their hands with chlorinated lime, it's what gravediggers or undertakers use to  cut putrifaction, what'll happen? So he tells the kids, "Wash your hands with chlorinated lime  before you examine the girls in my maternity ward." So let's test your powers of deductive  reasoning. What happened to the incidence of child bed fever in the maternity ward when they  started washing their hands? I'm thinking it fell. It fell. It fell almost to zero from 20% to damn  well close to zero. So some says, "Well, that's it. I mean, let's just have the kids wash their  hands." So he publishes his study. He does a an analysis of two different maternity wards. He does  a nice comparative case study. What do you think the eminences of Europe, the medical universities,  Vienna, Paris, Stockholm, what did they say? How did they greet Samis's seinal study with cheering  and tears of gratitude? Is that what you believe? No, cuz I know people. They said that's fish tank  cleaner. That's horse tranquilizer. How dare you? And then they went on CNN to denounce him. They  said, "You're crazy." Yeah. You've been infected with a deranged superstition. Everybody knows  it's got nothing to do with that. You're just putting stupid ideas into the heads of your young  and naive students. Stop it. So some of says, "No, I'm not going to stop it. I'm going to continue  researching this and I'm going to continue publishing this. So, this turns into a battle  royale in Europe. Okay. Now, interestingly enough, Oliver Wendell Holmes is doing the same at the  exact same time. I mean, I don't know, maybe they heard of each other. He's doing it at Harvard  and he Holmes is not getting a bunch of blowback at Harvard, but some of in Vienna is okay. So  this is how badly this escalates and remember this it' be useful to remember given the current  climate of things. So the eminences of Europe say um we have to silence this guy. Some of then  starts firing back you guys at this point have reached a moment where you actually know that I'm  telling the truth. Like like the reality is the evidence has now come in. It's so strong that  you know I'm telling the truth, but you would rather than adopt my protocol of handwashing. You  would rather that young moms, young mothers and their infants and maternity wards all over the  continent of Europe, you would prefer that they die rather than admit you're wrong. Wow, man.  So, do you know what the response was to him? You're a dangerous lunatic and we're having a  court in Vienna declare you insane and we're going to put you in the Vienna insane asylum.  They admit him and is this a true story? This is a true story. His wife says to him, "I  don't see, with all due respect, dear husband, I don't see how you can be right when all  of these medical eminences are wrong." So, she leaves him. No way. He's completely forsaken.  He's put in a mental uh asylum or insane asylum. There's actually an insane asylum that still  stands in Fienna. It's called um the Nan Tour the the the tower of fools. It still exists  by the way. It's very interesting. Remember the end of Amadeus the film where Solier is being  wheeled out. He's in the Nahan tom. Yeah. Anyway, so I don't think that Samise is in the Nanorm. I  think he's at a facility in the Vienn somewhere out in the Vienna woods. A guard strikes him with  something. We don't know if it was a blunt object. We don't know if it was a a a sharp object.  He gets an infection and he dies in an insane asylum. No, it's a true story. And how long  was it until he was postumously vindicated? Um I think Robert K in Germany in the 1870s vindicated 1870s so decades. So consider this. Um,  when we talk about you're up against censorship and you're up against the imposition of falsehood  and no matter what you say, you're just going to be told to shut up. Shut up. Shut up. I'm familiar  with that. Yes. Um, it may be 30 years. Yeah, that's right. I mean, we may we may be all gone  before. So, I'll give you another example. Smoking tobacco. So, I know you like to to uh to to smoke  in your younger days, and my mother will hold this against me, but when I lived in Europe, I enjoyed  an occasional cigarette. Well, I to be clear, I I've never stopped smoking. I love it, but no, I  I realize it has health effects that are bad. So, so the question was um in the 1920s and 30s um in  Germany um is there a link between long-term use of tobacco and carcinoma of the lung, cancer of  the lung? And you know, here's where you have to be really particular. So, it's not that everyone  who smokes is going to get lung cancer. It's not true. But could it be that in some cases? Yeah.  Among some of the population there's an underlying susceptibility and if that susceptibility is  activated by years of heavy cigarette smoking could in that susceptible population could  it cause carcinoma of the lung? There was an epidemiologist in Germany named Fritz Linkett and  he did a a a metaanalysis of all of the data from pathologists to doctors to everybody you could  talk to that had ever made any observations on this. And he concluded yes not in everybody but  in a statistically significant susceptible part of the population cigarette smoking causes  carcinoma of the lung. So that's 1930. Okay. And what year did the surgeon general's warning  appear on Camel cigarettes? I think 1964. 64. So that's that's that's quite a spread. So So  Sir Austin Bradford Hill was probably the most famous epidemiologist of all time. We have these  Bradford Hill criteria of evaluating causation. So in 1950 he does a landmark study and he  concludes yes again not everybody but in a susceptible population smoking causes carcinoma  of the lung. In spite of his prestige, the tobacco industry, all of its hired gun doctors, and the  tobacco industry did have hired gun doctors, that was systematically obscured for another  16 years. So when interests are at stake, don't expect acknowledgment of error. It's all  uh shocking but as I think the story the amazing story you just told reminds us we should not  be shocked because this is how people are and how always have been and even if the recognition  you receive for telling the truth isostimous or doesn't come at all it doesn't it doesn't matter  because it's a virtue in itself to tell the truth and that's why I'm grateful for the book you  wrote with Peter McCulla and I'm grateful for this conversation which was like twice as compelling  as what I expected so thank you thank it. You don't need to be an economist to see what's  happening. The dollar is in trouble. It's getting weaker. It's sad, but we're not in charge of  it. So, we have to respond appropriately in ways to protect our families. When paper money  dies, it's going to be replaced by programmable digital currency or gold. Gold survives. The same  Americans who think they're protecting themselves with gold are the ones getting ripped off by big  gold dealers. After we left corporate media, we got offered tens of millions of dollars to promote  gold companies. How do they get the money to spend that much on marketing cuz they're scamming their  customers. We didn't want anything to do with that. So, we sought an honest broker and together  we formed a precious metals company that you can actually trust. It's called Battalion Metals.  At battalion metals.com, we publish actual spot prices. We're totally transparent about the vig,  what we take, and we treat everyone with honesty. So, if you've been watching what's happening,  you know it's not just about money. It's about sovereignty and holding something that endures  and cannot be manipulated or taken from you. So, if you've been waiting for the right time to  act, this is it. Visit battalionmedals.com.