Joe Rogan what? The Joe Rogan experience. Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. So this is the first of, I've never had to do an emergency podcast before. But I feel like we do and Brett you and I have been in communication about this and this seems like something that we have to do quicker than later. Let's explain what's going on. You guys have had conversations. First of all, Dr. Corey please explain who you are and introduce yourself. Yes, sure. So I'm along an ICU specialist who's part of a group of other ICU specialists. We came together early in the pandemic to develop treatment protocols for COVID. We first developed the hospital treatment protocol back in March and then more recently we have an outpatient treatment protocol centered around the drug I've remacked in and I'll just say through our work, I would say we are probably the foremost experts on the use of Ivermacked in COVID in the world. And how did you Brett, how did you get involved with Dr. Corey and how did your initial conversation get started? Heather and I have been podcasting on the developing COVID story for quite some time. We started very early and we actually took the dark worst podcast which had been just me talking to people and Heather and I started live streaming twice a week at first and at first we were just simply looking at the evidence on COVID, what it is, how it transmits, how it should change your behavior. And those early days it was scary, we didn't know if it was transmitted on surfaces or what. So Heather and I just did our analysis live or not live, I guess it was live but in any case the two of us just had discussions about what we thought the evidence meant and we presented papers that we were reading in the literature. And we should explain your credentials like what? I'm a biologist, I'm an evolutionary biologist. The importance of evolution here is that A, all of the things that we're talking about with COVID are evolutionary. Obviously the virus is evolved, epidemiology is an evolutionary process, the immune system is both a product of evolution and it evolves in real time when you have an infection. So evolution is a kind of good generalist toolkit to apply to something like COVID. But in any case as we were working through the various emerging evidence and figuring out what we believed and what we didn't and why we ran into Ivermectin and there was this indication that it was effective against COVID and we didn't know what to make of it, we didn't know whether or not there was something. Where was the initial indication from? I can't recall, actually Pierre might have some idea where we would have encountered it in April or. Yeah, so. So, you know, just also Joe just for a little bit more background, I do want to emphasize that although I'm here today talking, my group, the five of us we call ourselves the front mine COVID-19 critical care alliance were led by Dr. Paul Marrick, very famous guy in our specialty in fact he's the most published intensivist in the world. That's what we are ICU docs and people came to him to develop protocols. So he grabbed his four closest colleagues and friends of which I'm honored to be one, I'm a good friend of his and he's a mentor to me. And we've studied, we basically started putting together protocols that we took from other critical illnesses that were expert at and we applied them to COVID and we learned everything we cut around COVID. We just read papers and papers and papers and we followed all the therapeutics that were being child and tested around the world and I've remacked in the first paper was last about March or April, but it came out of a lab. It was just like what's called a cell culture model. It wasn't tested in humans, but this cell culture model showed that if you applied I've remacked into these, it was actually monkey kidney cells. The virus was essentially eradicated within 40 hours. They could find almost no viral material when they used Ivermactin in this cell culture model. Some places around the world took that bench study and brought it out into clinical use and I call that the bench to the bedside and if you know anything about medicine development very few what we call molecules make it from the bench to the bedside. It was an emergency, it was a pandemic and so there were areas around the world that they just said it looks like it might work, it's a safe drug, it's a very well-known drug. People used it and so that was the first signal was just from the cell culture model. So it's a well-known drug that's been used for 40 plus years and the issue became that discussing this and discussing what you just said on YouTube led to your channel getting now one strike on one channel and is three strikes on your clips channel? No, we have and YouTube has behaved very bizarrely with respect to our channels. They've delivered one strike to each channel, one warning to each channel and they've removed many videos but they've played a game with their accounting system where they've removed multiple videos, filed them under a single warning. So it's not clear what they are doing or why but it is clear that they don't want certain things discussed and what has been their explanation? We actually got an official explanation from YouTube, maybe we should read that, maybe we should just read what their response has been because their response has essentially been they have one is it the CDC that they'll tolerate or that they'll agree to listen to them because obviously it can't be everybody now because we have the WHO is now saying that you shouldn't vaccinate children, they're not recommending vaccinate children or pregnant people, right? Is that okay? But we should be clear about this, right? That's correct, right? Well there's a number of different agencies like you just mentioned, right? In the US, and actually I don't know which agency those different social media channels are basing what they're considering approved therapies or unapproved. I think it's the CDC, isn't that? Well yes, is that what it is when you take a quote of 10? So the CDC FDA and other local health authorities. Right, but if you up until recently, if you said I don't think children should get vaccinated, they would pull that, right? Now the WHO is saying we don't think children should get vaccinated. I've also seen recent recommendations that say that women that it's completely safe, if you're pregnant to get vaccinated, the WHO does not say that. The WHO says you have to contact your care provider, which is a weird sort of way of like saying just to ask your doctor, but your doctor theoretically should not know any more than anybody else knows. This is a weird, like when people say what is the science? Well there's a lot of science going on here, and there's science coming from different directions, and depending upon who you listen to, you're going to get a different set of protocols, right? There's no question. You know, the way I talk about this is that you're seeing just this inconsistent standard, especially around therapeutics, the drugs that they favor and the ones that they don't. Really, it's very hard to follow consistent scientific principles being applied there. In fact, there seems to be other principles being applied, but what you just highlighted is this discord between guidance from major agencies are completely different, right? So now they're diverging around vaccines. What is the divergence you do explain? So the WHO, I mean, what is the specific divergence? In other examples. Yeah, like what? So number one, remdesivir. $3,000 dose drug, right? WHO does not recommend in the hospitalized patient in the US every single hospitalized patient gets remdesivir. Well, why is that? That's what I'm just saying. It's an inconsistent application. Why are they giving them remdesivir as a basic study? Well, it's yes, there are studies. So there are studies showing some support, but it doesn't show really what we would call important patient center outcomes. So yes, it could get you out of the hospital a little bit sooner. There is some signal that it might actually reduce mortality, so it might save some lives, but its impact is actually minimal and the study is varied. And so the WHO does not recommend it. They did a big trial of remdesivir. They showed it did not help anyone and so they don't recommend it. And is remdesivir something that's patented on the thing about one of the things about Ivermectin has been around so long there's a generic version of it available. Is that correct? That's a key feature of Ivermectin. There's no money to be made off Ivermectin. And no one can kind of control it. It's not like any pharmaceutical company can manufacture out of patent and not high profit. This becomes part of the issue with highlighting it, right? So I think we probably need to put a bunch of things on the table otherwise we're going to end. Yeah, I just wanted to be real clear about the YouTube situation with you because the reason while we're here is your channels and jeopardy. Yes, it doesn't make any sense. So YouTube has done a couple things. The first strike was for, you try to remember the language, I think it was spam, deceptive practices and scams. What was specifically spam? Obviously there was no spam. Right, but how can they say spam if you're just having conversations without a thing? They can say what they want because they're YouTube and basically although a majority of my family's income comes through our two YouTube channels, my contract with them is effectively an end-user license agreement. And so there basically is no recourse other than making a public stir, which has apparently gotten their attention in this case. But the, so the first one was for spam, deceptive practices and scams. And what was the specific video was this for? That was actually, that was for my video with you. And the second one, the second strike on the other channel was for, I hope I'm getting the details right, I'm not sure that they actually matter. There are two issues in question and the various strikes and warnings apply to one or the other, either my podcast with Corey and the clips from it or my podcast with Dr. Malone who is the inventor of mRNA vaccine technology and Steve Kirsch who has been looking into vaccine hazards. But the second one was more specific, it was clearer and what they said was deceptive medical information. So part of what we should discuss today is what it means for a YouTube to decide that something is deceptive or misinforming on a medical topic that is rapidly developing. So, and they also, I would point out, have a feature in their community guidelines which allows them to break their own rule against misinformation, what they categorize as misinformation, if one presents countervailing evidence. They don't say that they are required to break their rule. So in essence, what all of these things look like is a set of guidelines that if you read them carefully and attempt to adhere to them, you don't know where the line is. You find out where the line is when YouTube decides to warn you or strike you. And it's an un-channable situation. As I said, the majority of my family's income is in jeopardy because YouTube has decided that some things that are very strongly supported by evidence are misinformation and their basis for claiming that is that the who or the CDC has said otherwise. But this raises a question. If the who or the CDC were to be captured, right? If influence was to be exerted over one or both of these bodies, surely we would need to talk about it on the various podcasts that are on YouTube in order to figure out what to do about the fact that an essential set of organizations that are supposed to be protecting the public health might be doing someone else's bidding instead, podcasts would be a natural place for doctors and scientists to get together and say what we're seeing doesn't add up. But to take what they're saying is gospel and anything that contradicts them as misinformation rather than saying actually the evidence is what the people you're saying are spreading misinformation and the evidence is most definitely not what the CDC in the who. What do you do in that case? Well, Dr. Cory, where do they vary? Where does the CDC in the World Health Organization not agree? So we talked about vaccines already, Remdesivir. Another important one was this idea of whether the virus is airborne transmitted, right? So there's three ways that you can transmit a virus, right? One is direct contact surfaces like hand to mouth, right? Like spittle or whatever you touch your mouth and it goes that way. Droplet, so large droplet transmission from like a cough and then you, you know, lands on your face or you rub it into, you know, the mucus membranes or airborne where it's actually inhaled and just sharing the air with someone with COVID you can catch it. That's what tuberculosis is. That's why there's so much infection control practice around TB because that's an airborne transmitted disease. The, it took them a year, all of the agencies to figure out whether there was airborne transmitted. I already wrote an op-ed that was accepted by New York Times last May saying this is an airborne transmissions. You could see it. Who disagrees? So, so right now the CDC finally came around and admits that it's airborne transmitted to WHO still does not. What? Yes. So really like legitimately to this day they say it's not transmitted airborne. It's sufficient evidence. So what the cry in sufficient evidence. So how do they feel it's transmitted? Well, they think that it's all three are possible. They don't think it's predominant and they just, at least the way I've read the WHO is they just don't feel that it's it's a important mode of transmission. It, it may be possible. So, but they really minimize it where the CDC says that it is, it seems to be a different, definite mode of transmission. Is this debated in science or is it only debated in these organizations? So, is it debated amongst practitioners? Oh, yes. It was debated and the problem is it took time for it to become clear that this was transmitted in this airborne form. And part of there's partly that we've got a confusion, right? So, what's happening is COVID is highly effective at transmitting in part because it just saturates the air, right? It gets into these very little particles which don't do what the initial model said, right? The initial model had it in large droplets which only spend a little bit of time in the air, right? And so, the air clears because they hit the ground due to gravity. Hence the six-foot social distance. Right. But, you know, and actually, this is one of the places where Heather and I were way ahead. We were beginning to detect that there was something about, there was something about the fact that time spent in a room in which somebody had had COVID was creating these super spreader events which was suggesting that this wasn't a highly proximity dependent that's that basically, you know, there was a clock ticking and the room filled up with the stuff. And if the window was open, it filled up a lot slower that kind of thing, right? So, we were building this in real time from what we were reading in these papers which frankly mostly had not been peer reviewed because there was no time. These were preprints, right? So, you could begin to see the story develop and you could begin to see the dawning awareness and what Pierre is saying is effect, I forget which of the organizations does not is not yet up to date on airborne transmission. Well, the WHO is not yet up to date. The CDC did about a month ago, they did make a formal statement that they believe it's airborne. Is it safe to say that they're waiting for a preponderance of evidence? The WHO? That's not a short answer. The WHO is a very complex organization. I don't know what I think there's so many influences that the WHO I think there's other factors that are making them reluctant to call airborne trisms issue because the implications that would have around infection control resources and 95, this is just me theorizing. I can't pretend to understand the WHO. I know that that organization has been well described now over 20 years to be highly susceptible to many outside influence. And if you want evidence of that, just look at that one video where there was a journalist was trying to get the person from the WHO to even say Taiwan, to even talk about Taiwan and they literally disconnected their computer and then came back on and would not say the name Taiwan because China does not recognize Taiwan as a country. And then they said I think China's doing a great job. Let's continue. Let's move past this and they wanted to quickly brush it away and it's glaringly obvious that there's an influence in that regard. It is. And also I think the question that you're really asking is, is there a defense of being cautious about this conclusion? And the answer is no, that ship sailed the better part of a year ago. This was obvious. And the fact is it's crucial. People need to understand that their masks are not going to be perfectly effective. If you're in a room with somebody breathing out COVID, then the point is there's a clock ticking. And you have control over this. You get into the Uber and your driver is sick and they've been breathing this stuff out. They've saturated the air. You need to understand that saturated air is a thing and you need to start thinking in terms of rolling down windows, limiting your time in that space, those sorts of things. So this is actionable. And so for them to be behind the evidence here is actually potentially very, I mean, I hesitate to say it, but it's deadly. And this problem that we're highlighting here is that all this stuff is developing over the course of this pandemic and the rules are changing and the agreed upon facts are changing. In the beginning of the pandemic, if you just go back seven, eight months ago, if you said that it leaked from a lab, you get lumped instantaneously into a conspiracy theorist and a Trump supporter. And you get dismissed and you get you get censored from Facebook and you get censored from YouTube, right? This is all we all agree upon this. That's not the case anymore. Now because of a lot of people's work because there's a lot of people that have stuck their neck out and risk being labeled as a conspiracy theorist or as a Trump supporter just to put out the science. And now the consensus is it's very possible that it leaked if not likely that it leaked from the from a lab. In fact, this John Stewart clip that's been going around is it's hilarious to watch Stephen Cobraire panic and try to try to dismiss what he's saying or try to pretend that it doesn't make any sense interrupting a comedy bit on a comedy showing this is how strong the narrative is at a corporate level because he's on this big time television show. So there's you know it's you're on a network. There's probably a lot of pressure to stick with the conformed narrative. And John Stewart literally is in the middle of a comedy bit and Cobra is trying to handicap it. He's trying to hamstring the comedy bit because he doesn't want him to continue saying what he's saying and to say in a comedic way is actually even worse because it's actually funny how stupid it is to dismiss instantaneously that it came from a lab when it literally is the same exact disease they work on in the lab it's in that city and three people from that fucking lab got sick in 2019 with the exact same symptoms that you're seeing and one of their spouses died from the exact same symptoms right. Is that all safe to say? I think I think I don't know about the particular story on the end of what you just said. I think it's pretty please google that because in 2019 in November of 2019 three workers from the Wuhan Institute this is all from memory came up sick and they were hospitalized with the exact same symptoms that you're seeing from COVID-19 patients and I believe one of their spouses died. I did not know about the spouse having died I think I just didn't read it carefully enough. You're right about the three workers and the belief that this happened. But let me tell you my point is that this keeps evolving and this keeps so to like to stop conversations it's very dangerous because you you might be censoring something that's absolutely 100% true. So there's people that would have gotten that information and it would educated them and expanded their understanding of it. US Intel reports identified three Wuhan lab researchers who fell ill in November 2019 I mean look at this but but the evidence is far from conclusive. Like why did you put that in there in sufficient evidence. But isn't the funny the way they wrote that but see if you find the thing there I just want to be clear if it's about the if the spouse died just on to make one point. Also that you know when you talk about yeah so you bring up this point about the Wuhan lab leak and how that was discredited right not enough evidence and and basically you had that discussion suppressed. I want to bring that into the larger context which for me that's an example of what's called disinformation. So when the science runs counter to the interests of whoever it is a political body of someone with large financial interests would they do to counteract inconvenient science is they employ tactics of disinformation. So I want to be clear that misinformation is what I'm being accused of which is I'm a medical misinformation is because I'm providing information that is not supported by the establishment right so anything that doesn't agree with them is misinformation but what they do is disinformation. So the science around the lab leak was inconvenient to a lot of people and so that was distorted suppressed and debunked right but now we're finding out that if we really do look at the science the truth is a little different. I'm going to say that's very similar to the Ivermectin story. The science around Ivermectin is up against one of the largest and most powerful disinformation campaigns I think almost ever and we should be real clear that you were one of the very first people to point out that the characteristics of the virus seemed indicated upon closer examination that it was engineered. You were one of the very first you did it on my show and we both got labeled again as conspiracy theorists and leaning or dog whistling to the right or whatever. And so the molecular work was done by or the investigation into it was done by Yuri Dagan who I had on my show. I came on your show and talked about it and yes we were both dismissed as a trafficking and conspiracy theories. It's a tell when this was about somewhere around like April of last year correct. It was April of 2020 was when I did this on my podcast the first time I can't remember exactly. I think it was around the same time. But one of the things about the story that's so bizarre is that at the point that it suddenly shifted nothing changed right there was no new piece of information the only triggering event appeared to be Nicholas Wade's piece that he came out and laid out the same information in large measure that Nicholson Baker had already laid out right. So the point was this there was no there was nothing that caused the story to suddenly make sense where people had missed it before. It was just like they couldn't sustain the lie any longer and so they decided to back off a bit and come up with some new posture that they felt they could defend. So this was a question of disinformation. This was a question of actually stigmatizing people who were simply reading the evidence and you're right that the exact connection people need to draw is why is it that we are going to the very same people who got that story wrong and are now not only embarrassed by the fact that they blew it but also it is clear that behind the scenes they knew better right you can read this in Fauci's emails with Christian Anderson it is clear that they also saw the signal in the genome that this did not look like a fully natural virus. And so anyway what I don't understand is why we don't simply apply the lesson of the lab leak which we have just learned which is that the authorities do not know what they're talking about inherently does not say they never do but in that case they got it dead wrong they use the very same censorship tactics in order to shut down discussion and now we know who was right. So why are we listening to the same people making the same sorts of strange postures in public and shutting down using censorship to shut down discussion when in fact the evidence is very clearly supportive of that discussion and that is the anomaly here. And we should say that Christian Anderson in particular has deleted his Twitter account upon the release of these emails which is generally not a good sign. It is an indication that he does not feel like defending himself on Twitter presumably because he can't defend himself. It's not even just that he's not defending himself he doesn't exist on it anymore. He pulled his entire account. Correct. That's not good. We should also say here's one of the most important things about what your podcast does. You and your wife are incredibly careful and precise in the language that you use. You cite science. You're not hyperbolic. You do not exaggerate for effect. There's no entertainment value to it in terms of like exaggerating or putting a bunch of emotions to things or screaming out. You're just talking about the what is known in terms of what researchers have discovered. Here's the conclusions that can be drawn and you're very careful in the way you say it which is so infuriating that you're being censored because you will always say the majority of evidence points to or it's entirely possible that we're incorrect but here's what the evidence points to. This is so important in this day and age where people are trying to figure out what's happening in real time that you have people that actually understand how to read the science. Actually understand how to read these papers and then take that data and give it to people in a very consumable way which is what you and Heather do on your show and to see you get censored by people who I don't know what's going on if they're just if they're just trying to manage its scale and it's overwhelming and I assume that it's got to be part of it because I think there's no way YouTube or any organization that deals with that money that many user uploads can really pay attention to everything. It's insanity. The sheer volume of uploads they get on a daily basis is insane and it may very well be that they've been given a series of guidelines and you have a bunch of people that are working for the company that are using these sort of subjective measurements as to what's what's okay what's not okay. Hence the spam title right doesn't make any sense like they're just throwing a bunch of charges against a wall like a bad cop and then pulling your video and for someone like myself who needs to know that there's people out there that are objectively analyzing this stuff regardless of what the narrative is and this is where it's important because we've seen the narrative be wrong multiple times over the last year and I don't think it necessarily has to be wrong because of a conspiracy or some some weird nefarious intentions I think there's really a possibility that there's a lot of confusion. During that confusion you need educated voices you need people that are doing and that's why it's insane to me that you're getting censored and drives me fucking nuts. Your podcast is one of my very favorite I listen to it or watch it all the time and it's an amazing source of rational thinking by educated people to talk about things they understand which is exactly the opposite I do. It's not it's not the opposite of what you do but it will hand labours researchers wife died of COVID like illness December 2019. Wow okay so it's real. So I want to I want to put some context here okay Heather and I are doing two things which I think work and do mean that it is I don't want YouTube censoring anybody frankly I don't think the censors are ever right but what we are doing is we are showing our work and when we get something wrong we are dedicated to going back and correcting it so that people who are trying to track our model of things get the update right and that is the right way to do this work. Now what is happening in officialdom is the opposite and the key thing to track is this word consensus right scientific consensus is two almost opposite things in this case scientific consensus a normal scientific consensus looks like you know plate tectonics right plate tectonics was an absolutely heretical idea when it was introduced the idea that the continents are moving wow that was mind-blowing blowing and almost nobody got it at first right today everybody gets it we all understand the continents move and we understand how right we know about subduction zones and these things and we've got a model that makes it makes sense and you could present something that would challenge plate tectonics you could do that but you know you've got an uphill struggle because we have arrived at this through a lot of study right and the evidence is really strong and so there is a consensus about consensus that shows up like that in the middle of an emerging pandemic right where you've got a brand new pathogen which we know very little about I remember going out of the house wearing sacrificial gloves cotton gloves that I knew I could touch things and then when I got home I could throw them away or I could wash them right I stopped doing that almost instantly as it became clear that actually although many viruses do transmit from services surfaces this one doesn't right it's not to say can't happen ever but almost never right that's not its mode of transmission right to the point is the consensus arises from the work from people challenging each other and discovering that yeah that thing seemed to make sense but it doesn't add up when you look at the evidence right that's how the consensus happens these consensus these consensus that we are being handed about how this virus works what works to fight it what doesn't work to fight it what you should do in order to protect yourself these things are being handed down from on high and then they are silencing the people who are saying hey wait a minute that thing you just told me from on high doesn't square with all the stuff I can see right so they are shutting down the challenge to a consensus that has no right to be labeled as scientific because it isn't it didn't arise through the normal process it isn't what most people think it is it is an official position right that is not a scientific consensus and the lab leak is the perfect example of this because behind the scenes a lot of people understood that the story they were being told wasn't right that there was something very conspicuous about the coincidence of this virus emerging in Wuhan on the doorstep of the Wuhan Institute of Viralogy lots of people understood that very few were willing to say it in public and so that leads me to the thing that I think you need to track which is you've got a bunch of heretics who are saying things about Ivermectin about the hazards of vaccines about all of these topics who do you believe you gonna believe the heretics well the heretics actually are an interesting group and the thing that unites them seems to be their independence of the structures that are controlling others right so what what do you make of it when the people who are free who don't have to answer to their department chair right are saying one thing and the people who are signed up for some system that holds their well-being in its hands are saying the other thing right and in this case youtube is playing this weird role right I'm free I can talk about scientific evidence but in order to talk about it with my audience I have to go through youtube right so youtube is playing like it's my department chair and it wants me to shut up about certain topics and it's going to turn up the heat on me until I do which I won't but nonetheless that's the point is something would like to limit the discussion so that we are all on the same page on topics where we couldn't possibly all be on the same page not only that they're trying to limit the discussion when if you watch your videos and you listen to either Heather yourself or Dr. Cory or any of these other guests that you've had all you are going to see is rational discussion of the facts and the facts presented with real data and when you censor that we have a real problem and it's never good and there's this weird sort of dismissive air that people have about these things this the propaganda in this regard has been so effective I was having a conversation with someone the other day and they were discussing different treatments and how videos are being pulled and they brought up Ivermectin and this other person that was with them said good because you know there's too much bad information out there they should pull that stuff and he had to explain no this is actually Ivermectin there actually is some evidence to support its use and it could be extremely beneficial to people particularly in early stages of the disease and the only way we're going to know about this is if it gets discussed if more doctors here about this more people here about this more studies emerge and then that may become the new consensus if we're allowed to look at the facts not we but you guys are allowed to look at the facts and discuss them openly if you're not we have a real problem because now we're relying only on the organizations that have already shown that sometimes they're wrong so if that's the only way we get our information we we may be wrong and lives are in danger if we're wrong oh absolutely we will lose lives if we cannot sort out where I mean even if those agencies were perfectly immune to capture we have to be able to figure out where they've got it wrong so that they can get smarter right yeah the more intelligent people to understand the data looking at it and discussing it openly the better for everybody absolutely when we're talking about you guys we're not talking about crazy conspiracy theorists that are discussing hollow earth we're talking about some real stuff I want to emphasize one thing that Brett said which is sorry do you have COVID don't I don't want I just have a little just kidding we already tested it's not the the the um the terrible thing to have though a cough in a room yeah it's it's bad I've actually done a couple other interviews and I was like you know that of course coughing you sure it doesn't have COVID so thanks Joe you want to do whiskey actually that might be exactly with the doctor ordered um the you know what what Brett's saying about the independence that's what I've noticed you know the ones that seem to get it right they they don't have masters to answer to I've learned to unfortunately throughout the pandemic I've I've had I've developed a lot of sysm system and suspicion around some of the agencies because it doesn't comport with good science and sometimes it's blatant the ones who are making sense are like you said transparent with the data analyzing openly expert at the data amassing all the data and having frank discussions when you said like Brett said you know these consensus has come down and when they're so blatantly don't match reality so again I don't want to retry the old water but like this airborne transmission you know when you have a super spreader event like someone goes to choir practice and 59 people come home with COVID when when they when they were socially distancing and one person was singing like you don't need to be like a high level scientist to know that probably that was airborne transmission there was numerous examples of that and yet the official them was that it wasn't airborne just so like it was basic stuff that didn't make sense the lab leak also just on the face of it I mean even if you didn't go down to the genome level when I heard that the lab was across the street from the wet mark as a physician I mean I oftentimes have to figure out how to do things on very little information and that to me was so powerful I mean but so the sum of some is really really clear and yet it doesn't come poor with what's coming down and so when you look at the independent objective experts I think you need because here's the other thing I feel so bad in what we're talking about because the average person who the heck knows what they should believe right they're hearing newspapers and television and right and left and everyone saying different things and you know what some of the political spectrum they're getting some things right other things like how do you believe anymore and so and this idea of capture is is a real one and so like I'm very suspicious I'm very skeptical of everything I'm being told I'd like you know for some like ground rules for the layperson to follow like how do you know who's talking truth and I think openness transparency lack of external influences like for instance our organization we're a nonprofit we took an oath this physicians to help patients when this thing came and come to our shores all we wanted to do is learn as much as we could about the disease to figure out how to kick it says how to treat this thing and that's all we've done and we don't make any money off of it we're just trying to doctor and I think I think that makes us a credible source of information at least I hope so we should also be really clear as to what information has come out over the last few weeks that might be at least some indication of why there's been a misinformation campaign absolutely yeah I do but I want to I want to clear up one thing I think we have actually made an error that we could clear up right now which is we've been talking about aerosolized transmission and I think we've been calling it airborne transmission the point is it transmits both ways and it took a long time to realize that it saturated the air rather than hanging in the air briefly and you're right that that does explain the six-foot in the hospital when we say something's air force in the hospital you can move it towards your face in the hospital airborne means aerosol it's it's the same thing that's what we call it the hospital the other thing I would just point out is the way you know what to believe and nobody knows what to believe right what you do is you build a model that gets more and more predictive over time but the thing that you can tell is good about the heretics is that we agree on a lot but we don't agree on everything right there are places where you and I disagree dr. Cory there are places where I disagree with dr. Malone the inventor of the mRNA vaccine technology the important point though is that those disagreements are about discovering what's true right you you want as a member of the group of people trying to figure this out in real time you want to find all the places that you're wrong right your model gets better as you accept those things and so that's sort of the hallmark of how consensus is properly built is the openness to push back right we push back on each other we don't pretend to all agree to the same stuff okay to the to the question you asked me though things that have emerged of late so first of all we should talk about the evidence on ivermectin and we need to be careful right the evidence on ivermectin is a vast landscape there's lots of evidence on its effectiveness with respect to SARS-CoV-2 and the evidence is noisy right there is clear signal within it one of the things that is absolutely maddening about trying to talk about that evidence is that the response is a in coherent the response pretends that there is no evidence that it works rather than a noisy data set in which it generally does appear to work but the degree to which it works and in what way it should be administered there's variation around that so we there's this this monolith that says we don't have the evidence and what we need is large scale randomized controlled trials and in a sense this is this is an obvious tell right randomized controlled trials are good if you've got them there are quite a number of randomized controlled trials with respect to ivermectin they may not be as large as you want but in general very large trials are necessary when you're looking for very small effects right what we do have is several meta-analyses a meta-analysis is an analysis that takes a bunch of different studies that were done and figures out how to pool the data from them to look for a signal it makes a big study out of little ones and it has a huge advantage to it right you can do a large study and let's say that you got the dosage 50% which you needed to in order for it to be effective right that large study would say molecule x does not show any evidence of being effective against disease why because you got the dosage wrong right it's not evidence that the molecule doesn't work it's evidence that something about that protocol with that molecule didn't work whereas if you take if you do a meta-analysis and you group together a lot of little studies then you will have some bad studies that will fail to show an effect and you'll have other studies that will get it closer to right and so the net effect of all of them tells you what direction to go and in this case we have meta-analyses and they're very clear this molecule which we've seen work in vitro that is to say in the lab in culture also is effective in patients and it's effective in two different ways right this is Dr. Corey's area of expertise but let me just say I want to divide ivermectin into two things so that we're always clear what we're talking about let's say ivermectin A is prophylactic ivermectin you take it to prevent getting the disease right ivermectin A is an anti-paracidic drug was discovered in Japan by Satoshi Omura who got a Nobel prize for it with William Campbell a merc scientist the Nobel prize was awarded in 2015 but it was discovered in 1970s yeah I mean the first the organism was in the 70s and the the molecule was purified in late 70s yeah the molecule has cured river blindness and elephantitis to very devastating diseases it's regarded by the who as an essential medicine safe for children it has been administered four billion times it's a highly effective safe drug for these parasites and so the the thing that was mentioned earlier where it was found in cell culture to work there was this desire at the beginning of covid to figure out well what molecules are effective where might we look for a drug that would work and so they you know basically they weren't looking for protocol they were just throwing a bunch of molecules at the disease to see which things showed some sign of usefulness and from there we get to all of these studies which when compiled in a meta analysis tell a very clear story let me add a couple of things because this is a cool story about so ivermectin already won the the Nobel prize for the discovery because it literally transformed the health status of huge portions of the globe in eradicating parasitic diseases the one called river blindness is it's a really moving story because you had populations villages in africa where men by the time you were 40 you were blind and so you had like these communities where the children would lead the elders around like with a stick because they were all blind from this parasite and so basically this drug restored the site and transformed the lives of millions of people around the world and so i find that a really moving story just its history in terms of parasites and then bread brought a viruses you know that study that we already talked about in australia that study actually comes on 10 years of studies in the lab on other viruses so it's been shown to be effective against zika dengue west nile hiv even influenza again all lab studies we don't really have clinical trials in the other viruses but when this pandemic came it wasn't really a crapshoot to try out ivermectin in an RNA virus and so i didn't realize that i've already had 10 years of of antiviral effects in the lab so in fact i'm gonna foreshadow a little bit it's my secret belief that as we go into the future 10 20 years my hope and what i guess is that it actually will prove to be a really broad antiviral against other viruses and so i'm like really optimistic about the future of this molecule and other viruses we can talk about COVID still because you know the the data that that bread brought up is is in my mind it's profound and i think bread's being very cautious which is correct but as a guy who's been immersed in this data who's been living with it who's the physician who's been using it i mean i've been using it for eight months i am part of a network of physicians around the world that i talked to read you know regularly many of whom have treated in the hundreds to thousands of patients um we know how effective it is and so you know i have pretty strong opinions on this data but the points that bread brings up is very true it's you know this this obsession with this large randomized control trial is um it's fraught with error when you do that it's not appropriate for a pandemic and it's also a tool that's being used as a disinformation tactic so some of it is scientifically based we all like big randomized control trials when you can get them even though they they're prone to error um but what i try to remind the world is that when you look at the strength of medical evidence to prove something in medicine you start at the bottom which is an anecdote right so let's say you got sick Joe and i gave you ever met in the next day you felt better and i'd say i found the cure for COVID that's not strong evidence right especially with the virus people get better without it right so you have anecdotes case series right then you have like observational trials where you just follow a group of patients or you look at a group that you treated versus who you didn't maybe retrospectively and it's called this pyramid of medical evidence the top of that pyramid is not a large randomized control trial it's actually what Brett said it's a meta-analysis of randomized control trials the reason why because any individual trial can have an error or a flaw or a dosing or a timing problem you might lead you to the wrong conclusion but if you have a whole collection of trials and then you put them all together and you look for the signal out of that it's much more robust because it corrects for any individual flaws that you'll see in studies and so when we talk about that there are meta-analyses of randomized control trials 24 randomized control trials thousands of patients that's fairly unassailable evidence to show massive impact of this drug against COVID are there any credible critics of these conclusions so there any are there interesting criticisms of the use of ivermectin i want to i want to please say something there there is room for skepticism on ivermectin but it does not explain the behavior of the skeptics you know the words if we look at the standard of evidence that they appear to be applying here i don't think it's defensible in the end but reasonable people could potentially disagree the problem is when you've got a drug that's this safe that does appear to work in many of the studies that have looked at it and you're not giving it to patients who show up and a test positive for COVID even when you know that for viral diseases treating them early is the key to helping them that doesn't add up because if you know the Hippocratic oath in this case would suggest that the safest thing to do is to give the drug and if it doesn't work you haven't harmed them but if you fail to give it to them and it would have worked you have so i would just point out the strange obsession with large randomized control trials is actually cryptically an attack on several things if you're going to insist that is the only kind of evidence you will accept before prescribing this drug you're signing up for new expensive drugs over cheap repurposed ones you're signing up for unknown risks over known ones we know 40 years of history on this ivermectin for example you're signing up for shareholders over patients because these large scale trials are very expensive and the drug companies have to pay for them so you're basically saying any drug that's out of patent and therefore nobody is going to you know lobby for it isn't going to be able to find the money to do the trials and you're signing up for effectively phase three information over phase four now phase four is an informal designation for the phase after a drug comes to market right the point is you don't really know how dangerous something is until you've seen it in a large population that has lots of variation in it and it has enough time for problems to develop right that's phase four but what we've done is we've effectively suspended a lot of the rules of evidence for things like vaccines that were brought to market under emergency use authorizations and then we're setting a stupidly high standard for things that are very safe and appear to work and i would just say by analogy what's the best kind of evidence for a crime right i would say video evidence of people committing the crime right video evidence in which you get a clear sense of who the person who's committing the crime is okay let's all agree that that's the best evidence what if we said that's the only evidence we're going to accept because we have really high evidentiary standards right there's no crime if it didn't get recorded on video where you can see the person's face good now okay well then the point is all right now effectively lots of stuff that we would like to make illegal isn't illegal because all you got to do is make sure there's no camera around and you can do it that's what they're effectively doing here right by insisting on that standard and ignoring all of the very high quality evidence that has come in some other form they are effectively setting a bar so high that it can't be met and why they're doing it we can speculate about but the fact that it makes no logical sense is transparent well let's speculate all right this is part of some of the things that i was discussing earlier when i said things that are coming to light new information that we know over the last few weeks so uh Jamie could you bring up that New York Times article can i emphasize the the point i like what Brett saying about i'm sorry i keep i'm a rookie here right so far you guys just like veterans yeah this thing moves okay so just pull it just grab that handle and just how's ragged towards you yeah but the problem is when you turn a face towards him uh there you go get a drop off um so when Brett talks about behavior i think it's really important because let's say there is skepticism around the data the behavior is really odd right so Brett's talking about you have one of the world's safest drugs you have nothing but positive trials even if the opposition wants to say they're low quality and small which they're not um the precautionary principle would tell you to uh recommend it but here's another more clear example of abnormal behavior when you look at strong ledisis right which is um uh or that's actually on claustrochiusis is riverbladis but the two um other parasitic diseases for which ivermethan was approved as a standard of care worldwide 10 trials with 852 patients right now ivermethan is sitting on 24 randomized control trials with 3000 patients and it's not being recommended you know what are the results of of those trials the avarmectin trials so in the most recent meta-analysis that what you're bringing up uh no but Jamie has and he could bring it up so just published this weekend by um uh yes by uh Andrew Bryan teslauri um uh scott michael actually who's a member of the flccc but um this is a group of researchers who for decades their main job is to review medicine medical evidence to formulate guidelines for the big national and international health care agencies let's go back to that term i used before they did this work independently no one paid them to do this work they did it because they saw they looked at my paper and they saw my testimony and they immediately got interested and they started researching and they found consistent positive reproducible signals and so this meta-analysis which was just uh published basically found that there was a 62 on average and a 62 percent reduction in death when you used ivermethan from all of these randomized controlled trials so basically you'd save two out of every three people that you treated and i would also again argue that's the minimum of what ivermethan is capable of because not in every trial where they treated early when you look at the early versus late they do so much better and so i you know what are the results for early do we have so early around 80 percent reduction uh and sometimes even higher in in in the hospitalization and death so if you treat patients and even in those early it's not my early so my dream my dream is that every household has has ivermethan in the cupboard and you take it upon development of first symptom of anything approximating a viral syndrome especially in the context what i mean you should be assuming any sort of viral fluid like illness that you're developing right now is covid until proven otherwise and take it and even if it's not covid it's safe to take and it's probably effective against that virus so there are they're all what's considered minor and transient and that's another example of weird behavior when the wh-o put out their guideline on ivermethan they put in a lot of language questioning the safety of ivermethan which is known as one of the safest drugs in history it's been mass distributed across continents billions of doses and they want to bring out questions around safety while there are other guidelines for the other diseases that ivermethan is from the wh-o they all they'll write in there that billions of doses been administered the side effects are minor and trans so they're inconsistent dependent upon what disease they're talking about ivermethan being prescribed with with covid they are off the reservation what is what are the criticisms in terms of like when they're when they're talking about the possible and potential side effects what are they saying so the so right now know they're what they try to do is they're trying to suggest that there's there's more side effects when you use ivermethan versus placebo but there's really nothing important so you get a little nauseous some people get a headache some people get a little bit dizziness but they generally go away with stopping the drug and they're also reasonably well tolerated and so you'll tolerate a little bit of anil effect from a drug if it's going to help you prevent hospital and death and so it's an extremely well tolerated drug and the last thing i'll say on the safety is a famous french toxicologist reviewed 350 studies on ivermethan and he was contracted to do this and he put his report out about a month and a half ago and in the executive summary he writes that severe side effects from ivermethan are unequivocally and exceedingly rare unequivocally and exceedingly rare it's a very very safe drug all right a couple things um one Jamie can you put the abstract of that paper back up because there's this thing so the world is very focused on using ivermethan to treat COVID which i understand but we miss this other thing so scroll down a little bit therapeutic advances there it is sentence in the middle okay this might be one of the most important sentences written this century low certainty evidence found that ivermethan prophylaxis prophylaxis reduced COVID-19 infection by an average of 86% 95% confidence interval between 79% and 91% so that sentence actually is a hallelujah sentence because what it means is even if ivermethan were completely ineffective at treating people who have COVID that number is high enough because it is over the number uh that we understand herd immunity to be for this disease any number that has been proposed uh as far as i know because that number is so high what it means is that ivermethan alone if properly utilized is capable of driving this pathogen to extinction and we should discuss what the what the word prophylaxis means because many many people may not know to think about it as a condom right Joe Joe i've been told multiple times when i talk about ivermethan to use um preventively yeah because you're absolutely right yeah a lot of people don't understand the context all it means is to take the drug to anticipate that you may get it so if you're in a high risk area you take it and it's it'll protect you to prevent infection. I've sent you from contracting so i should say i was a little i was very encouraged by that number that number is high enough to be uh independently the end of COVID if we decide to make it so i was concerned at the beginning of that sentence starts with low certainty evidence so i contacted test lory and i asked her what that meant and it turns out it's part of a categorization scheme within the data science that is used to do these meta analyses and low certainty means that there is an expectation that if you had more information the number would move a little bit it doesn't mean that it's uncertain whether the effect is there that that the identifying the exact number is liable to be sensitive to more information but nonetheless again this is the issue of ivermethan A is prophylaxis ivermethan B is treatment the evidence that it is highly effective as treatment is i would argue overwhelming you can see it in this meta analysis the signal is very clear and my experience has been when you look at the papers in which it's disappointing you very frequently see a reason right in general they treat late we know that that is an obstacle to it working the last paper i went to gave it on an empty stomach this is one of these things where you tell me if i'm wrong Pierre but if you're treating parasites you may want to keep the drug in your gut and therefore you don't want it to dissolve and cross into your blood if you're treating or preventing COVID you do want it to cross into your blood and the fact is the molecule is fat soluble so if you're taking it as prophylaxis you should take it with fat but they don't like to do stuff like that in these trials because empty stomach is the way to get all of the patients to be the same if they've eaten something they will have eaten different things and it creates noise so anyway there's a there's a bias there in some studies in which they block the effect in part by not letting it cross into the bloodstream yeah two two more points on this abstract so the two most important words right so so Brett emphasized this finding of 86 percent protection against infection if you take it preventatively right and that low certainty evidence means it could be higher than 86 percent protection it could be lower i maintain i want to really emphasize this is that if you look at the trials that make up those preventive trials right the ones where you take it weekly because they had some what you took weekly some where you actually just took it once a month and they they actually had profound benefits but the ones that you took weekly led to like near perfect protection like 100 percent protection in the large population of health care workers now in that trial they also took it with like a seaweed called carrot gene and it's more common in South America it's considered to be vericidal it's been shown to be vericidal and so they sprayed that in the side of vericidal vericidal meaning can kill like homicidal but vericidal means kills virus so right so a virus murder right so and so they they kind of used to and actually trials of that seaweed spray are actually also positive so so the best trials of prevention really had two molecules that were probably working in concert but it led to near to perfect protection in in in 1200 health care workers 800 who took this regimen 400 who didn't not one of it was 788 health care workers got COVID over like a four-month period well wait but not one of them got not one of them but that's that's not the thing that's most impressive here because these were frontline workers who were so thoroughly exposed to COVID that 57 percent of the people in the 400-person control group who didn't take ivermectin did get COVID right that's a huge distinction so yes i agree that to the extent that this evidence is low certainty it suggests strongly that a proper protocol with this a protocol in which we've dialed in the steps of it is liable to be much closer to a hundred percent effective but i want to emphasize it doesn't matter that number is plenty high to drive COVID to extinction and i would also say and this is my wheelhouse evolution we are dealing with a limited time the more time this virus has to experiment with humans the more likely we get stuck with it forever so our failure to apply ivermectin and frankly it isn't just ivermectin we now have a series of repurposed drugs for which there's not a large profit to be made because they're out of patent but have shown high effectiveness in the treatment of of COVID our failure to use these things properly in a coordinated way that is actually evidence-based is putting humanity in danger of getting stuck with this pandemic forever absolutely i mean the key thing that i want to communicate is that this is a treatable disease we do have an outpatient treatment for it it's not just ivermectin Brett mentioned a number of other molecules that are ivermectin has the most data behind it and it also has the longest experience especially when you talk about population-wide distribution so you can't think of a better drug that already has a track record at eradicating a scourge of disease across continents the best thing it has gone for it is that trump never brought it up there is that right there is that there's not a resistance on the left right the only resistance right the only resistance is the resistance because of the authorities the authorities not backing it or what's happening with youtube censorship so i want to bring up the second most important word on that abstract and this is the key of kind of what you just said Joe is that the the trials i'm just so blown away by the evidence behind ivermectin so as a physician i've i mean that's what i do i read i look at therapies i'm always trying to figure out how to treat my patients better you know i'm an intensivist right so i deal with the sickest of the sick depending on the month or the unit about 20% of my patients will die and so i'm taking care of a lot of dying patients and a lot of patients who are near death and there's nothing more satisfying than bringing them back a lot of those therapies are time-dependent dose-dependent and they're synergistic and so you really need to be you know you need to be constantly trying to figure out better ways to treat your patients right when i look at the evidence for ivermectin i've never seen a collection of trials so consistently and reproducibly positive they line up in a way it's almost visually beautiful in that the treatment effects are always so large now i am so moved by this i'm so amazed by this and in this process and i've been fighting this fight now for eight months when i first came out in public as you know people know i gave the senate testimony which a lot of people watched i was shocked at the resistance that it met like i i put all these trials i showed all the evidence and i it was just getting dismissed and they were like basically almost felt like i was being condescended to in lecture like oh you don't know how to read evidence and i was saying i can't think of in history trials that are lining up like this randomized observational prevention treatment early late okay i had any debates or any conversations public yeah i just disagree i just had a debate with what i call an ivory tower academic last week it'll be up on uh trial site news uh trial site news is a website where uh which had been very played a big role in the pandemic because they have been following and reporting on ivermectin efficacy since last april in fact a lot of different developments and things that i've learned about ivermectin i've gotten from trial site news there it's a website where they follow everything pharma so anything that comes out of a drug trial or related to pharmaceutical industry it really therapeutics and trials it goes on trial site news but they've been a really uh very close observer of ivermectin so um the thing about what happens though when you bring this evidence fourth is and this is why we'll get back to this abstract is that the opposition to ivermectin they're faced with right now 60 controlled trials showing benefit maybe one or two didn't show benefit 58 out of the 60 show benefits and they say this is low quality evidence poorly designed trials small trials and that's been the same thing they've been saying for six months now when you grade the quality evidence there's actually standards there's definitions there's way to do it so teslor and her group who did this that's what they do their experts at grading quality of evidence they grade the quality of evidence for survival with ivermectin so the the 62 percent reduction is actually graded as moderate level certainty i gotta emphasize they did the work they looked under the hood of all these trials they looked at things like allocation concealment and renmization and you know all sorts of these terms of how you conduct a trial they grade the trials evidence as moderate and the reason why that's important is that cortico steroids which are the standard of care worldwide for the treatment of the hospitalized COVID patient that was adopted immediately overnight based on one trial and that's moderate certainty very rare that you get high level or strong certain it's very hard to get there you need like massive trials done by big pharma over years so moderate is actually quite strong so the level the quality of evidence so no longer should we listen to our agencies or these leaders trying to dismiss ivermectin evidence as very low or low quality that's what the w-h-o did in march they dismissed the evidence is very low quality and they dissected it they removed many of the trials they threw this one out for this reason it's this is where i'm getting back to and i hate talking about this stuff but this disinformation like there's effectively it's a dishonesty there's clearly they're operating on what i call a non scientific objective their objective is to not have ivermectin adopted worldwide they ivermectin is seen as an opponent to whatever policies they're trying whatever policies or product or pharmaceutical products they want to bring forward now does this resistance exist in a vacuum is there evidence of this resistance in terms of like emails that have been leaked where people go back and forth and discuss whether or not ivermectin should be promoted reports so all of the agencies and i can bring you a stack so from the Canadians it's in its all by the way north america and western europe those so it's the e-m-a which is european medicine the asian choose all of europe and then you could look at France and other ones like all of those western european countries canada the us the n-i-h just look at their reviews of ivermectin they just cons they it's almost like they've copied and paced all around the world every every agency that's reviewed it has said that it's low quality evidence small trials poor control groups different doses which actually are strength of the trials evidence but it's like they've copied and paced it and and and it's really tiresome and it's incorrect and i think they're all acting on a different objective they're not credibly assessing the data around what what's promoting them to behave in this way like what is is there can we can we get the new york times piece up the carls and her piece yeah so i've been wondering about this for the longest time there is obvious resistance looking at the evidence which is clear enough why would they be and i should point out there's another interesting piece of evidence which is not only was the safety of ivermectin challenged by the cdc was it well the w-h-o-o kind of suggested that it may not be safe but murk itself murk which was the manufacturer of this drug murk which has given away millions of doses in africa attacked the safety of its own drug said that it wasn't safe and shouldn't be used in this case which was strange but then here crazy it's crazy has that ever happened before well here's the thing i was waiting you know what don't we know and there's a certain number i mean i you know i don't know how much this is a murk centric phenomenon but there are a couple things about murk murk has announced that it has a new drug that it's very excited about for covid and it's more new pure vera but more new pure as well as the tuk all right so this is this is the article this is the article scroll see i want to there's some paragraphs here go back up back up there's a paragraph about what happened when they looked for drugs that would be effective against covid so this is carls ember this is one of the world's premier science writers writing in the new york times back up more but that's the top we're going to talk about the three billion uh... bright well we're going to get to the three billion here in a second but keep going stop at the start of the pandemic researchers began testing existing antifiral the virus in hospital hospitalized patients with severe covid-19 but many of those trials failed to show any benefit from the antivirals in hindsight the choice to work in hospitals was a mistake okay go down a little bit uh down a little bit more stop so far only one antiviral has demonstrated a clear benefit to people in hospitals remdesivir that's the three thousand dollar a dose drug that is authorized originally investigated as a potential cure for ebolo the drug seems to shorten the course of covid-19 when given intravenously in patients in octomer it became the first and so far the only antiviral drug to gain FDA approval to treat the disease yet remdesivir's performance has left many researchers underwhelmed weak yeah i'm missing the there's a paragraph in here where he says that the search for drugs that work didn't turn anything up in any case people can find it on their own i guess but this is this news report came just before anthony fowchee sorry my glasses do not interface well uh... before uh... anthony fowchee gave a press conference about a three billion dollar initiative to find drugs that work against covid now of course these drugs that they find will all be under patent and therefore highly profitable so what you've got is uh... drug companies mark is involved in malnew pierivier this new drug uh... it is also involved in an agreement with johnson and johnson to distribute their vaccine and strangely we are ignoring the evidence that is right in front of us that we have multiple drugs that are highly effective for covid and one that i would point out again is highly effective as a profile act so i don't know anything about the business side of this i do know what fiduciary responsibility is i know that the shareholder value must be driving things behind the scenes i know that these companies have been immunized from liability with respect to harms that might be done by the vaccines that they're distributing so there's a question about do all of those things add up to explain the many anomalies about the recommendations of how to treat patients uh... who have covid and leave they do well let's put it this way i can't come up with anything else that makes any sense what's a perfect storm right you have a generic like what what is the expense of ivermacken oh it's uh... actually i've seen it estimated like in large bulk quantities you can make it for less than a dollar like a dose in the united states there's FDA regulated product which so it's more expensive but around the world i mean in india they were distributing it in many regions and we should talk about india in a second but um it it's extremely cheap it's a very low cost that's a problem so extremely effective extremely cheap and generic big problem yeah but look but is it how i don't what i can't get myself to is what are these conversations sound like on the other side who decides to shut down in the middle of a pandemic where you have a drug that's actually good enough to end the pandemic at any point you wanted right who decides to prioritize business interests ahead of that i find it hard to imagine so i i'm what i'm what i'm actually guessing is going on is this you've got a pharmaceutical industry which frequently has obstacles that the development of a new drug is extremely expensive it can be you know it can go bust you can develop a new drug and it doesn't get through the trial so there's a lot of risk and so the pharmaceutical industry has engineered mechanisms to get their drugs through this process right they've corrupted the system and my sense is that their ability to force the system to accept certain things and to ignore other things is so well developed at this point that it must have just gotten applied on autopilot and somehow we're stuck in the situation where the evidence that we have effective tools is overwhelming those tools do not excite anybody in the pharmaceutical industry because there's no profit to be made and somehow that autopilot has us facing the possibility of getting stuck with this this pathogen permanently because there's nobody at the helm that's about what i would guess i mean this is you're seeing you're seeing this is a system at work right so we we we live in a public in a health system which favors for profit medicines over non-profits the for profit medicines that can create can that can hurtle over those bars right to get those big former trials no one's going to fund that around ivermectin i'm actually philanthropy is funding a relatively big trial right now we're waiting on i think the world is waiting on the results i actually think that trials on ethical i i could not as a physician knowing what i know give someone a placebo right now for ivermectin the evidence is too overwhelming but you're in a system where we're clearly the the things that are favor those with financial interests and so that's who gets the ear of the agencies that's who gets attention by the FDA and ivermectin is really ignored there's no one championing ivermectin except for like my little group of a non-profit doctors who became expert at ivermectin i will also say though we're not alone there's like you know our organization we call ourselves the flcc for short but there's little flccs in countries all around the world that we're talking to who are also advocating and going to their governments and their agencies and finding very similar resistances it's like it's like the same play over and over again the influence of the pharmaceutical companies is a real thing it's global it is but i think what what keeps stopping me in my tracks is the magnitude if you just simply extrapolate from what is evident in that meta analysis about the capacity of ivermectin to address this the amount of needless human suffering is almost incalculable and that we would allow it to continue i mean flcc was very excited in his press conference about this a new initiative and it sort of sounded like well we're settling in for a very long term situation with this pathogen right we were told that the vaccines were a solution to this but it looks like they're just really gearing up for you know this and of course that will create profits for a long time to come Brett can we say just stop for a second and call attention to the absurdity of what that article just described you're talking about they're committing $3.2 billion to develop a better ivermectin we already have ivermectin it is already a profoundly effective antiviral it is cheap widely available could be produced in mass quantities and delivered to the masses and population yet our government in the middle of a pandemic is giving $3.2 billion to the pharmaceutical industry in a program to develop a new oral antiviral pill it's almost it's so transparent you wish she just say look okay i see what you're doing we do me a favor just adjust one of the molecules on on ivermectin we'll pay for it a pat none it we'll give you the money okay well that's small compared so mother period doesn't share a molecular structure with ivermectin but one of its a purported main mechanisms of action is the same is a similar one it's identical to one of the main mechanisms action of ivermectin so it's a different drug but it's kind of doing the same thing now it's not as good so it it interrupts one of them is there's these enzymes that the virus uses to replicate and one of them is called RNA dependent polymer polymer polymer polymerase thank you and it interferes in binds with that and so if you don't have that enzyme you can't replicate and so it's thought to that's that's one of its mechanism now the thing about malnue purivir is they've already tested it in hospitalized patients and it's failed it hasn't worked in the hospital where we know ivermectin works in the hospital even in late phase we know ivermectin's working they're now testing in outpatient which is the holy grail because right now the NIH which determines the treatment guidelines for this disease in this country besides tylenol and wait till your lips turn blue they offer nothing to outpatients so that is a ripe market to try to find the covid killer ivermectin is the covid killer and should be the mainstay of any early outpatient treatment regimen and yet it's not the one thing i want to bring up and this is talk i want to go back to as i love the example that bread brings up is just look at the behaviors like even just ignoring some of the signs look at the behavior so when you look at some of the trials around their favored medicines like remdesivir they kind of do funny stuff with the trials they change endpoints they use weak outcomes like okay two days less of a hospitalization for three thousand dollars doesn't save lives doesn't reduce mechanical ventilation when you have other drugs that do but another absurdity is mexico mexico out of all of the countries that we just talked about they did something that i think is unique historic and needs to be recognized so what happened in mexico is they have an agency called the iMSS it's basically their social security department which covers a large part of the health care system and they had they went rogue in mexico back in december at a time when hospitals were full they were getting in and they they're almost like at that crisis peak like we were in in this country around december in jim remember when like la was running out of oxygen and like like indy was last month so mexico was in terrible condition back in december the iMSS and i would say i would like that our paper and our advocacy was part of what made them pay attention ivermectin they implemented a nationwide test and treat program every outpatient testing center if you tested positive you were offered ivermectin and you got two days you got 12 milligrams which is not a high dose in fact i consider that to be somewhat of an under treatment but what happened within two weeks of that hospitalization rates plummeted death rates plummeted and over the next three months they have basically rid COVID open bars open restaurants at a time when the vaccination rate was like one to five percent so it wasn't the vaccines it was all related to this and then three weeks ago maybe it's three weeks now that agency put out their paper their paper looking at the data of their program and you know what they reported is that in many thousands of patients those that accepted medicine took it their rate of hospitalization was up to 75 percent lower than those who didn't and and that's not the only agency or country reporting that now why isn't that front page news in the major media in the United States you have a large country like mexico who just put out results of a a nationwide program sent it around ivermectin where hospitalizations were reduced up to 75 percent in those given i've been in your opinion and insufficient dose uh what i'd like to say is it's the minimum of what it's capable of that if had i you know with hindsight had you done more of a weight-based right because we're not all the same bigger you are you probably need a little bit more and so and also a longer duration i think they could have gotten that number higher so it's it's my opinions the minimum of what that program was capable of but even in that form and that dose in strategy was incredible what they did you know what he lives they saved by reducing that hospitalization and how are these the hospitals they emptied them that is incredible and i always wondered like how's mexico party and so early ah now there's your answer and yeah and the the hospitalization data so close we have an analyst that works with us a guy named one chimie who i think when all is said in down a couple years will be a historic figure he's a guy who helped teach me what i've remarked and was doing in the world he's been tracking areas and countries and regions and states which have adopted i've remarked and he's been looking at the numbers and we have many dozens of what's called temporally associated declines so temporally associated mean you know in the context of time so when you initiated a point a what happens very close in time after that every time i've remarked and is deployed or adopted you see these rapid declines now everybody's curves around the world have been fluctuating right we have these peaks we have these you know the the epidemiologic curves of cases and deaths but when you look at the iver mechden initiations it's always reproducible it's literally within one to two weeks you see these drops and how are these results being received uh crickets so so the mexico preprint this is how crazy the world is so the mexico preprint i thought would be front page news across mexico that they found a cure the federal health ministry in mexico really was against the i.m.s so it's almost like the cdc and the mah were fighting i was trying to come up with a analogy because i don't know mexico that well but i do know those those are two large preeminent health care agents but the federal health ministry was against this program in sufficient evidence that other than i think they were partly because they were captured um but these rogue sort of clinical experts who are trying to act in a humanitarian base is using a precautionary principle which breadboard up which is like safe med seems like it only got upside let's just do it and they did it and it worked but in the papers there's still discussion insufficient evidence and then some people now they're planting things in the papers as i understand it saying that it's political that that paper in which they reported their results some people are excusing it's because that's how they want to get reelected so it's like again it gets devolved into like political controversy and so but the fact that our government isn't talking to the group of doctors that headed up the i.m.s.s and carried out and issued this program to learn how they did it is it's it's it's unforgivable why aren't we talking to these leaders of the i.m.s.s program in mexico they're just they're not far from here right now pretty close yeah they're pretty close right yeah little silent and walk we could probably drive down there today yeah can we can we have them on your progress but but that's just Mexico and i i could probably talk all day long but just uh ten days ago the state of lapampa in Argentina southern Argentina they did a similar program where they gave ivermacked into patients who tested positive they also reporting there they had 40% less hospitalization 30% less death and 40% less ICU use and so in that small program out of Argentina and then when you look at India remember how crazy how india was the headlines for for a while and like literally there was smoke over all the cities from the funeral pyres because so many people were dying well in a number of the states that aggressively adopted ivermacked and you saw those curves and they plummeted to New Year's Euro in states that didn't you saw the curves go up so there was almost like there was a natural experiment in india around ivermacked and so you know just to finish you know breath talked about the preventative trials the treatment trials early late now you're also getting data from real world that's a really credible in fact to me it's probably the most powerful source of evidence is you're seeing it work on a population based on a population basis around the world so i would like to i think it absolutely the data suggests that it works for treatment that it's highly effective there are several different protocols you could use but i i want to go back to this issue of prophylaxis because again to me we're not just dealing with the costs in the present we're dealing with how much cost will humanity experience in the future if we don't drive this thing extinct well we have the chance and we do appear to have the chance so if you would put up the graph i sent you i apologize for the complexity of this but actually hold up for just a second Jamie so i i was been talking to various people about whether or not the data on ivermacked and suggest it could drive SARS-CoV-2 to extinction and i became convinced that it could when this meta-analysis came out i talked to test Laurie she said she believed that it could i believe is it fair to say peer that you believe that it could oh absolutely okay but not everybody agrees and actually on my podcast with Robert Malone the inventor of the mRNA vaccine technology he actually he said he hoped i was right but he doubted it and anyway we've gone back and forth about it a number of times and i tried to focus him on a couple of things and last night he contacted me and he said Brett you were right it'll do it and then he said let me show you and he sent me this graph i didn't send you the graph damn no worries we got time all right um so robert came around he did come around and his classes by the way are preposterous they they did not work well with headphones i should have remembered that uh you know i see they're supposed to make it more convenient they they do when you're not wearing headphones let's uh if we can make a note so um and this is where the story just keeps getting like more and more amazing right so Brett is rightly focusing on the preventive aspects right because it's it's great to treat and make sure you stay alive and go to the hospital much better to just not get sick and to eradicate the virus but we say we can definitely large number of people if we drive it to extinction make a note that the body of evidence which is the weakest but it's some of the most compelling long COVID so let's talk about that after i want to talk about our experiences with long COVID okay okay so this is incredibly complex and i must tell you it's complex enough that i have had to stare at it and talk to robert about what it means and so i'm going to take you through the highlights explain it to people that are just looking at the where listening only so what we've got is a graph uh in which we have some curves that descend through the graph and the curves these curves are parallel to each other and the basic idea is do you guys remember what r0 is from the beginning of the pandemic so r0 is the reproductive rate of the virus at one each infected person tends to infect one other person so the amount of infected people tends to stay the same over time above one you get one of these explosions of new cases it goes below one you see a decline in cases anytime you have a decline in cases anytime r0 is less than one you are headed towards the extinction of the pathogen and lots of pathogens do go extinct SARS and MERS are both extinct as far as we know now they can come back but extinction is what we're shooting for now the point of this graph is remember ivermechten shows itself to be about 86 percent effective at preventing contraction of covid that means that uh so if you so r0 for covid is somewhere between two it's a little bit above two so the green line there is just below the line that we would draw for covid this graph was not drawn with covid in mind what this means is and uh can you scroll up so we can see oh the bottom there it says uh critical boundary for combined av e sub s av e sub s is the rate at which people exposed do not come down with a disease when treated that's on the y axis i mean the x axis on the y axis we have av e sub i which is the rate of reduction of viral shedding and the basic point here is that uh four a disease like covid with an r0 of about a little over two with 70 percent of the population uh compliant with the prophylactic protocol we would drive r0 r0 becomes r sub f in the treatment so the reproductive rate under treatment is r sub f and it will be less than one if you get 70 percent of the population to take the prophyl axis so the point is that level of prophyl axis is more than sufficient by a lot to drive this to extinction if you only had 70 percent compliance is there any evidence of the efficacy invariance uh yes i do well well we don't have trials testing you know where they really measured the variance and show but we do know um this epidemiologic data so if you look at India lots of delta variant from looking at the epidemiology what happened there ivermethan was slaying the delta variant south africa and zimbabwe especially zimbabwe when they were getting hurt earlier in this year they basically eradicated covid with widespread adoption of ivermethan they were doing dealing with the south african variant Brazil is a bit of a mess in the sense that there's so much controversy around the different treatments and there's political overtones that there's no uh systematic use of ivermethan but there have been pockets and cities that first didn't adopt it and then did and we know in that p1 variant out of Brazil totally susceptible to ivermethan so from what we've seen and then the uk variant we saw in slavaki and check republic same thing responsiveness to ivermethan so just by looking at sort of epidemiologically seeing these variants pop out i have gotten no data to suggest it doesn't work against any of variance and that's what we would expect because its mechanisms of action are multiple um and they don't really will change to the outer surface of the spike protein we think that it to evade ivermethan you'd really have to have a very very different virus and so i don't we don't think that uh we have no evidence to suggest that it's not going to work this sounds like a gigantic ivermethan infomercial sponsored by ivermethan well you know what i mean i mean it's a lot of money that we made there Joe but not really not really if the ivermethan there's no money to be made it's just lives to save i'm sorry but it is it's it's so funny this is one of the best examples of something that is almost too good to be true but turns out actually to be true right and it's the problem is it's actually putting those of us who can see it in danger right because as people ignore this evidence with this much at stake this many people needlessly suffering and dying people losing their loved ones right the desire to just simply get people to look at the evidence and then extrapolate what a reasonable person to faced with a safe drug with noisy data that has a very strong signal of efficacy that works both as a treatment and as a prophylaxis what would you do if you were in charge and what you hear back is the most maddening well you know i'm i'm evidence-based and if it isn't a large scale randomized controlled trial then it isn't evidence to me and it's like it only a crazy person would say that in this case and yet you hear it all the time especially all these different countries that you've outlined that have adopted treatment but South Africa here's the thing though is that the the reasons for the opposition i think are multiple you know i hate talking about the sinister sinister stuff which is the disinformation aspects where they're literally making concerted efforts to get leaders to inject doubt around the science some of it is just intellectual skepticism like this what we call evidence-based medicine um it's gotten a little perverted and i think it's it's not always practice correctly and so you you have a lot of resistance to the to the science around ivermectin um now i lost my train thought uh that i wanted to say about that um you go ahead well um you want me to help you because we're we're just talking about profitability we're talking about the fact that it's in all these different countries like it's kind of too good to be true well the profit part is i mean i agree that's that's one of them the oh the other point i wanted to make is that and this is so demanding is that the other resistance is what i call ivory tower syndrome where this evidence-based i call it moniacism which is this obsession with this big randomized control trial but part and parcel of that obsession where they won't believe anything until you do that trial is that they don't do the work what i've seen is a lot of intellectual laziness and just flat out laziness like when i see people reviewing the evidence and i'm like they clearly either didn't read the trials didn't look at all the trials they i just find it's a very curse-reviewed now whether they're doing it on purpose or not and i'm going to call out one particular body which is the idea essay which is the infectious disease society of america and they like all of the other agencies that there are professional societies of infectious these experts and in their review of ivermectin they don't recommend you sat outside of trial outside of clinical trials and they also say that the evidence is low quality small trials but they also say something else which is absurd they wrote that of concern is that almost all of the published trials are positive and so they suspect publication bias want me to repeat that so they literally in their review they say you know we we noticed that all of the studies are positive so we think there might be a publication bias i want to ring someone's neck you think there might be a publication bias so if you don't know what a publication bias is is that in medicine when people do studies let's say you study a drug and it found you find out it didn't really work right your motivation for finishing the manuscript submitted like it's a lot of work to submit and publish papers and scientific journals might flag and you might not publish negative trials and so there's something that happens which is a publication by where you only see positive trials and it gives you only a one-sided view of the efficacy so you might wrongly say oh man this drug works because all the trials say it works but you're not accounting for all the trialists who are in publishing now there are ways of investigating and looking for publication bias and i will tell you that the lead researcher for the unitate WHO who used to collaborate with he he's no longer doing the work now um he did look at that and he found no publication bias and the reason the the the way you combat publication bias is when you do a clinical trial of a medicine it's been standard now is that you're supposed to register your trial in a clinical trials registry before you do the trial and most journals will not publish your trial unless it was pre-registered and the reason why is they want to make sure if you register a trial in ivermectin and then never publish they can find you and say what happened what happened to your trial did you find out it didn't work and didn't publish like what's going on anyway long story short there's no publication bias so let me ask you this if there is proven to be no publication bias the people that initially were skeptical because of a publication bias when proven that that's not the case why is there not a corresponding enthusiasm because because their objection wasn't a real objection right it was it was stalling and i would just point out it is lovely that we have a registry that tells us there's no publication bias but you don't need it because the experience in Mexico and ujera pedestrian goa and all of these places where it's been tried is perfectly consistent with the result that you see in the studies right so the observational studies are consistent you've got um you know the argentina front line healthcare worker study that's a that's an unambiguous result that would be essentially impossible to you know this is the one where uh what was it 237 out of 400 who didn't take it doesn't take it got sick 58% Joe that that trust and didn't take yes so that trial none of the one's zero of seven eighty eight that's wow 237 of 407 got COVID 58% that shows you how high risk these people were and how well protected those that took that regimen of ivermectin and the care so it's be real clear had none of the people who took it prophylactically in that study got COVID 58 percent of the people that didn't take it got COVID correct that's crazy and the and the point is that you know that is within a study yes if the study is not outright fraudulent the chances of getting a result that skewed are effectively zero so it's just insane that these calls for or these criticisms of potential publication bias aren't met with once the evidence has been established once you've looked at it and they they say no there's no publication bias why aren't people going well this is amazing news then right because this is what we've been searching for so again i want to just point out the evidence that the molecule works is overwhelming right figuring out how to use it best is a question that reasonable people could disagree over but it's something that we would find out if we applied it and collected the the information but that that graph which i realized i forgot to say where it came from that was worked on by uh Ira Longini at the University of Florida and his postdoc Natalie Dean and what that i think i forgot to say the the y-axis on there is the one fly in the ointment which is that those curves are drawn based on an effectiveness at preventing viral shedding and an effectiveness at preventing the contraction of the disease and although there's every reason to expect that viral shedding would be low with the use of ivermectin i don't think we have that data yet but anyway assuming that that comes out the way one would expect based on what we do know what that graph says is that given an r-not of the type that we believe we have that we have a single tool that even if it didn't work to treat sick people is effective enough to rid the world of this disease and the farther below one the the effectiveness is they're more rapidly we can drive it to extinction but why we are not even considering this why we are instead of applying this drug good enough today to do the job and instead going to invest three billion dollars to see if there are any drugs out there that we can come up with that might work it really does suggest that what is driving here has to do with profits i hate to say it but yes let me bring up the prince investigator of that trial so his name is hector Carvire he's this lovely love this is the argentina yeah he's so great he's he's actually retired but he used to run hospitals he had very prominent positions and he was the p.i. a prince investigator of this trial and you know i've gotten to be friendly and collegial with him because we've shared data and insights and we lecture in different places and i asked him i said you know because his trial was already done last June and i said what's the latest data and you know as you're following these patients and he says still today out of those large groups of health care workers the only times anyone's gotten sick when he when he's looked at those cases either they forgot to take their doses or they took inappropriate doses but generally almost all of them have maintained protection the other thing i'm going to borrow with you because it goes through your question is he has this phrase which i love he says unfortunately iver mectin has has affected the most sensitive organ on humans the wallet so that's pretty clever what do you way of saying what the problem it answers your question like why aren't we doing this and apparently iver mectin is really damaging to the wallet show how much of this did you guys discuss on your podcast that has been taken down yeah uh we discussed a lot of it that you know some of this is new the entire podcast has been taken down entire podcast has been taken down you know i should also point out i don't know did you mention that uh dr. Corey's senate testimony was taken down by youtube i find this one of the most good airing facts of now your senate testimony has been taken down a long time ago yeah i mean it hit it hit almost nine million views and then it then it got disappeared and oh that's the other thing i want to bring up with hector carvaya in argentina you know this is the p.i. this incredible study and by the his is not alone we have now 14 profile access studies and some of them quite large um every time he mentions iver mectin it's he says it's scrubbed from the internet like he can't really share his day i mean well there's a lot of censorship down there around iver mectin and so the the drug is specifically called out in youtube's community guidelines they mention it right this thou shalt not discuss the effectiveness of iver mectin and but you're allowed to discuss rim does it here oh yeah it's approved it's it's part of the n.a.g guideline you know there was an article written by the right i mean look on your face says it all so this is not adding up the mat ibe article with you yeah so i i i i got interviewed for it and i thought it was a fair fair representation you know he balanced both sides but i'd like to phrase he called me um some sort of ghost of the internet because wherever i go things get this disappear and and so his got taken down i did a long interview with a guy named john Campbell from the u.k. he has almost a million subscribers on youtube he's a medical educator been covering lots of covid related topics and we discussed iver mectin for a half hour that got taken down another medical educator dr bean who's really a great a phenomenal educator who i've converse with when i went on his and he's constantly reviewing data on many aspects of covid but i think at one point every video of his where he addressed iver mectin got demonetized and this is a medical educator that's that's his whole demonetized i can live with yeah i don't like it's the shutting down the discussion yeah i don't like the demonetization but because it what it is is it's a thinly veiled attempt at self-sensorship if you demonetize people enough for very specific subjects they will no longer breach those subjects because they know it's going to hurt their pocket right so um i ran across something i think you're more familiar with it than i am but i ran across it yesterday evidence that see if i get the list right the a p roiders facebook twitter youtube yes the washington post who else is on this list uh financial times the long list of places where information is distributed have teamed up to prevent the distribution of what they're calling medical misinformation which of course now you know your listeners will have heard a discussion about a very promising drug for treating and preventing covid which we're now forbidden to talk about uh on on youtube at least in positive light and the implication you know if you think so i've been making the argument that capture capture was originally named uh regulatory capture right and it gives the impression oh the regulatory agency has been captured by the thing that it's supposed to regulate the nuclear industry it may have captured the the department of energy for example and therefore decision start going its way in this case i really think we need to start thinking in terms of capture that extends to other places right you expect the regulator to be captured but you don't necessarily expect the new york times to be captured you don't expect all of the places that you might discuss what's going on you might you don't expect the places where you would discuss discuss capture to be captured and yet they are and so to have youtube controlling the bounds of discussion obviously forbidding scientifically viable conversations from happening which are the only thing that stands a chance of correcting this uh you know this unbearable momentum in favor of a single solution which itself has hazards associated with it right and i don't know if we do or don't want to go there but the point is this you know this drug comparatively safe very safe by any measure is highly effective and yet the official policy is effectively um vaccines at any cost and get everybody on them and don't talk about other stuff that's not approved don't talk about the alternatives and and none of it makes any sense because you just consider the anomalies right the anomalies are things that even if you accept with the opponents of of this perspective are saying can't be explained right why is it that we are not giving let's say that everybody who's vaccine skeptical is a crazy person right i don't think they are i'm vaccine skeptical but uh and i don't mean that generally i'm very enthusiastic about vaccines in a general sense i'm highly vaccinated but in this case i'm worried about a vaccine a set of vaccines that were sped through this process where their manufacturers have been immunized from liability and where there is a very strong signal that something is not right um why is it given that you have a population of vaccine hesitant people however they got there even if they got there from confusion where we're trying to reach herd immunity in order to ostensibly drive the pathogen to extinction where this drug appears to give people immunity to a large extent maybe a complete extent from the pathogen in question why would we not be giving ivermectin to those who won't take the vaccine can't take the vaccine to whom the vaccine will not reach right all of those categories even if you believe the vaccine was far and away the best solution to this problem all of those categories would benefit from having ivermectin and the population is a whole would benefit from them having it because it would leave fewer people for this pathogen to jump to and yet we don't do it that i don't think that can be explained by anything there's no logical event great way to fill that hole of people who are going to get vaccinated 100% you're going back to your graph you know the graph i don't know if you mentioned this but you know in that graph when you look at the population you already have now a large proportion that have been vaccinated and then large port have herd immunity so the amount of water the ivermectin has to carry to get us to the coal line is is not that great it is not that it's not as large it's not as large at all and you're going to want to deploy this i mean imagine that you took the vaccine right and then you had a breakthrough case right this is now happening regularly why are we not giving ivermectin to people with breakthrough cases of COVID they of course they did what they were asked to do and they now have this this condition and you know so anyway there's a large rabbit hole surrounding what what they are pushing instead of ivermectin but really what we can't answer we're vaccinating children right that's not safe we have a drug that we could administer that is safe in children that appears to be highly effective right if you were going to insist that children have some sort of protection in spite of the fact that they tolerate COVID very well ivermectin would be a far better choice you know one difference i don't know how big of a difference is if i understood you correctly but the way i see that censorship and that tni that i think it's called trusted news initiative again i don't know enough about it but from what i understand it was a consortium of major media outlets that can't do some sort of agreement to suppress medical misinformation and i guess it was somehow defined as anything that doesn't come from what i call the gods of science and knowledge right so from the leading agencies and when you talk about i've been working on this analogy which is that it's almost like you're in a plane emergency right and a plane is crashing like we're in a emergency right now and everyone's saying listen to the captain you have to listen to the captain's instructions don't listen to anyone else but listen to the captain and no one's considering what if the hijackers already got the captain and you're not listening to really good advice and that's what it seems like here we're listening to hijackers yeah or your house is on fire and there's a bucket of water and somebody stops you from using it because you have improved its well you know i love those i love those analogies yes it's yeah yeah something is not is not adding up here and i you know i think it is worth pointing out that i don't know what explains it but throughout this story we've got uh doctor Fauci in a very strange position so from again yeah again right and that's that's the problem so at the same point that we have a drug that appears to work in fact we have several of them um he's announcing a search for drugs that might work right that's conspicuous this is the same person who was apparently um circumventing the ban on gain of function research by sending the research offshore to the Wuhan Institute using eco health alliance right why is the same guy in a position where he may have contributed to causing the pandemic and now here he is in a position to do something about the pandemic and he's making exactly the wrong decision he's not wielding the tools we have he's announcing a search for new tools as if the tools we have don't exist this is nothing here adds up and at the very least okay so nothing adds up we can't talk about it in the official channels because the official channels are constrained and then the free people who discuss this on the internet who take their expertise on the internet and discuss the fact that something is not adding up are being silenced by youtube and facebook and whoever else and the point is it all points to one thing right for some reason there's a desire not to apply this tool and there is a pursuit of other tools and there is no cost benefit analysis that will cause that system to rethink it's not scientifically based that's what i want to be clear because you know Joe what happened to me is i would i bet the guy that i was a year ago and the guy that i am now is totally different like i just see the world a lot different i guess you could say i'm more cynical but every time i get cynical i also find out that i'm correct in that cynicism like everything that i'm suspecting i'm actually finding evidence that the forces that i think are acting improperly actually are and you know when when is it gonna stop well it's just so extraordinary than all the years you've been practicing medicine that in the last year it's changed you this much because of what happened to the science i always thought the data would win out and science trump's all i i came into it naive you know and and and i you know we came with our experience our expertise are insights into the disease that mean and mean the group you know we we we obsessively studied this disease and we're also decades of experience highly published and when we came out with our protocols i don't know if you know this but i gave senate testimony back in may a year ago and i gave testimony to the world saying that was critical that we use corticosteroids and i did that at a time when every national and international health agency said do not use corticosteroids in covid and i was roundly attacked harassed and criticized for that very public recommendation what was the reason why you recommended it because we knew it was critical in this disease so about four reasons number one my colleague and our group his name is umberto meduri he's probably he is the world experts at corticosteroids in lung disease decades of practice he's made multiple contributions to our specialty him and another group of scholars reviewed all of the trials from SARS-MERS and H1N1 so the prior pandemics and when you really carefully control because they were all what's called observational trials back then and so there's a lot of what are called confounders but when you control for the confounders really carefully what him and his group and this what i think is a landmark paper what they found was that corticosteroids were actually life saving in the prior coronavirus pandemics so we knew that when you really look at again going back to that laziness and and the lack of deep expertise and deep dives into the data which is what umberto and his group did back in in in April of last year they found there was actually life saved so that was one reason i knew the other reason i knew is because i i i born raised trained lived in New York i moved to Wisconsin i was recruited by the university of sconson five years ago but um i know guys and gals in every i see you in New York city and when they got hit it was bad and i was in Wisconsin we weren't hit yet and i was on the phone with them every day i was trying to learn everything i could about disease and the stuff that i was hearing first of all that was just armagedon it was insane the stuff that i was hearing i mean it just still brings back really horrible memories of what happened to New York and Seattle and Detroit and New Orleans if you remember that time when i mean to know what it was like on the inside i mean newspapers did a reasonable job of describing it but it was really really bad but i knew from them that people were crashing on to ventilators and they weren't coming off they weren't coming off they were dying on ventilators the lungs were deteriorating and they were just doing what's called supportive care only which is Tylenol fluids oxygen and it wasn't working and then some of the colleagues who said you know we got to try something they were trying steroids which what we were saying we kind of knew we already knew steroids were indicated and those that started to use steroids you started actually it was interesting it started popping up on social media doctors some of them anonymously were starting to post like hey we're using steroids we're using it early when they're soon as they get on oxygen and we're finding the not getting intubated you know they're coming off ventilators and we're actually discharging patients and so you had like on the ground like real-time feedback that it was working we knew from prior trials and then i wrote a paper talking about how the type of lung disease that COVID causes it and i don't want to get too wonky here but it's a disease called organizing pneumonia which is not an infectious pneumonia it's actually although they call it pneumonia it's just a reaction to a lung injury to exposure to something and so the lungs are reacting in the form of an organizing pneumonia the cardinal therapy for organizing pneumonia is steroids and not only is it steroids but it's oftentimes high dose steroids and you're supposed to weed them off as the disease gets better not some predefined time and i think we talked about it on your podcast and i just have to say it again but my belief leaving i've remacked and alone is that many many thousands of people are dying around the world from under treatment with cortical steroids we now have significant amounts of data to show that the trials which use methyl pridinousalone at higher doses have much better outcomes and all see need longer durations what the whole world is doing is they're following remember how we talked about the pitfalls of a large randomized control trial so when i said to use cortical steroids in the senate testimony i was attacked criticize their records there was no randomized control trial seven weeks later oxford put out the recovery trial which is their big trial in the UK and they showed that cortical steroids were lifesaving so we were validated we validated back then and they used a small dose of a cortical steroid for a pre-determined time 10 days and so i by the way i would travel around the country in different ic use throughout the pandemic because i left the universe with scouts and i helped out my old icie in new york when they were getting indundated and then i was in greenville and milwauky and so i've been in a bunch of ic use and i kept seeing doctors using six milligrams of dexamethasone for 10 days and stopping they were literally stopping steroids with patients were still sick on high amounts of oxygen on ventilators and i mean there's nothing more absurdly bizarre than doing that like the disease is still marching on it's still overwhelming these patients and you're stopping a medicine why do they stop because the trial said that that was the trial protocol so people decided they're not going to doctor anymore they're just going to follow the trial protocol and i'm saying you got a doctor you follow the patient you don't follow some protocol i mean the human condition is a bit variable don't you think well right we're not all the same but there's a the hidden feature of your story here right is that back when we were talking about corticosteroids you had doctors who were pooling their insights yes and it resulted in a discovery that something should be done to have youtube and all of its fellows and then what is it t and i deciding that we can't talk in public about this topic means that that process can't happen now why is that process being frustrated we can guess yes it probably has to do with profits and i must say every time i try to sort through the logic of why this would be suppressed right the consequence of it being suppressed is obvious which is that the standard of care doesn't improve but why i keep coming back to these emergency use authorizations which have a provision in them they cannot grant an emergency use authorization if there is an existing treatment that is safe and effective right the vaccines would not have been authorized if i were mectin was understood to be what it is and that i have the sense is the key thing that explains everything else somehow those e u a's and the immunity the liability waivers that these companies have been granted mean that this is all the more profitable if they can silence a discussion about a cheap effective competitor that is safe that already exist and so in some sense they started with the conclusion ivermectin doesn't exist it does not effectively treat this disease and anybody who says otherwise is spreading so-called medical misinformation when in fact what they're spreading is information right so bunk is debunk information is misinformation it's all on a set we're through the looking glass i'm gonna bring up something that you glossed over earlier but you you stopped eating go back to it is long-covid and the effectiveness on long-covid yeah so i don't want to use that term infertile because it's a pet term well because it cheapens the subject in a bit but the way i want to say is that the efficacy of ivermectin in all of these phases is just truly remarkable and and it's it's you know paul maric he uses he uses this phrase that hopefully this is going to be taken seriously but you know he said it's like this is a gift this was a gift to humanity this drug and it it's showing itself not only in the data that we've already reviewed but long-covid right we still don't understand exactly what's causing long-covid right but if you know anything about it right it's a whole constellation of symptoms generally marked by fatigue people just don't feel right they feel run down sometimes dizzy sometimes with fevers headache you know sore joints and then the brain fog right so a lot of it is cognitive they just don't feel like they're themselves they're forgetful and when you interact with some of these patients as a physician it's really sad like i know 29 year olds who are disabled like literally healthy 29 year olds who can't go back to work and and they can't participate in their relationships they can't do the fun stuff that they do did anything they do it they they feel terrible okay what's interesting so we don't really know what drives it we're starting to get more and more insights um if i'd we are working now to a collaboration it's a network of folks and two two in particular doing a lot of research on long-covid they're doing a lot of immunological studies um and a lot a lot of investigations into different inflammatory markers they want to call cytokines um so we're starting to understand it is it is persistent inflammation we don't think it's persistent virus we think it's persistent viral proteins that are in some of the immune cells that are triggering the immune cells and so what's interesting is ivermectin is showing really strong efficacy and when when my first case of a patient where i treated for long-covid i mean they literally were almost crying and joy because they had been sick for so long and we have i have a i have dozens of testimonials of of of people who were sick for months they took ivermectin and they said like within 12 to 24 hours suddenly they started to feel better well let me ask you this is a long-covid are we thinking the virus is still infecting people no we don't think it's persistent virus so that's the case then how is ivermectin curing these people that have this show term yeah so ivermectin it has we think a number of anti-viral properties so it interrupts the replication and entry of the virus but also has a number of anti-inflammatory properties so it actually modulates and it decreases the inflammation by so if someone's true something's triggering ongoing inflammation ivermectin can tamp that down so we think it's it's acting as an anti-inflammatory but it also binds to the spike protein and we think that there are persistent proteins in some of these cells and so ivermectin we believe is somehow binding to and kind of suppressing the triggering of inflammation by these proteins again don't i wouldn't say don't quote me on that but i will be the first to admit we need to learn a lot more about long-covid the what i but what's interesting about long-covid is if you talk to a patient yeah now you keep doing the studies just help me to feel better right like the average patient they don't really care what it is or what we're treating they want to know that what we're doing is working and those are a theories as to why it works but it's really really satisfying now the trick with ivermectin is i've i've and long-covid is there's kind of two groups there are some patients which literally get better after like a couple of doses and then they're good to go they like feel better and they're back to normal whereas quite a few others i'd say the majority kind of need and here's where you got a doctor and titrate you kind of got to go longer sometimes higher doses sometimes we pair it with with a standard dose show for so it's 0.2 milligrams per kilogram so for like a 70 kilogram male be about you know 12 15 milligrams but we sometimes use a little bit higher doses if we don't get the effect and or longer durations or more frequently so i have one guy I've been treating for many months and him we've messed around with a few things and now we're down to like once or twice a week is what we're using it and but he feels he starts to feel unwell if there he doesn't have a dose for a few days and so some of them you have to treat long but the thing is is i just want to if i can just talk about our organization because it is a non-profit Joe and and our protocols are all on our website and i think they're really helpful for patients and physicians this is good sound medicine then i want to share but our website is flccc.net and we're a non-profit and we've put out our protocols the rationale the studies for them and we put out what's called the i recover protocol that's our protocol for long COVID it also applies to post vaccine syndromes we have encountered numerous patients who've gotten quite sick after the vaccines and who that's persisted and there the reason why i've remattened so potent is much more clear to explain right the vaccines right tell your body to make spike proteins and the whole big thing the discussions around vaccines which Brett really addressed with Steve and Robert on his podcast but we're learning that the spike protein is actually not benign it's a pathogen it can make some people sick and some people quite sick and i've remattened binds to the spike protein so if you're one of those people who have a prolonged illness or certainly not feeling well after vaccine i've remattened seems to neutralize the spike protein to make patients a lot better that's been another really satisfying asker people who've come to me really sick they're feeling terrible after the vaccines sometimes one to two to three weeks and they take ivermect and they're feeling better within a couple of days so there there are a number of things to say here and i think we should be cautious because some things like the evidence that ivermectin binds the spike protein it's hard to find evidence of that directly true but in any case and the evidence so no actually i want to thank you for caution because i do i do have to i do want to be more cautious a couple of things the evidence for binding the spike protein is more what's called in silico it's basically computational modeling where they're looking as to see what it would bind to and they we think that the binding of ivermectin is to to to to covid is is how it works it makes sense not only from the in silico studies but also the fact that it prevents entry because if it binds the ivermect to to covid that also would suggest why you're preventing people from getting ill because it can't enter but the other thing that i really want to emphasize as far as caution is that when we say that we're having efficacy and success and treating long covid i want to be clear we do not have clinical trials to support that protocol all we have is clinical experience so but it's becoming larger and wider again my network of physicians that have been using ivermectin for acute as well as long is growing and the numbers of patients they're treating is also increasing but remember that pyramid i talked about before when you talk about treatment of long covid you're at the lower levels of the pyramid right i don't have big trials or lots of even small clinical trials so i think one thing that is conspicuous is many things lead back to spike protein right so covid is a bizarre disease right it does a lot of damage to a lot of different systems as pier can can tell you the fact that the vaccines utilize spike protein at the level of the drawing board makes sense but this was done at the drawing board before it was understood that the spike protein itself was cytotoxic now one of the things that we got tremendous push back for on my podcast with the Robert Malone and Steve Kirsch was the claim made by Robert that spike protein is cytotoxic cytotoxic means kills cells this is actually unambiguous and the pushback was actually very carefully phrased because what they're really saying is that the spike protein in the vaccines is not cytotoxic as far as we know there is no evidence of that right but as Robert points out this is nonsense because what we know what we learned too late to prevent the vaccine manufacturers from using spike protein was that spike protein is cytotoxic and the subunit that they have used is based on that spike protein now they have locked it so this is a protein that changes form right it basically closes like a clamp and they have modified the sequence to lock it open in order that the part of the spike protein that is too deep in the weeds probably but that is not covered by sugars right is available for the immune system to discover it so they've locked it open and there is a possibility that that would prevent it from being toxic but they didn't design it to be non-toxic they locked it so that the immune system could see it and the problem is that this vaccine or these vaccines have already failed at several different levels the way the vaccine is supposed to work it is supposed to be injected into you at the injection site it is supposed to have the mRNAs or the DNA enter the cells trigger the production of spike protein the spike protein is supposed to move to the surface of the cell and it is supposed to stay there it has a domain into the it is supposed to stick it into the cell surface where the immune system is supposed to see it and learn it right now the fact is the components of the vaccine do not stay in the injection site and the spike proteins do not stay locked to the cell surface maybe some of them do but many of them seem to float around the body so we have this molecule which is based on a covid molecule or as far as covid 2 molecule that is cytotoxic that circulates around the body the evidence is that it actually shreds the blood brain barrier so it opens up holes into the brain so you know when you're talking about long covid post vaccine syndrome and these people have brain fog and other cognitive disabilities it makes sense that there's been an error here right you've got a spike protein capable of damaging this tissue necessary to protect the brain the spike protein seems to be circulating around the body in a way that the designers of the vaccine did not intend it to do and so it all sorts of sort of adds up that covid itself long covid after the virus is gone but there are still viral proteins probably spike protein and post vaccine syndrome where the spike protein has been produced in isolation of the virus all of them have a similar collection of symptoms and this would also explain why Ivermectin whatever its mechanism of action and there seem to be several seems to be effective in treating all of them but it's all telling us a kind of remarkable story and you know you have to ask like if you put the question to a business school class what would you expect the behavior of a corporation that manufactures a product to be at the point you've immunized them from liability right I think the answer would be obvious right you would expect them to become a lot less sensitive to the harm that their product does and to pursue profit in spite of potential harm is that what's going on because it sure seems logical that the behavior would come from that calculation now let me ask you this about the spike protein this this effect first of all how do we know that it's going it's not staying in the area of the injection going throughout all the the body and crossing the blood brain brain barrier how has this been measured and why do some people get the vaccine and have no side effects whatsoever okay so I talked to Robert a little bit about this the evidence that the spike protein is cytotoxic I'm working from memory here but I believe it comes from human cell cultures and this is from the salt institute's paper yeah from mice and from I've now forgotten the term there's a term for bits of brain that have been grown separately on a chip for work in the laboratory I'll see if I can find the term but in any case it's been demonstrated in these the you answered the question bread of how do we know the spike protein circulate well or we know so a I believe we know that the manufacturers ran a test that was basically whether intentional or not built to fail right apparently they used whole body they there's a a reporter protein that fluoresces that you can basically put in place of the mRNAs for the spike protein and then you can see where it ends up in in a mouse model you can basically see which parts of the animal are lit up but if you if you do that by sectioning the tissues so you're looking at the tissues it's a very sensitive assay if you do it by looking at the whole animal then the photons have to go through a lot of tissue to get out and so you don't see it and so it's not surprising that you would see it concentrated at the injection site so in any case in the demonstration phase we had a test that wasn't capable of seeing smaller amounts of circular it circulate around the body what we now have is evidence for example from this recent autopsy case yeah in which the spike proteins have been found throughout many tissues of a person who died uh following it was following COVID right yeah and right oh no it's following vaccination there's one falling vaccine there's also an autopsy study uh with COVID but what you said was correct on both I don't want to detract from but um what we're seeing now is I think people are misunderstanding whether it's virus or protein and we think even in the non-vaccinated what they're seeing is actually just viral proteins not actual virus in a lot of those tissues well we see a couple different things we see uh spike proteins but we also see this lipid nanoparticle coat material so the lipid nanoparticles are designed to protect the mRNA and get it into the cells that are supposed to transcribed and it's supposed to make the spike protein and this coating is now floating around the body it has conspicuously shown up in some places where you really wouldn't want to see a signal like ovaries um and so we have that and then we have the question of the spike protein which is not the initial vaccination floating around it's the consequence of cells transcribing the subunitive spike protein and then it breaking free from the cell surface and circulating around and frankly long COVID could be the virus is gone but those proteins have circulated possibly as the result of some adaptive strategy that the virus utilizes in order to open up tissues like the blood brain barrier who knows but yeah and what is the is there a theory as to why some people get vaccinated and have zero side effects I so that's i'll like and say as i agree with the question because it does seem to be that it's very well tolerated by many people um the argument is what is the proportion that don't and what is the acceptable proportion of those that don't and i try to leave vect i try not to address vaccines i try to focus on ivermetic because you know i think i the ivermectin is such an important part of all of this and i think it it would answer and solve a lot of the concerns around the vaccines and we consider it as a bridge to vaccination as well as a safety net for right so it's just so incredible that you've got this this this treatment rather that seems to be well first of all is an anti parasitic that also works as an antiviral that also works as an anti-inflammatory drug that also binds this spike protein i mean it does so many things it's like i'm smell bullshit but it's so but not really yeah exactly it's like you would be super skeptical i'd like to say i wouldn't be here i wouldn't be here i wouldn't be anywhere talking about ivermectin if if if right i'm sure if the data didn't support that nor would my group which is one of the reasons why it's so infuriating that this is being censored which is one of the reasons why i wanted to have you guys in here early we should say we were scheduled to do this a few weeks from now but we realized like okay this is something that's it's it's heating up and there's a narrative and this narrative is going to get squashed if they want to pulling your channel and like as far as we know they don't have any influence right now or Spotify or as they there's some whatever it is and again we don't know what this is and i don't want to i don't want to pretend that i'm i have evidence of some nefarious intentions i don't have a problem with youtube and i think part of what the dilemma that youtube faces is that they're managing its scale and i think it's insane and impossible and i think once you once you make a choice to say this is disinformation or that anything that doesn't go against the accepted narrative by the WHO or the cdc is disinformation and we need to get rid of that and it's bad information it's it's deceptive or it's it's dangerous whatever the whatever the label they put on it once you make that distinction you've put a you put motion you've put some some events into motion some actions and it's very difficult to get people to admit that they made a mistake agreed this is part of the problem big product with censorship because we've seen already it was incorrect in term at least in terms of being completely disputed the the the lab leak theater it's not been disproven and in fact people were getting censored and removed from social media platforms and banned for suggesting this in the past now you can just openly do it and you can openly discuss it so i think the the thing to point to is this anytime somebody decides they are going to upgrade conversation by forbidding certain things from being mentioned you know there are contexts in which that makes sense right if you're teaching evolution the you know the requirement that you stop every time somebody wants to say how do you know god didn't do it right you have to curate that discussion and eliminate that but that's not the position that you tube is in youtube is dealing with a platform that covers us all and yeah there's going to be a lot of garbage circulated on that platform to be sure that is the nature of human dialogue right if you do it on paper it'll be on paper if you do it on video it'll be on youtube it's just a human issue right but at the point that you say well wouldn't it be great if we got rid of the nonsense let's purge the the platform of nonsense okay now you've created a tool that tool is inevitably going to be captured by people who are going to use it to shut down their competitors in order to profit from it it is going to be captured so the answer is look you're not really going to beat an open discussion in which nothing is forbidden short of actually breaking the law right you're not going to upgrade the conversation and although you will shut down some cranks you're also going to shut down some people who are trying to help you see that the tool you need is right in front of you now I could be wrong about that right I freely admit this is new to me I am new to covid I have some specialties that are relevant being an evolutionist allows me to see certain things it's a very good generalist toolkit but I'm not a doctor I'm not a virologist right I could be wrong about things here but the only way we're going to figure out whether I'm wrong whether you're wrong whether all of the people who see the same thing here or something similar are wrong is to have it out and if we are going to shield that discussion from the public so that doctors do not know that other doctors are seeing a signal and that they might have a tool at their disposal that they're not using then people are going to die needlessly and youtube needs to understand that it is taking responsibility for that I got to speak up about that because I think you said it earlier Joe when there's never been a time where censorship has led to a societal good yeah I think that was before the podcast but yeah and we talked briefly about that never never never never and if you look at any great thinker in history any of their comments on censorship it's considered to be like like a indisputable harm to a healthy society yeah and then when you talk about extending it to science and so in the beginning I tried to be a little bit magnanimous and say okay you know you know hate speech calls for violence insurrection if you want to surrender you know censor that you know that's clear because if you don't people will get hurt right and so I agree that and we don't we don't I don't want to debate you know what is appropriate to censor what isn't but I just can't figure out why a healthy debate of science and of medicine by credible physicians using data and you're basically saying to the average person in this country that you can't think for yourself right we need to protect you from people talking about medicines that you can't credibly assess whether they're true whether they're using the data correctly and so you're removing anyone's ability you're basically saying we need to think for you because you're going to hurt yourself from medicines from medical misinformation you want to put that on the same shelf as calls for violence and insurrection like by the way even before this happened there's plenty of nonsense on the internet around medicines and health like right but this is a different thing right because of the fact that it's a pandemic everybody is very urgent in their actions so they've they the excuses they have to act quickly to stop this stuff the spread of disinformation can happen very rapidly they've decided it's yes exactly they've decided that you know what normally we wouldn't do that but in this state of emergency we're going to take on these powers and we're going to stensor and what Brett said was really important and I think you've pointed that out but like that one little experience of learning from other doctors on the front lines back in last spring about steroids to further support and validate that that's really what you need to do that saved lives that saved a lot of lives and and even you know when I gave the centa testimony in May even though I was attacked and criticized being able to talk about the science and the support for steroids many doctors started using it and actually that that wasn't censored actually I don't think they were censoring as hard in the beginning as they are now at least around the steroids because that didn't get taken that it also didn't get 9 million views that I saw was almost valid it was there were censoring people from talking about 5g there was a lot of nonsense but it was clearly goofy right right and they were pulling some of that stuff down now normally right you would say well that's wise the problem we're seeing is once you do start censoring once you clear that lane you have a tool now you have this thing and you have a history of use right so then you start going well what else can we censor well this is not in compliance with whatever organization we're currently following right right whether it's Hunter Biden's laptop or right lab leak but so but Brett that I just want to finish what you said I just have to emphasize again because this I there's nothing more important than what you last said is that there are lives the suppression of ivermackton that is you know we could talk about the theoretical objections to the censorship in which are there are many especially history I think we throughout our history books as we went into the pandemic but just looking at ivermackton the when you were the incalculable loss of life and prolongation and worsening of this not only in the US across the world incalculable doesn't even come close because I got to tell you a lot of the world still follows the US we're still considering especially in medicine some of the top trained and and you know the tops of like science and research around medicine so if the US had adopted ivermackton that would have had an immense global impact and so this particular instance this issue of ivermackton and their censorship I just got to say they got it wrong and and it's almost hard for me to talk about what that implications of that was I mean they literally yeah you don't want to say they're horrifying you know you don't want to you don't want to you don't even want to put that responsibility on some other humans or set of humans uh account right well you've seen it first hand I see the people dying man I see him crashing on the ventilators like you know and especially it's this thing about the early treatment which you picked up on Joe like if you treat him early they don't go to the hospital they don't need me in the ICU I'm really good at what I do but these patients are really hard to get better once they're in the actually they're very hard to turn around when you start late even with ivermackton I have seen it work but most of the time I'm seeing them in advanced forms of disease but you see these patients they're trapped in the hospital on high flow oxygen support devices for weeks and there's all sorts of other insanity with the visiting policies they can't see their loved ones for weeks at a time they're in these rooms either on ventilators or not they can't see that there's no visitors and they're all alone they die alone a lot and are there other things that are used in conjunction with ivermackton that are common like iV vitamins or anything along those lines so our protocols show myself and Paul Maric and myself and a number of other and our group were also expert around the research on high dose intravenous vitamin C of which there's very good data for severe lung injury as well as emerging data in COVID so we use high dose iV vitamin C so our protocols high dose how many milligrams you talk so we're doing actually for it's about three grams iV every six hours so that'll be about 12 grams a day but that's iV that is many many many many many fold higher concentrations than oral oral vitamin C is a not a very effective acute treatment mostly because it's limited by absorption kinetics you can't get a lot of iV vitamin C into the bloodstream iV is a complete oral vitamin C that's the wrong one i'm not sure yeah so oral is limited you can't get very high concentrations but iV you you can achieve high super physiologic concentrations and we know that has really beneficial effects we have studies that show we have our own practice so if you look at our protocols the sicker you are when you get the hospital we have and this disease is really complex it has a number of different inflammatory and what we call pathophysiologic pathways and so we use a whole host of medicines it's our protocols called math plus it's a methyl pridness alone of scorbic acid which is vitamin C thiamine which is another vitamin heparin which is an anticoagulant and then we have a number of other medicines so iVermectin we use an antidepressant called fluvoxamine which actually has very profound anti-inflammatory properties which is kind of a cool story too that drug so Steve Kirsch has been you know who is on your program he's been a big champion of early treatment and one of the drugs that he's helped fund research and try to bring to prominence again safe low cost off pat medicine he's struggled to get that into the wider i would point out that this video was also removed by youtube in spite of the fact that we sat with him and talked about fluvoxamine among other things with Robert Malone the literal inventor of mRNA vaccine technology so youtube somehow feels qualified to shut these people down but yeah and it's yeah well when you talk about all the all the other stuff so we use a whole bunch of stuff and the only thing that bring up fluvoxamine because you'll kind of like it because it's just kind of like it's so cool how science plays out is that what happened around fluvoxamine is that there was a psychiatric hospital in France and the area was getting hit hard with COVID and they noticed that the people getting sick and going to the hospital were the nurses and the doctors and the patients were going at very low rates were getting sick and now patients with chronic mental illness especially institutionalized generally not known for their physical health or good nutritional habits I mean they oftentimes they have an epidemic of smoking tobacco addiction obesity I mean there's a lot of things that can travel with mental illness yet they were doing better than the nurses and doctors and so people said what's going on they started to look at that and they started to look at all the variables that might differ and they noticed that depressed people who was highly protective that if you had a diagnosis of depression your chances of going to the hospital and dying was much much less and really what that was it was a proxy for the antidepressant that they were on and so that's sort of what kind of engendered the investigations and now we have a number of trials showing that that antidepressant mostly for its anti-inflammatory properties you know a lot of drugs have what we call pleotropic effects they work on you know few different mechanisms and so anyway long long answer to say that we use combination therapy protocol it's critical that you use a combination of therapies and the sicker you are the more that we're going to use and so I invite your listeners to look at our protocols so I wanted to just fill in one more piece of the puzzle which is and this is me guessing but there is a distinction between public health and the science of human health public health unfortunately has to deal with the game theory of people right so if you had let's say a vaccine that was highly effective at addressing a dangerous pathogen like measles or polio or something like that but there was some risk involved in taking the vaccine people who decided not to take the vaccine would get the benefit of everybody else is having taken it without suffering the risk themselves so that makes sense logically speaking in order to get people to take the vaccine enough to gain the immunity the herd immunity that would prevent the virus from or the pathogen from continuing public health officials will oversimplify and at some points they may even lie in order to get people to behave in a certain way now I don't support this but I do recognize that it's an actual problem how do you get the collective to do what it needs to do if the individuals are calculating their benefit and they may benefit from staying out of a protocol that they you know they should participate in from the point of view of the whole society but because what we have now is YouTube and the other platforms and the AP and Reuters and all of these groups listening to the public health authorities as if they were scientific authorities what they are ending up doing is taking this license to lie to the public and they are using it to shut down the scientific discussion of what we ought to do and I swear it looks like capture is what has gotten a hold of this process so if there's some part of governmental structure that is allowed to lie and then it is captured by something that is looking to make a profit and it starts shutting down those who are discussing the problem and the immense human suffering that arises out of it that's a that's a I don't know what's the polite word for clusterfuck I mean it's the only word yeah there is no sit for that right have you had a debate with anybody who opposes these ideas so that's an interesting question so I did have a video debate around the science of I ever met in a week ago that'll be up on trial site news I think any day now who opposed it so it was someone who wrote an editorial in a very very prominent journal basically saying that the evidence for Ivermacken is weak and shouldn't be trusted and basically just criticized all the trials and so when you ask like have I debated anyone openly what's interesting is I'm ready anytime put him anywhere I'll debate the science of Ivermacken no one's coming forward no one's inviting me to debate no one's out there and the reason why is they have an impossible task they don't want a debate because they can't win the debate because what they have to do is here I have 60 controlled trials 30 of them randomized all showing benefit their only argument is that the evidence is low quality they're forced to say why we shouldn't trust the evidence they have no evidence to show it doesn't work all of the evidence shows it works they're only tool their only fight is to say don't trust the evidence and as the evidence builds and as it's looked into more as you could see from that publication this weekend their argument that this is low quality or very low quality starts to break apart they don't really have an argument nobody wants to fight me the guy the guy who who I debated last week you you can watch it be the judge I mean I he just kept nattering on the same old talking points about these little trials and but at the same time when you look at what I call the totality of the evidence what we talked about prevention epidemiologic early late randomized observational and he had no response to that not that part he just kept saying you know those are oh I'll tell you what his response is is when you look at observational trials and epidemiology you have to be careful because those are associations not causations and again not to get too cute but as a patient if you're in the bed sick before me and I say we have this drug that's highly associated with recovery and survival we can't prove it works but it's highly associated that the people who get it they all seem to do much much better than those as a patient I don't think you really care we want to know that it works and we have causation trials in fact we have now double blind randomized control trials showing that the time to viral clearance is greatly shortened with ivermethan just a week ago an Israeli group very prominent university showed a trial that viral cultures cleared quicker and so when you were wondering earlier bread about whether the cases or whether the viral transmission would be lower around people you treat with ivermethan the evidence right now in double blind randomized control trials very carefully done is really showing that it eradicates the virus the other thing and this is where I'm going to get to the sinister because the WHO guideline document and again I think you already know about the history the more recent history of the WHO and I want to be clear the history the successes of the WHO for their first four decades five decades were unbelievable what they did for global public health was you know I mean historic right with smallpox and polio and even in the HIV epidemic but the last 20 years the WHO has really done very poorly in a number of global emergencies and this one's no different but the reason why I want to bring something up is that I want the world to know that if you look at their guideline document from March 31st there's a section where they talk about something called a dose response relationship and that's really important in science when you're looking at an effective therapeutic if you find evidence of a dose response which is to say higher the dose higher the response right dose response relationship that's like an unassailable pillar of efficacy the existing evidence at the time of that guideline we know because their researcher was out there in public lecturing on it he was showing that single day versus multi-day you had much faster eradication of the virus so viral clearance had a dose response in that document they say we looked at dose response amongst these five outcomes and we found none guess what outcome they didn't mention viral clearance that to me is a crime that is evidence of a crime they deliberately left out scientific evidence to show efficacy of a drug because they didn't want that recommended and and I they need to prove to me why they didn't put it in there when their own researcher was giving public lectures showing a dose response in terms of viral clearance so as somebody who is waiting into a discussion that is not that is only partly in my area of expertise I pay very close attention to the arguments that come back because I want if there's if I'm saying something that's actually not robust I want to know about it right away because it's dangerous for me to keep down that path so I watch and I think the problem is the arguments that come back here amount to scientific sophistry right these arguments aren't really real arguments you know the idea that well you've got to be careful with those trials because correlation does not imply causation well that's not actually true correlation does imply causation when there's a pre-existing hypothesis right that's what we use to establish causation as we say I believe x causes y and here's how I'm going to find out I'm going to look at whether where x goes up y also goes up right so this argument is one that sounds sophisticated but it's actually wrong likewise the insistence on large randomized controlled trials being like insisting on video documentation of a crime all of these arguments are effectively obstructionist right they're not real arguments and it does not to say that real arguments don't occur right we can talk about whether or not the spike protein that is created by the mRNAs in the vaccine is toxic the way wilds spike protein is but the presumption would have to be that it is and the circumstantial evidence suggests so so in any case there are arguments to be made occasionally you get one back but most of which you get back appears to be obstructionist and one of the hallmarks of obstructionist arguments is that they don't update when you properly challenge them they just move on to the next argument right you don't get an acknowledgement that actually you were right about that right so I mean I'm seeing that across the board and again I'd love to know you know if it'd be wonderful to know exactly what the truth of what's in front of us is but the evidence that we have is so strong already that really anybody who's not encouraged by it and interested in following that path to find out how good it is is doing something wrong and the behavior I like how you say the evidence is very strong and the behaviors around it are inexplicable because it's really those two things that you're observing you seeing this really almost unassailable data and the behaviors are bizarre like like your ask and go where is where are they coming back saying no you're wrong Dr. Corey because and they take the 60 trials and they show how every single one of those 60 trials somehow led to the wrong conclusion and that I am incorrect in my conclusions where where where are they doing that where are those papers being published you would should have to show your work if you're going to pull down a video in that regard absolutely and you know you feel like in the appeal you should be able to just say here here's the paper what's wrong with it yeah how how is what I said misinformation right well how well it matches this paper and of course they're pointed to spam right yeah how'd you get to that yeah I think there was just an amazing what was it spam spam I'm kind of receptive practices and scam yeah so you fell in under scam you weren't spamming anyone about I've met you know I'm gonna sell it yeah so it's either it has to be disruptive practice oh yeah either way it's horseshit it's it's a nonsense critique yeah right um I think it's really important for people to understand that this is this is a censorship issue as much as this is a medical issue there's a bunch of things going on here this is a public health issue there's a lot there's a lot going on with the subject but for there's no one no human other than humans making money no one's benefiting from this censorship this is not good it's not good for any of us it's bad for humanity it's bad for humanity but it's also there's not and this is I know you're right here but I don't mean to do this and make you uncomfortable there's not a better platform for discussing ideas than yours what you do is beyond in my opinion it's beyond reproach because you guys do correct mistakes you are entirely honest you are doing this in all in good faith you are talking about this you and your wife are both scientists you're both biologists you're talking about this from an educated perspective all the ducks are in a row and yet you're in danger of losing your channel and this is the argument that everyone who is anti-censorship as said from the beginning of time you can't allow it to start because it's like a fire that keeps looking for fuel it keeps it burns down the house it's like okay how about the yard fuck this yard we need to burn this yard down this yard is non-compliance and it's just gonna keep going and what we're seeing it's not wackos that are saying the cell towers are killing people with radiation and 5G is the devil and they're putting chips in you and it's magnetizing all the sites where you're getting vaccinated no it's fucking real scientists now now it's real scientists getting censored and there's no evidence whatsoever that they're incorrect that's dangerous for all of us especially for people like me that aren't scientists that rely on people like you to go over this data with a keen sober eye and analyze it and disseminate it in a way that it's gonna give people at least the ability to make an educated decision that ability is being it seems like purposely removed from from from us I really really appreciate that and I will say this is a complex topic we have been showing our work from the start we've made errors we've gone back and corrected them but what is motivating us is that there is a lot of there is a lot of risk to human beings out there just even the loss of one person so devastates a family that just thinking about all the people who are gonna be harmed by the fact that we're not following the evidence and figuring where it leads it's just there really isn't a choice but to talk about it and to have some monolithic platform decide that somehow it knows and then when it turns out you ask them how do you know and its answer is well the who told me and the answer is well that isn't any sort of evidence at all that's pure authority it's anti-scientific you're on exactly the opposite side of history that you claim to be on so thank you Joe yeah and I appreciate the way you summarize that Joe and you know I want to sort of say something positive which is this censorship we all agree it's it's really harmful and it's actually hurting people and it's hurting people in a global scale but you know I have faith I've seen now we started to see that that there are groups there isn't organized opposition who are now understanding that some of these agencies are captured and that if they keep listening to them they're gonna keep getting what's happening which is uncontrollable spread crisis situations and so when you look around the world if you look at India finally they broke free from the WHO numerous states in India adopted Ivermatin in their treatment guidelines Uttar Pradesh already did it months ago that's the state of 240 million people it would be like the 10th largest country in the world if it was a country that's just one state in India they've been using it aggressively and they have some of the best numbers not only in India and in the world number of other states also broke free and then now our organization we're being approached by a number of I'm gonna just gonna say very well resource philanthropists from a number of countries around the world who are now trying to organize distribution campaigns just as you would with for the parasites now they're trying to organize them based on the evidence in a number of countries of the world and so and the other thing is we've seen these incredible successes so Simbaway is a huge success story if I had one of our colleagues down this lovely doctor she's just awesome really great doctor the name's Jackie Stone she at one point set a couple of months ago she's like we're bored around here we're looking for the next pen that obviously she's making a joke but literally there was no more cases and the hospitals were empty South Africa where Dr. Marric and myself gave a lot of lectures early on in January there was a whole movement that started and fought the government they moved Ivermatin from illegal it was illegal to import or possess Ivermatin they moved it to now you can actually prescribe it compounded and it's available in society and so you know there are like really there are successes against what we clearly know is just incorrect and and harmful advice from from unfortunately those leaders that we look to for good guidance we just haven't gotten it I think that's a good way to wrap this up I'm gonna bring this home um thank you gentlemen for coming in here and doing this and thank you for your tireless work on exposing this and and letting people know and brave because it's this is there's there's a lot of stake particularly your channel and your main source of income for your family and your reputation and the fact that you're willing to go against the what is this the current orthodoxy it's so and I'm happy you guys exist and it's just it's stunning that we find ourselves in this position where there really is a clear thing that's being ignored whether or not it's right or wrong we mean let it have it stay in court yeah and then they're not yeah thank you Joe thank you my pleasure appreciate all right sort that out for yourself ladies and gentlemen goodbye