The joke and experience. I was brought up. I was brought more men. Realist. So I was brought more men. Yes, I was more men. Well, my family's more than what we're all excommunicated. What happened? My dad got us all taken out of the thing. So it was just like we were like deep. We were deep. And then when we moved provinces, the church wasn't good here in Ontario. So in Nova Scotia, big fellowship, we Mormon world. You know, then what my dad was like a high deacon or whatever the fuck it was. Or like we always like sat next to like the bishops family, like front row shit, because it's all like the families whoever's like up on the stage or whatever. Like the family's sitting the front rows and shit. And so then when we moved to Ontario, I fucking, you know, like when we were about 12 or 13, right around like that time when we started all of a sudden, doing like drugs and drinking is when we stopped going to the church. Because that's maybe a part of it too, right? Where like we were like, I never had a Coca-Cola. I never saw a PG rated movie. We only watched G rated. Really? I never saw the Simpsons until I was, you know, like things like that. Like we were allowed to act. So once you got excommunicated from the church, they just, well, we took ourselves my dad, I don't know if excommunicated is the right word. Left the church. We, when we left the church, but because they have so much information on you and your family like fucking family tree stuff, like it takes a long time to actually get your, your, like your shit out of there. What do you mean? Like your, like I think they just have like a lot of information on you. And your families and they do a lot of ancestral stuff, right? So I think they do like a lot of, and you, you know, the pen, you got to give all the, like even like I would get $2 a week for my allowance and I would have to give 10% to the church. So we would all, my brothers, we would have to take our nickels or whatever, our dimes. Really? And we'd have to give our 10% to the church. Really? Yeah. So that was training. Like just think like that training of like giving the church the money from day one. And all that kind of shit. So it was just like, and then, you know, my parents are like, they were young. And it's great. They were like the young, the young couple that got knocked on and my dad was like, come on in like drink a, like you want to be here. And all of a sudden my dad was just like, and it was one of those things where I'm like, why? You know, we were so like, you, like when I found that out later on, I was like, you literally just like somebody knocked on that, you let a missionary in here? You know, like where it's like so funny. Oh, when you're asking them that question, like later, like in my 20s, like when I had like some balls to like, you know, dads are so scary. So I was just like, you know, like when I, huh? Yeah, just why you're asking them why? Yeah, just like some quite like where I was just like, you know, like you come visit me and call it. And we'd have like lunch, you know, my dad would drive up to the city. And you know, having those father-son kind of conversations, like hey, like this was kind of crazy back then. They're like, why was this? Or like, why, why, why, you know, why were we never like to sleep over at other kids' houses? Or like, you know, like things like little small things that I don't think are, you know, crazy. But I think it's definitely like one of those things that like, you know, never having like coca, a coca cola and then all of a sudden, I'm like, do an acid. You know, I'm all gas. You know, like it's just like, I was like, oh, cool. We're not moments anymore. Let's do some water acid. Sometimes that's what triggers it, right? Is the repression. There's so much repression. And then all of a sudden they take the rains off you. Well, and the idea of heaven just like at a young age, I strongly felt like there was no heaven. And I strongly felt I didn't believe it from a young age because I also, and there's three levels of heaven in the Mormon or in the book of Mormon, right? There's like the celestial, the fucking whatever and whatever. So I was just like, there's three levels of heaven. There's like three levels of heaven. So then there's tears. Right? So the thing that I was, I was a clip though as a kid, I would, I was walking to like, you know, a little storm, like grab a little thing. Like I remember just, I stole a Jack knife ones from like this like, you know, hardware store or like, I would just like take things, you know, a little clip though. And in my head at a very young age, I was like, I'm never going to be eternal with my parents at a very young age. I was like, my parents are like, you know, they did the whole thing with the underwear and they're married forever and like, fuck it. Underwear is wild. Dan, I think they had to give it back or they had to get rid of it. I don't fucking know. I don't know. Let's face time Steve and be like, what the fuck? So did you have to get underwear back? I still don't understand like they have information on you. Like what is that make it hard to leave because they tell you, hey, we know things about you? Like what? No, I don't think it's like weird like that kind of stuff. I just think it's like our shit out to be like stricken of the books. Right. So you don't have to pay them every week. And you don't have to. Pencil or I think it's called pencil. But I think it's like once again, there's probably a lot of Mormons watching that that are being like, man, he doesn't know shit. And I don't know shit. Okay. I don't know shit. I just lived it. Right. But I just think it is. I remember it was just one of those things where I remember my dad and my sister. It was crazy because she had a child out of wedlock. She's going to love that I say this. But she had like a child out of wedlock. And so that was like a thing where I think it was like, I don't even know. I think there was like a thing where she got like a piece of paper saying she had to go in front of like a tribunal. Oh boy. And like, you know, explain herself or she was get or maybe she was getting an ex community. I've still forget. It's kind of fuzzy. But I think it was like one of those things where I remember when the missionaries showed up and it was almost like they served her like papers or some shit. And I remember my older brother almost like beat the shit out of these missionaries was like get the fuck out of one of those kind of things. Like get on our porch. Get the fuck out of here. Serving your papers. You violated. I don't know. Really just phone. And like that's the thing is like I don't like a lot of. Well, that is the wackiest religion. It's the wackiest, right? Yeah. I know. I was off course on part of it. It's like other than sign of towels. I was baptized. It's the wackiest one. It's the wackiest one, right? I know the guy who made it up and he was like, he used to go. He used to go to the hill where he found the book of Mormon and they used to redo the event and we would visit the jail where he was like motor. How old was he when they killed him in his twenties? That's in that wild John Smith. John Smith. Joseph Joseph Smith. He invented it when he was 14 years old. Let's go. That's incredible. That's like now that's like a tick talker. You know, everyone just follows tick talk same shit. Well, I just can't imagine a 14 year old that's not full of shit. Yeah. You know, like a 14 year old that tells you a story like that and everybody's like, wow, he's like, you've made angels. But where do they like? They were beautiful. You have a golden tablets. I love a golden tablet with the last work of Jesus. Jesus catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.