Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night, all day. Gee, I get new classes. No, I just have different payer for different stuff. Did they get stronger? No. No. I just have a... Did you always have classes? Do you have an eyeball issue? Yeah, I got a stigmatism. OK. But I got one for driving and one for my computer. I used to have to use reading glasses. Then I started using red light. Red light therapy. And I think that... The first thing I started doing is taking... This company Pure and Capsulation has this... It's called... Macular Support. It's like a combination of nutrients that help your eyeballs. I don't know how. But I explained it to you, Roman. He read it off to me and he's like, this makes sense. But then the big one was red light. I started using red light therapy. I don't need glasses anymore. What? My eyes aren't perfect. Like in low light, they're not so good. Like in a dark restaurant, I have to use the flashlight on my thing to read a menu, but I don't need glasses anymore. So I was... I've been wondering, is it that I'm getting older or are they just using darker light in the restaurants? They definitely use dark light and restaurants. I mean, young people can still read it. Like I've gone to restaurants with my kids and they can read in the dark. I'm like, you can read that? I can't read it. But like small print, like on my phone, like reading an email, I didn't used to be able to read it. And now I can read it perfectly. See now, I'm in that age now where I've got to start. Switching. Switching glass. It's different. Yeah. Here we go. Here we go. Listen, dude, I'm just happy you're alive. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, you know, you know, man, I've always done no more talking about it. You had a heart attack. Yes, I had a heart attack three months ago. Yeah. Super Bowl weekend. Yeah. In Atlanta. Yeah. I don't know where. Well, what was it really out of nowhere? Not really. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, like, because those are, I don't know if you're a marathon runner. Right. Right. Exactly. But I was sitting there, you know, honestly, I was sitting there thinking, because I remember the doctor, because we, you know, we really are, like, we've set ourselves up. We, we kind of deal with trauma in a not, I mean, you can argue about how it's, whether it's healthy or not. But with, but our first go to his humor, right. And I remember the doctor getting upset with me, like the, the, the surgery, the lady was about to do, she was about to put a stint. So, you know, I'm sitting there, and she was like, Hey, something very serious just happened to you. You know, because I was just talking, you know, I was, but it was just how I was just coping, you know, right. Right. She was not happy about it. Did you tell her that's how I deal with things? No, I was already all drugged up and shit. It was, because it was one of the things where I think like, you can't, they can't put you out completely. Like it's, it's not that kind of anything. Oh, okay. But I think they need you to be conscious kind of in case something goes wrong. Right. But they, but whatever the fuck they put me on, I don't remember any of it. And you were joking around and she was upset. Yeah. What happened was that when I got to the hospital, the doctor that first saw me was like, I forget his name, but he was like, Hey, I'm Doug. And don't, don't worry about anything. I'm going to be with you the whole time. You know, and then maybe 20 minutes later, you know, they, they were in the end, they drug me up. And I'm like, Hey, what the fuck is Doug? You know, and they're like, who's that? I was like, he's, he promised me that he wasn't going to leave. And I was, obviously I was just joking. Right. I know like he would just saying that. So I would calm down. Right. Right. I don't know why Doug thought he would bring me comfort, but I just, but I, I, I, I, I fake made a big deal of the fact that I felt abandoned by Doug. And she didn't think it was funny. But somebody did. And that's all I needed was the laugh. I'm like, issue bits. It's not me. You're the problem. You two serious. Well, why would she need you to be serious if you're getting a standpoint and would that make it work better? I mean, to be fair, I think my whole life people have said as serious as a heart attack. And I feel like if you dedicated your life to that, you probably a serious person. I don't know any other heart surgeons, but I bet they all pretty uptight. Yeah, they have to be. It's life or death with every decision that they make, right? I guess. They got to get it in on time, right? Like if they're going to put a stint in you, if they're going to do something like, if you're one of those people like you are that if you didn't address this, you would have died. Right. So that's one of those things that's time critical. So I guess with those people like, hey, stop fucking around. Like in their mind, like I got to save you. I got to figure out what has to be done within a certain amount of time and get you on the road to recovery. Because if I don't, you're dead. You know what? Some of us should, I remember. And this was just flash. Because I only remember these couple seconds is she kept yelling at me because I kept moving my hands. So basically like I'm laid down like this and they want you to keep your hands right by your side. And I just remember I kept coming to with her being like, hey, keep your hands. She might as well keep your fucking hands down. I don't know though, I don't know. I ain't gonna make no accusations. But she was clearly upset about it. She was upset. But I'm like, I'm on drugs. You gave me. I'm not going in on purpose. Apparently my default response. Cause because they, cause they put it, they have to put a stint in, but they go through your groin. Yikes. So, so, you know, so apparently like my default response is to protect my dick. Like I'm waking up, somebody's fucking around down there. Oh. You know, it's like, why don't you all tie me down if it's that important? Why don't you tie my hands down? Right. Maybe they can't. I don't know. And medical people are real sensitive about criticism. You know, some of them really like, we save lives, how dare you? It is like, all right. Yeah. Yeah, some of y'all still ask us though. But they don't have the best sense of humor. They can't. Like that's not the way, if you want to be a really good doctor, you can't be all source 10 of the media. Well, see, the nurses have a sense of humor. Right. Right. Right. Right. Nurses are fun. They must be different species. Yeah, nurses are fun. Like nurses come in, they joke around with you. They fuck around like some of them do at least. Yeah. And some of them, let's be honest. And then they land. And then the nurses were incredibly attractive. Like, really? There was a hot nurse's everywhere. I think. Like nurses and it's something about like that text. Like working at the one, the ladies working at the vet hospitals. Yeah. It's something about going into that field. I don't know what it is. That text you mean veterinarian. Yeah, like veterinarian. But not the doctors. Right. Just the nurses. Well, the people who love animals, sweet people. Oh, yeah. And money. They love animals. Nobody. Well, the nurses don't usually love money. If they did, they wouldn't get into that profession. But the veterinarian hospital certainly loves money. The administration. Speaking of which, I can't decide which pisses me off more is like when I get the bill at the human hospital or when, or because at the vet hospital, I feel like they're like they're extorting me. You know, like when I got the bill from this hospital, I was like, God damn. But I was in there and they were, because they didn't walk up to me while like before the surgery and go, what's it going to be? Right. But when it's your pet, that's what they do. They're like, right. We could do this life-saving thing, which is the best thing to do, but it's way more money than you have. Or you know, you can be a piece of shit pet on and get the $20 thing. Yeah. They're trying to get you to take out a loan. All that. Just really time of school. That's awful. I don't know when the last time you had to do some serious shit for your pet. Pretty recently. Marshall swallowed a bunch of rocks. Oh, God damn. Yeah, he, we, someone spilled chicken food on the gravel and he ate all the chicken food and just kept eating and started eating gravel. Oh my God. He's retarded. He's the sweetest. He's the sweetest dog that's ever walked to face the earth, but he is not clever. And so we bring them inside. No one knows. No one knows anything that happened. And then he starts throwing up and he's throwing up rocks, like little pebbles. And then he starts getting diarrhea and he's diary and pebbles. I'm like, oh no. And then we put two and two together. We figured out what happened. And so then I had to take him to the vet. So I took him to the vet and he had to stay there overnight and luckily they didn't have to do surgery. They pumped it out of it. They somehow and another got the rocks out of his stomach and they had to keep scanning it to make sure there's no rocks remaining in there. And so he passed all the rocks, either through them up or shit them out. And then within a certain amount of time, I think he was there for at least 24 hours. But after a certain amount of time, he started eating and then they weren't worried about him anymore. That dog fucking eats. He just all he wants to do is eat. He gets so excited. All he wants to do is favor the thing. He wants every most of the flavor out this dirt. It's so crazy. He kept eating rocks. I mean, he ate pounds of gravel. It wasn't like a small amount of gravel. It was the amount of gravel that was in my living room. On the carpet was crazy. Oh wow. Out of throw up and just diarrhea. It was everywhere. It was a crime scene. I bet you he won't do that shit again. Oh yeah, you will. He'll do it tomorrow. The dog doesn't learn shit. He's the best. Like he's a sweet dog. I love him so much. I love him so much. He's just all love. Every time I see him, he just wagging his tail. I get on the ground with him. He kisses me. I go. My brother's belly. He's the best, but he is not. That used to be a wolf. That's what so fucked up about human beings. We took something that's the most clever, most, they communicate with each other. They plan traps on animals. They're so clever. You can't also, you can't train them. You know that about wolves? You can't train them. That's why you don't see wolves in the fucking circus. You cannot train. You can train a bear. You can train a lion. You can train a tiger. Just go, fuck you. I'm going to do exactly what I want to do. But not dogs. Certainly not my dog. Like Marshall, he's the sweetest. Like he was so easy to train. It's just wow, because you could train a lion, but you can't train a lion. I don't care. You can train a wolf. You could train house cats to do certain things. Like some people have trained their house cats to shit in the toilet. No, Joe, there's a video of like, I want to just use Russian. It's Russian. She's like the world champion cat train in life. And she's getting these cats to do a whole bunch of shit, but every now and then they do what they want. They just do what the fuck they want. Yeah, that's true. You can't get them to do it like like a really good dog with like a Belgian malamaw. That's absolutely just does every task you ask him to do. That's impossible. Absolutely. But with wolves, you can't train me to do anything. They won't listen. I didn't know that. They don't listen to you at all. I had a friend who had wolves. He had like seven, eighth timber wolves and they got out and killed a bunch of his neighbor sheep. They like you couldn't stop them from doing anything they wanted to do. Whatever they wanted to do. Why do you have a pack of wolves? He's an idiot. He had three of them. I was like, you don't have these dogs. You just feed them. You don't, this is not like a dog. They don't listen to you and you have a house with a yard. Like that's crazy. Like you should have like an enormous piece of land and even then if you have wolves that can kill everything they run across. Yeah, they need miles. Yeah. Of space. Yeah, they're cardio machines. They run through the mountains. They chase down moose. That's why I guess so irritated when, because I'm in the apartments now. I'm in one of those. I don't know what the fuck is going on with my building, but it's full of dog. Like the building is four dog people. There's a dog wash. All of the grass around it is all fake and there's a fucking shit bags every 10 feet. And the front of the building from noon to 4pm, it's always just the strongest scent of dog piss because 50 people have walked their dogs around it. And that's fine. I don't mind that at all. But what irritates me is when I see, because I know I have the biggest apartment in the building and I know that I don't have room for, like I don't have the room for, like a blue healer or. Right. That dog needs to be running miles every day. Why do you get that big ass dog? Oh yeah. I saw a cane course though. That's crazy. You got a cane course so in a 1300 square foot apartment. That's crazy. That's crazy. And I don't see that motherfucker every day. So you skipping days? This motherfucker needs to hurt things. He needs to have exercise. That's like having an MMA fighter living in your house. Like you better take him to the fucking gym. Oh yeah. Because people get a blow off steam. When people find out that I have a cat, they always like, oh so yeah, apartment smells like a cat. No. No. But you know, you know, who's place is always smell bad? Is people that have a dog that's too fucking big to be in the place? Yeah. Yeah. Also they probably can't wash it right. Like what are you going to do? What are you getting a shower with it? I used to get in the shower with my dogs. I bring Marshall to a groomer. But my dog Johnny, he used to love getting the shower with me. Really? Yeah. He was a big master and he loved it because he was just massages in love in the shower. I just cover him with shampoo and I would talk nice to him. I go, oh, we're good and so clean buddy. He give me kisses. We're a group of children. And so something about seeing their human with no clothes. I think they lock because my cat does it. She loves the coming to bathroom whenever she knows I'm naked or she has a shower when she just sit there and watch. It's probably weird to them that you could take your clothes off. I mean, I think it's weird to them that you wear clothes at all. Oh, for sure. They're like, what? What are you doing? Why are you under the sheets all the time? Yeah. And I've solved my stance on people that put clothes on their animals, but I'm like, they don't like it. No, well, some dogs like Chihuahas in the winter, it's a good idea. You know what I mean? It's like 30 degrees. I like the dog likes it. No, the dog likes that you like it. But they don't want clothes on. They don't. But if you have like a little like a look at Chihuahas for instance, they get really cold. Those guys, if you put a little sweater on them, like they feel better outside. Don't get that much more. But okay, then go all the way there. What a boot set. I'm going to wear boots in the summer because like New York City, like this street gets so hot. Yeah. Like if you think about how hot the street gets, if it's 98 degrees outside, it was like broken glass. Oh my god. Yeah. I'm walking on hot rocks. Right. But also, what are you doing that big guy's dog in New York City? That's true. There are no apartments. Where you got a great day in out here in New York City? I mean, I would have to make a choice. Like if for some reason I had to move to New York City, I'm not getting rid of my dog. And I'm not leaving my dog here. I can't read a $0. No chance. No chance in hell. So I would just have to commit to a lifestyle, a taking that dog out to like Central Park every day, doing things that I'm every day. I would have to make a choice. I would have to live near the park for sure. Like for me to get rid of my cat, it would have to be it would have to die. They'd have to die or it would have to be someone where like, I am absolutely not capable of, you know, like I'm I can't move. Right. Or something crazy like right right right right. When I tried when I moved out here from Cali, like she she came fly. Also, did you drive across the country? I paid somebody to. Oh, there you go. Oh, that would that would be a fun. Actually, I didn't have a card of time, but that would be a nightmare. This is the most stubborn like this preacher. Like I have a hard time getting her. I've taken her to three groomers. They all been like, yeah, come get her. Yeah. Yeah. Because she doesn't like to be with restraint in any way. Yeah. And at the slightest sign that you are thinking about holding her down or putting her in something, she will fight with everything she got. Is she a feral cat? No. Have you ever been? She had a cat. Are you ready, Ben? She's got her. She's got her. She's got her. I got her. The story of the lady told me it doesn't really add up, but basically she was a divorce happened. Oh. This family had two cats in a dog and then the wife got the house and started fostering animals. And then my cat brother who. her and her brother with original cats. My cats brother started basically like joining this pack of cats against, because maybe don't socialize at all. But her brother kind of turned on her. Came to Thrones. Yeah. And so since then she was just hostile with everybody. All the animals I mean. And so when I came to get her, all these animals were in his lady's house, except Millie, she was in the garage. And they had a little post and she was in the garage. And when I came to take her, she was so down the door. She was like, fuck all in people, fuck my brother, fuck this. But she likes you. Oh yeah, she loves me. She's still to this, she follows me from room to room. Oh, what that sweet. Yeah, yeah. But she also had to just choose one person too. She also hates me too. So she hates you? I think she hates... Probably a bad experience. Yeah, yeah, yeah. She's just got some kind of trauma that I don't know about. You gotta give her some kitty cat ayahuasca. Bro, I've had to put her on CBD and shit before we go to the vet. Really? So it was brought to you by ketone IQ. I don't care who you are. Performance is mental. I talk for a living, so I'm always looking for a way to stay sharp. Ketone IQ is one of the few things that actually feels like a game changer. It came out of a $6 million US military research program on human performance. It's a small shot of ketones. Fuel your body makes when fasting or training and your brain loves it. I use it before long days for a smooth, steady focus, no spikes or crashes. And it's clean. No sugar, no carbs, no preservatives. Go to ketone.com slash Rogan for 30% off your subscription order or find ketone IQ at target stores nationwide in the protein and electrolyte aisle and get your first shot free. or so confident in it, they'll even offer a 60 day money back guarantee. Go ahead and take your shot. Do you ever put her in catnip? You ever give her a cat in it? Oh yeah, sometimes she can get high and roll around and get freaky. She loves it. What is it so weird? What does cat, it works on every cat. I remember seeing a cat where it doesn't work on. Imagine, I mean, it was shit like that for people. Oh yeah. You just get someone who you're playing here, shit like that. But I don't know if it gets them high. I don't know what it's doing to them. So then, let's find out. I really have no idea what the mechanism of, let's put this into perplexity. All right, Jim, you're in complexity. Catnip is an aromatic perplexity as our AR sponsor. Right. Yes, we have an AS sponsor. Oh shit, okay. It's the shit. It's not ideologically captured. Catnip is an aromatic herb in the mint family whose leaves and stems contain a chemical. How do you say that word? Nepet, tau, lau. Want to try that, Jamie? Nepet, never to lactone. Nepet, tau, lau. I think you're right. Nepet, tau, lactone. The trigger is playful or euphoric behavior in many cats. Many cats, interesting. I thought it was all cats. Plant is native to Eurasia. Now common across temperate regions and it's easy to grow in North America, often in gardens or pots. Why cats react to it? Catnip contains an oil whose main active compound is Nepet, tau, lactone, type of terpene produced in glands on the leaves and stems. When the cat's smell, nepet, tau, lactone, it binds to receptors in their nose and stimulates brain pathways linked to mood, leading to behaviors like rolling, rubbing, purring, meowing, jumping, or brief zummies. Only about two-thirds. Oh, okay. 80% of cats are sensitive to catnip. The tendency is genetic. The effect usually lasts five to fifteen minutes after which they become temporarily immune for a while. Interesting. Is it safe? For most cats, catnip is considered non-toxic and safe. And many vets recommend that as enrichment to encourage play and reduce boredom or stress, eating a small amount is usually fine and may suit the digestive tract. But large amounts can cause short-lived stomach upset, vomiting, diarrhea, or dizziness. He can't just fucking, a fiend. Oh, shit, you're only supposed to give a pinch? I don't know. That's what I say down there. Only a pinch. Oh, here it goes. Typically, offer just a pinch of dried or fresh. How much do you give your cat? Bro. You give your cat a bat-bag. You give your bat-bag. You give your bat-bag. I just let her go ahead. You know what's funny, man? My cat is very like, I let her do what she wants. You know, like, I let her, she can go outside. Like, you know, she's not, she's not an outdoor cat, but if she want to go out, I'll open the door. Because I make sure, you know what it is? I make sure outside is not some mystery place that she, if she want to go, I'll open the door and let her go. And then after she get cold or hear something and smell a run back in the house, because that way she's not like just dying to go out there. Right, right, right. I'm not worried about her running away. I'm worried about coyotes, man. When you let cats out, man, coyotes are fucking, every day, target your house. Do you know where the cats are? Do you know the cats that get let out? Yeah, but it's like, nothing comes near my builder. Because it just smells like, it just smells like 50 dollars in there. You have eight dogs too. Really? Mm-hmm. Yeah, my daughter's puppy got eaten by a coyote in California. God was training and he left the puppy outside. I got eaten by coyotes. But I've been seeing no coyotes. Oh, I've seen them. Also, but here's the other thing too. My, my, my girl is, you know, she, she takes zero chances. The slightest side of danger. She, she already got. Wow. 50 spots to hide and run. Okay. Like she's never gotten into with it with anything. The thing about coyotes is they're having, they're predators, right? And cats are predators too, but pets are different than wild animals. Yeah, it is between the very different. She'll bring a fucking mouse in the house. Yeah, I mean, they kill stuff. They kill stuff for fun. But there's a difference between that and needing to eat and needing to like eat cats in order to survive, which is what coyotes do. the coyotes know where the cats are. They know what the smell when cats are peeing outside. So they know what cat lives in the house and then the cat pees outside. They just hover nearby and wait because they know it's a matter of time for the cat us to go outside. You know what's funny, man? I haven't seen the coyotes a whole ton of living off the hill. They'll hide three years now. They hide. I saw them all the time in LA though. You'll see them. They exist. You know what it is? I think it's that the ones out here aren't starving like the ones in LA work. Right. Boulder and Boulder if they hungry they get. Well, the thing about Austin as opposed to LA is there's a lot of animals and there's a lot of moisture. So if you're outside of greater Austin area, like a lot of these coyotes, I see them all the time out where I live because there's a lot of animals where I live. I see like foxes almost every day. I see armadillos a couple times a week. I see deer every day. I always see the especially when I come home, I see foxes running across the road. There's all kinds of animals. There's all kinds of things that coyotes eat. A lot of rabbits. All kinds of things coyotes eat. And so they don't have to come into the city. Whereas in LA, you've got LA and then everything around LA is just barren. You know, it's all dry and fucked up and you might find a rabbit. But it's ways that you eat someone's cat. And I think that every person doesn't realize how many coyotes are around them. Like they're like, every major city, they're like raccoons. They're in every city, everywhere. There's a great book on it called coyote America. Yeah, it's really good. And it's all about how coyotes, what happens is when they yell out, they're doing like a roll call. And when they're doing a roll call, they're letting all the other coyotes know that they're there. And when one of them's missing, the female coyotes assume that that coyote's dead. And so their body responds by making a larger litter. What? So they get there. They'll have more babies if someone's missing. Damn, death makes them horny. Well it makes them have more children. They always have children. They're always horny, right? But they instead of having three pops, they'll have six. And they spread out because they were persecuted by gray wolves. That's the whole deal. And being gray wolves in red. So coyotes and red wolves mate with each other. That's why you get what they call a coy wolf. But it really is, coyote is a wolf. It's a type of wolf. But they're not related to the gray wolves. And gray wolves and coyotes don't mate. So gray wolves, the ones that have them like Colorado and Montana, those wolves just eat coyotes. They just kill them. They don't fuck around. So there's no chance of becoming allies. So those coyotes learned a long time ago when they start getting killed by wolves, just spread out, just get the fuck out of there, keep moving. That's why they're in 50 states. They're in every city in the country now. And then it wasn't the case when I was a kid. When I was a kid, I grew up in Massachusetts in my high school years. There was no fucking coyotes. Nobody, I never heard of anybody seeing a coyote. I never saw a coyote in my life until 1994. And I remember in LA they had those Oakwood Garden apartments. It's like furnished apartments that they had an LA. And I was driving to it. It was like when I first moved there, I didn't have an apartment yet. When I first moved there, I was like, those fucking dogs, these dogs, and like, oh shit, there's a coyote. I remember pulling the car over, looking at them, like this is weird. These weird little wolves just wandering around the city. Like that's how you know you see in the coyote. You like, is that a dog? Well, that was the first time. And that was in 94. But by the time we left in 2020, fucking they were everywhere. I mean everywhere. They expanded. And now they're in New York City. They find them in the middle of the fucking park. They find them in the Bronx. They're in abandoned buildings. They're all over the place. They're in Chicago. Coyotes are over the whole country. When I was in LA, one of the neighborhoods I lived in, I was in the neighborhood, Facebook group. And it was a dude in there. His name was coyote. The guy's name was coyote. He just wondered if he loved coyote so much. And he would litter it. He would defend coyotes no matter what the fuck they did. Some I would be in the Facebook group. Hey, a coyote fucking ate my dog right out of my hands. Watch out. And this guy would be like, if anybody here harms their coyote, they have to answer to me fucking dog. Oh, God. Oh, yeah. His name was like his name was like coyote Jones or something like that. He was serious. He was real serious. Really in the coyotes. He was, you know, everybody got their thing. Well, they're an interesting animal, man. It's really interesting in that book. It was, it's all about, you know, who's, um, I just saw something about how raccoons are the next animal that it that's being, you know, tamed or domesticated or whatever. Oh, I believe that the ones, the ones in the city are starting to have like shorter snouts and. Oh, wow. Yeah, they're starting to look more like how wolves became bitch ass wolves when they get one on the fire. They're basically they're starting to get cuter like dogs. The ones closer to us are getting cuter because they know it gets them treated that the cuter ones have more, more babies. The same thing I know and that's crazy because I've read some way that we haven't actually domesticated cats or not. That makes sense. Maybe domesticated isn't the word, but never got them to the point where we did with dogs. Exactly. But raccoons are getting there. That's so interesting because, but it makes sense. Like, did you ever heard about that Russian study that did with foxes? Like how quickly you can domesticated fox? Oh, no. You know, it's really quick. So you start out with foxes and any fox that shows any aggressive, you start with a bunch foxes and any fox that shows any aggression to a person you kill it on the spot. Oh, bang. The bang dead fuck you get all the ones that survive or ones that have no aggression towards people and then slowly their snouts get shorter and their ears start to flop. And over the course of like 10 years you got a totally different animal. See, we can find that. Why don't people do that? I don't, well, they did do that with this one study, but it was just to show. how quick things change like given natural selection. Like natural selection dictated that if you're a sweet or fox you live. If you show your teeth they fucking shoot you in the head. You know, and I'm sure Russian scientists a little bit more hardcore. Oh, Chinese. Here it is. Dimitri Belov and Ludemelia Trutt. The Russian Fox Domestication Program is a long-term experiment in Novo Seabiria, that's successfully bred domesticated silver foxes, a form of red fox selecting specifically for tamedness after over 60 years. Accessibly bred domesticated silver foxes, a form of red fox, selecting specific specifically for tamedness after over 60 years and dozens of generations, fox act like domesticated elite pets, displaying dog-like behaviors such as tail wagging, licking, and whining for attention. So you can buy them, can you buy one of these foxes? That's crazy. See if there's a video. Oh, you get one for 9,000 bucks. What? Let's, oh, known for high energy and needing intensive care. Yeah, you don't want that in your fucking 1300 square foot apartment. We're mixing them in elite though. It is interesting, right? What does that mean? Does it look like AI? Let's see. It's who knows nowadays, right? Oh, look, this lays God foxes a pet. Oh, wow, they're like little dogs. That's crazy. But the thing about foxes are, they are like playful in the wild. Even wild foxes are playful with people. All this cool guys missing a foot. No, I don't know if those are wild or different. The things are showing foxes. These are just different foxes. I don't think these are those foxes. This is just right. It's showing the info and then showing a bunch of different foxes. But if you remember Grizzly man, like that movie, the Warner hers on movie, so he was living in the middle of Alaska around these bears. And the foxes would come and hang out with him. And the foxes would like hang out in his tent. They would play with them. They stole his hat once and ran away with his hat and he was like chasing them, trying to get his hat back. And the bears don't attack the foxes. Well, they probably would have they could, but foxes probably can get away. I mean, they probably catch a fox slip in every now and then. But mostly what they were looking for up there was salmon. They were eating a lot of salmon. And when bears get salmon, that's all they want. Like there's a crazy video that we've shown before of this guy. And they're on the edge of a river. And the salmon are running. There's all these bears in there that are just like, just gorging on salmon, which is why those coastal bears are so much bigger. Like Kodiak bears like Alaska, the reason why they're so much bigger is because they have access to salmon. They have access to fish. And all the other animals through there too. But when there's a salmon run, that's all they want. They just want to eat salmon. So you're saying like, if you give salmon to a bear that's never has salmon before, it will just that's all they'll want to do. No, that's all I'm saying. I wouldn't it's probably delicious. I mean, that's why we like sashimi. But I think it's the access is so easy. They don't have to chase anything. They just stand in the river. It literally comes to them. They just bite it out of the air. You see how bears do that. And bears are kind of lazy. Like, if they could preserve energy, they will. They just want to get fat for hibernation. Right. So they just want to eat as much as possible. So the point is like when they're like that and they're just eating fish, you don't even have to worry about them. They're not even going to kill you. So this dude is like sitting there. He's got like a little lawn chair and this fucking giant bear just walks up besides him and sits down. Like sits down almost like a person and they're like, hey, get out of here. Hey, I mean, it is as close to him as you are to me. And it might be a thousand pounds. I mean, this thing is fucking gigantic. And you see the river behind him. So you see all these bears that are just scooping salmon out of the river. And what is the bear trying to tell him about doing that? Bears on it doesn't give a fuck. He just comes to sit down. Like, you might be a stick. You're a person. It doesn't matter. It's eaten salmon. Sorry. Like watch this. Look at this. This is just sitting there with his fucking chair. This giant ass bear just comes next to him. Look at the size of that thing. But it's not interested in him at all. It's not like playing coy and it's not pretending it's not going to kill him. Like it's it doesn't care about him. Like it doesn't think that he's going to eat it. That's for a fuck sure. Right? So it's like he's just chilling. Like that might as well be looking at it. He says down like a person. Burleigh, you know what it is about these are my fuckers. It's how fast it can go from this to terrifying. Yeah, it's a 45 miles an hour. But look, it's like, hey, get out of here. Then it walks off. He's like, all right, not looking for any trouble. Just trying to get out. It's amazing that the thing listens to him. But they also amazing that he's not freaked out. I guess he's taking a photo. So in that video, you see there's a ton of bears that are just hanging out in that stream. They just lay and they don't fight with each other either during those situations because they know there's so much salmon. There's enough for everybody. So like if one of them kills a moose, right, the other ones will come over and try to steal it from them. Poke you. That's my moose. And they'll go. There's only one food source. But on these rivers, there's just constant fish coming out. So they're like, ah, I just grab it. I'm going to eat them. And they're fucking gigantic because of that. We don't know shit about these animals. Yeah, we know a little. You know, I just saw some shit about Florida. So they they have a serious snake problem now. Like I think it's, it's pythons. Yeah, it's pythons. And how to do it on Python cowboy. He gave us a head. Where's that head? You know that? It is. Well, yeah, well, they, so they, they, they've been trying to catch. So apparently it came from the 80s and the 90s of like a big python pet boom and moose of research center that got hit by her cane. Right. I was about to say that the hurricane came. They got they released into the wild. Now it's a problem. And they try paying hunters to get them and they try to training dogs to find them. Nothing is good enough. But then they made, they made robot rabbits. You see this? Yeah, they made, they made robot rabbits and they made them. They made them. They put them in these boxes and they, they generated fake body heat and, and, and, and the scent of rabbits and everything. And it did attract, it did pull the snakes, but it pulled everything else too. So we ended up happening is the, the snakes only natural predator was these was, was alligators and the alligators was fucking these things up. And this, this snakes purposely avoid the alligators. So it ended up having the opposite effect. The snakes stayed away and the alligator were fucking these boxes up. Oh wow. And it was almost a complete waste. But then one of the nerds as they were bought the shut the whole fucking thing now, he noticed in the data that what they actually found out. So they plugged it into AI and the AI did this whole fucking map of all the data because, because apparently before every attack, the, the, those boxes were still like tracking movement and everything was going on. And they found out that the animals have like highways. So it's not that the snakes were in random places is that, is that the snakes and the alligators were using these, these highways that only they could smell of like the quickest ways to get through the Everglades and stuff like that. And so they were able, so now they just, they know where they are and they know how they get from one part of the, of the swamp to the other. And they didn't, so we learned something. We still don't know what the fuck to do about the python. They used to dogs a lot where the dogs find the eggs. Well, they, they've trained these two dogs specifically, but it, but they got to the point where it's like, you know, you just, it's just so much ground to cover two dogs and gonna do it. And it was, because that's the problem with the python. I mean, we could wipe them out if we want it. I don't think we can. What the problem is going is just so big. What that's my point is we can't have like the cost of doing it. We just haven't found a way where we can do it where it doesn't cost just a crazy amount of money. But you think about all the money that do spend shit on? Like if they got all this Somali daycare center money back, kill the snakes. Yeah, did you see Ilhan Omar? She was reading off of a script. She's the woman who's a congresswoman from Minnesota from Minneapolis. And she was re, she's connected, at least accused of being connected to the Somali daycare center. She's, Somali. She's accused of being connected to the fraud. So she's reading off this script. And you know how people write World War Two? And they use like, I for two. Okay. Yeah. She reads it as World War 11. This is a congressperson. She's a congresswoman. See if you can find the video. It's, it's kind of adorable. It's kind of adorable because I don't think English is her first language already. At least it doesn't start. The last time the Alien Enemies Act was invoked, it was used to detain and deport German Japanese Italian immigrants doing World War 11. Oh, two. At least she caught it though. I didn't know she caught it. I never saw it. They always cut it off before she caught it. Wow. That's politics bro. The politics is fucking brutal, man. I don't understand why anybody will want to go into it. But you matter, how could you say World War 11? Like you know, there haven't been. Oh, but I've not seen other wars you forgot about. But I've said way dumb or shit. Let have you ever reading off a written speech? I'd be, oh, man, I would almost be, you know, there is I do on a daily basis, I do things or say things that like I'm like, I definitely shouldn't have children, you know, like I'm, I'm, well, if you did, they'd make fun of you. I'm too forget stupid shit and my kids make fun of me. It's normal. Yeah, my partner being a person to pretend that you don't say stupid shit. But the thing is like you and I say stupid shit publicly. Like we'll say stupid shit. Oh, the podcast. Oh, yeah. And sometimes sometimes you get paid to pay for it. But I'm talking about stuff that I would, that I would be embarrassed to have said publicly. Like World War 11. Yeah, like World War 11. Because I'm telling you, I do shit like that all the time. I have, I have wacky Tony makes fun of me all the time because he's like, you're like a cartoon character. I have that kind of luck. Whereas like sometimes I just have those days, man, I wake, I woke, I wake up. This happened like the number one I was, so last Tuesday, right, last bottom of the you walked in the green room and I told you I went to go smell the candle and I didn't know there were no jelly roll candles. And it's a bomb. And I wasn't thinking about it. And I went to smell the candle and poured the wax on my clothes right before I got to go all stay. And I was wearing like light pants. So it looked like I jizzed on my pants as the wax was drying. And and and that's why I went home early that day. Because I was like, it was one of the days I woke up and the day started I woke up to my CPAP machine crashing on the floor because I rolled over and pulled it off my nice thing. And I get up to go to go deal with that. And I fucking stub my toe. And I'm like, it's going to be one of these days. It's going to be one of these fucking days. I'm gonna drop a glass in the kitchen. You know, so you just said let's call it day. I said, hey, we all call it go home, go right to sleep. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. She gave up on the day. No, I still, I mean, I still the mothership that night. But I tell you, that was good though. My set was good. But I took a nap. I had not to tell the mothership because I take this edible, take a strong nap, get to the mothership, do my sales leave almost like it's a new day because you just woke up. But no, but did not spill the wax on me. So my brain was like, you don't get to cheat. Interesting. The idea of good days and bad days based on just like that's this is what the world has planned for you today. This is a bad day. You know what it is? Is if I don't get the sunshine like I, because I'm a night owl, which kind of sucks. But if either I need to stay up for the sunshine because I got the black out curtains. But if I wake up late in the day and I don't get no sunshine, I just, I feel dumber. Yeah, definitely. I do too. Yeah. Yeah. When I, if I wake up late, even if I get a good amount of sleep, like more than five hours. But if I was up really late at night and then I wake up late, I feel off because your own systems all scrambled. Your system is used to waking up in the morning, going about at night. But if you stay up late, like your brain is working on like 40% capacities. Sometimes I sometimes I, cause I get, I'm a big gamer. Sometimes I get it. And I want those people like if I pay $60 for a game, well, now it's like $80, but I'm gonna play the fuck at it. Like the day it come out, I'm playing it all night. So you're playing online or you're playing the game itself, both both. It depends on what is the games that you like. Oh, type of shit. Like what's the big one right now? Right now. The game I'm playing the most is called Deadlock. It's not, it's not, it's not open available to the public. It is. No, you're in developer. No, you know, but you can get, you have to be invited as a close, what would they call it? A close beta or play test? A close play test? That's a hardcore you are. You get invited to beta Oh yeah, I got a bunch of nerdy friends. Wow. Yeah, actually, my little, one of my little nerd groups is like, it's, it throws one of the servers at the mothership. We all gain. We like, we on the same disc or we don't need it. We don't, because it's nice to have a group where it's like some new shit come out and we like, yo, this is deathlock. Oh yeah. Yeah. This looks cool. This shit is cooler than the motherfuck of it. It also will make you mad as shit. So it's third person. So you're kind of in third person. Yeah, it's third person. And you get to pick who you are. Oh, what does that? Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Right now, I think there's 34 characters. So look, that's all different people. There's a lot of information on the screen that just popped up. Oh, yeah. What's all those? But this is what are all those things? This is crazy. I'm a fuck this up in a bunch of people. Okay. So, so basically, so, so see, see that bottom, that bottom left number, the green number, of three thousand three. Yeah. Okay. So those are souls, which is just money. Right. Money's are souls. Yeah. And this game just think of souls as dollars. Okay. So she's got three thousand dollars. And basically, so wish the thing she just left is the, is the lane she was in. And basically how, how well you're playing a game, how many kills you get, how many minions you're getting, you get more money. And the money lets you go buy those items. That's what all those parts are underneath those people. It tells you what everyone's bought. Okay. And since this bitch got the most money, she's bought the most stuff, which makes her stronger. So this game's all about snow, is all about getting, getting the money to get stronger faster. So you can win. Okay. Yeah. So, and you have a zip line. See, I'm a zip line here. Yeah. Yeah. Because if you see the, see on the right hand side, that's that, that's the map. She's good. So there's three different, there's three different lanes you have to control, right? And that big, that big box is like the, man, this is a lot to, it's just like a League of Legends, but on the ground. Exactly. Okay. I'm glad you put it like that. But that doesn't help Joe. It doesn't help me. He's like, thank you. Okay. So so so so see this fun. See the yellow side, see the yellow side on the left hand side of the map. Okay. That first tower is where you start at. And the point is to get stronger, get underneath that, destroy it. Then you work down to the second one. That one is a little stronger. It defends itself. That's what she's in front of right now. Right. And then they're on teams. Yeah. It's two teams trying to, and you're basically you're trying to work yourself down to their base and kill the help, kill the one on their base. Oh, wow. So you gang, you join up with the team of guys that are playing this online. Yeah, it's six on six. Oh, wow. But then they just, but here's the thing. This is all very complicated in all this, but they just introduced raw mode, which is or street raw, which is basically it knocks it down to four and four. It makes it one lane and it gives you random items. So you don't have to do any of the complicated shit. You can just get in and get it. So you get in, run around, grab something, and be people over there. Yeah. So basically the, the, the bra mode is just a condensed version of the game where you're just fighting. You're not, you're not to worry about managing anything. Boy, that looks like you're to take up a lot of time. Oh, buddy. Yeah. Because because here's the thing, this was crazy about shit like that is, if you're, if somehow you end up in a game where everyone knows what they're doing and everyone's communicating, one of those games can be over in 25 minutes. But if you're on a, that's probably not going to happen. So anyway, from 25 minutes to an hour, I've seen games going out. Yeah. So it's like, but most of the games going that long is just because it's either because people are playing with you, because it's one of those things where like if you get, if you get behind to a certain point, you can't come back. That's the whole point of the game. Oh, really? Yeah. It's, it's the whole point is there's nobody's like, I'm so much stronger than you that there's nothing you can do. It gets to the point where I'm just abusing you. Okay. And just because they've collected the most stuff, because they've, they've, they've had the most money for the longest. Uh, and they can just keep buying better and better shifting you. And there's nothing you can do about it. Um, but my point is, the point is for you to get to a certain point and just in the game, but some people don't know when that is, you know, the quick, uh, three sentence overview of what the game is, is a futuristic urban fantasy New York. Your God's part of an occult ritual trying to destroy each other. Yeah. So I'll be, so the backstory is an event happened called the mouse room that it's all. Yeah. Or it's, yeah. No, this is just the backstory. It opened up a portal that let magic and magic into the world and all of these people got all these abilities and powers and stuff like that. And, and there's two opposing gods and some other dimension. And they want you to summon them so they can cross over into this realm. And, and so there, we, so the team you're on is whichever God you're working for. Right. And if you, when you win the game, that's supposed to be you completing the ritual. And if you help complete the ritual, you get a wish. And so when you, when you go to each character, it tells you you to a backstory and what they want, what, wish they want when they get there. Okay. Yeah. And some people don't want nothing. They just want to fuck people up. And how long you're playing this game? It's been probably, I don't know, a year and a half. So it seems super complicated. And like it would dedicate a literal mouth. It's very complex. You, because you don't, you don't even know what the fuck you're doing for like the first 200 hours. Like it, it takes about 200 hours before you like, kind of get what's going on. This is the kind of things that people without kids say. Oh yeah, that's what I'm saying. I just, I can't, I'm definitely, I'm definitely a 43 year old child. Like I don't live like an adult. Yeah. No, I live like almost like a fret, like a fret boy or something. Well, if you could pull it off, those are, when you ask people, because some of the happiest times they're alive. When they were young and free, especially people that don't like what they do. People get a job and they don't like it. And then they have responsibilities and they can't leave their job. People to get a wife and don't like her. That happens a lot. That happens too much. What happens too? And a husband you don't like to both. Oh, yeah. That's probably worse. That happens. Well, both of them are bad, but it happens a lot. Well, how do people bring you gaming one of these brands? That was that dog. That's insane. That's like, that seems like how you should be playing a game like this. Yeah, a dark room. Let's talk. Yeah. I mean, but the thing is, that's, I don't think that shit is very comfortable. How dare you. That chair goes upside down. You're laying down, brother. Oh, versions of it. You could make, you could customize. Oh, how much six? So wait a minute. This is zero gravity. Watch it hit the different images. Look at it. It's like that. Oh, that's crazy. That's crazy. But what else does it do? Does it massage? It sucks your day. I mean, 10 grand. I'll come out just sucks your day. Yeah, I'll take that. Can you piss another thing? Well, it used to be 10 grand. It's on say they have the one that's also like the, I mean, in the bed version. The what? Well, this one, this one does go backwards, right? Show show a version of it where it's completely reclined. That's what I was trying to do. You got this. You got to do Jamie now, but I'm here wanting. Oh, it's a scorpion. Let me show you something. So that's pretty wicked. And so you get to adjust that and you can make the screen right in front of your face. But I'm about to skip four heart treatments and get that chair. Oh, buddy. Oh, wow. That was pretty cool too. Not the same thing. I actually prefer what we're looking at here. Do you? Well, you prefer that to the one that you lie back. I don't, I don't use a control. Only the only games I use a controller with is mad. So you're a mouse and keyboard guy. Yeah, almost exclusively. That's why I feel a little futon built on. I never, I never figured out how to use that food. Listen, if you're going, who's choosing a food time? If you got the money for a good game in PC unit, you bet now no food time. Well, that's, it just went all in on the gaming PC. Yeah, I mean, no choice. No chance of pussy. My shit's got kind of, it's gotten kind of crazy. Recently. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Did I never show you? Check this shit out. What you got? Are there any other ones that do it with a even bigger screen like that? That kind of a deal, like what is the ultimate setup for like somebody like a Bill Gates on a start? There's a news like the F1 rig we have. Yeah, there's a new screen that's come out. That's like a 100 and that's it. I don't know. So that's my shit right there. Oh, you got a dual monitor setup, curved monitor to a super ultra wide. That's a problem. Yeah, it's a problem. That's a problem. I'm going to send this to me. Send it to me and all send it to Jamie. Oh, do you have Jamie's number? Yeah, I don't know. I can send me to Jamie. Send it to Jamie because that image is crazy. We need to show people that image. That's a problem. If I had that, that'd be a real problem. Jamie, don't I got you a number going on? I do my best writing like when I get the most done on my laptop because I don't ever look at anything else on that laptop. The only time I use the internet at all is to check things to like find out if something's real. And even that, I don't use anymore because I use perplexity for that now. I just talk into the phone. But when if you have that much distraction, like two monitors like that, I would never leave. I would just be playing games all it's too fun. It's too much too much sometimes it is. It is. It's a very fucking problem. Games are a problem. They're so good. You know what it is, man? Is it it's a it's a dopamine drip. Look at that. Look at that setup. Bro, what's that thing on the right? That is for controlling the sound. So so basically like, so say I'm in the chat, I'm in the Discord chat and and I got a YouTube video plan and I'm in the middle of a game, right? Then I don't I can reach over and turn down the value of the game so I can hear somebody more clearly or turn up the music without having to open up anything on mine. That's crazy. You are an addict. Jamie, you don't have that, do you? I was going to show you mine. He's got I have to wait more than that. Oh, yeah. No, yeah. Jamie's control. I have a cybersamboard play there connected into mine. So I can fuck people. Can you blur that top thing? Because I've got people's names. Yeah, but like I can record sound like live sound when someone's chatting and I can record their voice and back like instantly. This is me not streaming. I'm going to start streaming this summer. So I'm going to have to add a couple of things. So you're going to start playing video games and streaming it. You can make a lot of money. It's easy money too. It's crazy because you're already going to play games. I know some people just like they don't go on the road because they make so much money doing this. Wow. But the problem is how long is that in the last going on the road is for it's like, oh yeah, but you can always do that. Yeah, but you might not have an audience anymore. Yeah, that audience. Oh, that's true. Yeah, we still stuck on the road. You have a T-Pain on here? No. Yeah, T-Pain. He's like, he's like, he's like, you've got to you got to offer me a lot of money. Because he still goes on the road, but it's like, you got to pay him because he makes some he's like, why would I leave? Why would I take less money to leave my home streams? He screams. Yeah, his setup. He's got his fucking crazy. It's insane. Yeah. He's like, we have one F one set up. I think he bought six. He's got his whole studios in one room. He's got the racing room over here. He's got the, I think, probably four different rooms in different things. So he'll game or he'll have on guests or he'll just make a, he'll just make a song live in front of you. It's just like normal live setup. He's got, he's got all my stuff on set ups. He's got, he's got multiple screens around there. Oh, that's crazy. So he has a whole room dedicated. Oh, yeah. Oh, my God. It's all wired together too. Don't so when he's streaming, how is he making money? Sponsors. He's definitely a Twitch partner of some kind. Okay. So you, you get sponsors and like how much do you think he's making? Fuck, I couldn't. I don't even know. I mean, if I had to speculate, yeah, speculate. I would say he's probably make pulling in at least a quarter million a month or something like that. Probably more than that. Just playing video games. Just, just streaming. He only had to play video games. Sometimes he just talking. That's crazy. Just, well, there's a lot of that, right? A lot of streamers. Yeah, that there's a lot of political streamers. There's just talk. There's different people that do different things. There's, there's, there's, all right, they call them IRL streamers. There's new sent streamers. Would they do since? Yeah, they just walk around. People. Fuck, what people you, we are. We got some of your letters to circuit, raise the similar letters and one flight simulated down there. So this is the VR room. The computer I play on is right here. He's set down here. Whoa. It's VR. We got sensors and room. This is the workshop. It was just a utility room, but I'm like, why not put 3D printers in there? This is 3D printers. You can see, I'll take a lot of inspiration from trying. That's amazing. And he's, he's married though. Yeah, but he's making money. Oh, this is why this is why I've got a complaint. You want to go shopping? Listen, lady, this is how we make the money for you to go shopping. You're right. You know, I mean, she can't complain if that's what you actually earn money at. You know, my wife used to complain about the podcast before it started making money. Really? Well, she was like, you don't have to do that. I was like, I do. I have to do it. I told people I'd be doing it on Monday at X amount of whatever, whatever time it was. You, but that's just always how long until you were like, I could fucking just making money. Oh, it took years. I didn't even try. I never tried to make any money with it. I always did it for free. I did it for fun for how many years. I didn't make money for years. Oh, wow. Zero money for years. I never even thought of it making money. It was just for fun. I would just have everybody come over. Like, so girl would come over. Eddie Bravo would come over. Joey would come over. Duncan, we would just talk shit and just have laughs. It was just for fun. We enjoyed the shit out of it. We had a vaporizer. This giant bag. Well, I know. Yeah, the volcano. Oh, my God. The thing was horrendous. I remember when them things first came out, they fucked a lot of people's world. A lot of people fucked our world up. There's a lot of podcasts in the early days that are unlistenable or watchable because we just obliterated. And I thought it could never get past that. And now they got, you know, then people came up with the Dabs. Bro, Jelly Roll has this machine. It looks like a robot. It looks like a little like a little Pokemon robot. Yeah. What is it? Because Frank is a good machine. Frank is still is one of the, he's like sponsored by those people. That's crazy. What's called peak, the peak people. You know, I don't know if it's a peak. It looks like a device. He's scared me just looking at it. You look up the peak pro. It's big like this. Like this French press. Yeah, you can hear bro. And listen, and every time I see Frank, they've come out with a new one. They have one that's like a Sherlock Holmes pipe is all electronic. It is all for Dabs. But every time every time he visits me, he like a broke check this shit out. People like him with this reason why we'd still as a legal. Actually, I just raised something to date at Trump is Trump is making. It's scheduled three now. Yeah. Oh, he, oh, it's done. It's done. We, we need to schedule three. So scheduled through first of all, it should be right with alcohol. If you're 21, leave me the fuck alone. What is it? What's scheduled? What's alcohol? Alcohol is not scheduled. It's not a prohibitive substance. I don't think alcohol is scheduled like that. Alcohol for 21 and older is totally legal. So schedule one, which is where weed was, which is so crazy. Like the most dangerous. No medicinal benefit harm addiction. Now I won't argue addiction because I don't think I totally understand it the way other people understand it. I think it's highly genetic. I think addiction is very genetic because people keep telling me that cigarettes are addictive and that nicotine is addictive. I recently got off of nicotine patches and I started taking ultra patches. Do you know what these are? couches rather. They're, it's like neutropics. It's like vitamins like brain vitamins and nicotine in there? No, no, no, nicotine. And when I started doing it, I was like, okay, I wonder if I'm gonna like I've been doing it if you want to try one. Here. That one's empty. No, no, no, no, no, no. And when I started doing it, I was like, okay, I wonder if I'm gonna like I've been doing if you want to try one? Yeah. That one's empty. Um, I just bought these over Amazon. But um, I was like, I've done it before when I went on vacation, like I didn't have them at all and I didn't have any withdrawals. But then I talked to McCann and McCann said that when he got off of them, it was like two weeks where he was like, fucking super tense and yell at my people. No, no, no. Oh, oh, nicotine. Pouches or cigarettes. He got off of all of it. Um, and then I hear, but so my point is, I think it's a biological thing. I don't think I have the bi- a lot. I get addicted to stuff. I get addicted to doing things. I got, I used to be addicted to video games. I would definitely get addicted again if I started playing. I get addicted to pool. I get addicted to martial arts. I get addicted to doing stuff. I get addicted to archery. But I don't think I get addicted. I probably would if it was like axes or something like that. I think that's just strong. That would just get it. I think I'm too much of a control freak to get addicted to any kind of hard. Well, you quit cigarettes like that. Yeah, but you know what? You know what? It was easy. It's because I had a heart attack for you. It did. Oh. And I already felt like shit. So I didn't go, I didn't, the withdrawals were nothing. Um, I'm going to send you something, uh, Jamie. This is kind of crazy. But I sent this to Thompson Gurus as Thomas starts smoking again. This is as a guy that's making this argument that there's a benefit to smoking as long as you do it with the proper diet that there's some sort of an actual benefit to cigarettes smoking because one of the things about these blue zones or people like live forever, a lot of these people that are like living that are really old, they smoke cigarettes. Yeah. That's what shook me to fuck out. Like, you know, every time they every time they go, this is the oldest person alive, they're 100 and nine. They smoke. And then they ask them to go, what's your secret? I drink fire water. And so listen to this. And I'm smoking is good for them. Top heart surgeons claim is breaking the internet. Clib is exploding after cardio, thoracic surgeon, doctor, Stephen Gundry made a claim. It's turning everything people thought they knew about smoking upside down. His argument is smoking specifically nicotine can have real benefits when paired with the right lifestyle. And one point even says about a patient probably it's because he smoked that he's doing so well. points to long living populations where heavy smoking is common claims that a part of sardina, 95% of men's woke and live longer than the women says nicotine acts as a powerful mitochondrial uncoupler argues that the damage blamed on smoking can be offset by diet and suggest that we've been looking at it completely backwards. According to him, the real question isn't why smoking harms people. It's why some smokers live longer and what we're missing. So there's a video in here. Listen to him talk about it because it's eight minutes long. Yeah, which is played a little bit of it because it's kind of interesting. Credit to Dr. Mike on YouTube. Been smoking for 45 years and they're living a healthy life and they say it's because I smoke and obviously we laugh about it because we all agree that it's not true. So why did this one case move you so actually, let me stop you right there probably it's because he smoked that he's doing so well. Okay. We need to back up. How do we get there? Well, I have a whole chapter in gut check looking at the healthiest, longest living people and one of the unique features of most of the blue zones is that particularly the men are heavy smokers and the smoking actually the nicotine in cigarettes is one of the best mitochondrial uncouplers has ever been discovered. And we've looked at this for the long, long lens. We said, wow, what other healthy lifestyle things are these guys doing that's preventing smoking from harming them. In fact, we should have looked at it the other way. What is it about these people who are smokers that lousy the live to 105, 110 years old. And when you do that, then you say, okay, smoking was good for them. Why don't we see the oxidative stress that smoking we all know occurs? Why don't we see the cancers in these people? It's because the rest of their diet facilitates the absorption of the oxidative stress in these guys. So your state is that if you smoke but eat in this specific way, you can negate the effects of smoking, the negative effects of smoking. Yeah, what's fascinating is a heart surgeon way back in the good old days, most of our patients were smokers. And they had specific proximal lesions in their coronary arteries. The rest of their blood vessels were absolutely gorgeous. And they were skinny for the most part. So how did you gauge that? Did you? What do you mean we operate on? But you operate on what other vessels that you saw, like you would do peripheral arterial disease, screenings on those patients. And you would find... Are you just to operate on? Because one of the number one risk factors for peripheral arterial disease is smoking. Correct. Because the smoking, the oxidative stress isn't stopped by our current diet. Let me give you an example. Okay. We're one of the few animals that don't make vitamin C and vitamin C, and I've written about this. Sure, he would go on here. We got it. I mean, he's... I understand what he said. We said people to Dr. Mike's YouTube channel for the rest of it, but... Dr. Mike wasn't having it. Well, he didn't know. I mean, this guy's the expert, and this guy lays it. And Dr. Mike's open-minded. He's probably... What he's saying, he's making sense. It makes sense to me. It's the poor diet. That's why I was hoping that video would give me hope, but I'm like, bro, if I could change my diet, I wouldn't have had to hard to diet. You know what I'm saying? Oh, so I'm gonna get this perfect diet, so I can smoke that. I don't think it's a perfect diet. I think he just got to move to Italy. But whenever I go there on vacation, I'm like, why am I trying so hard? What am I doing? How come I'm not just for chilling? Well, you know that's the thing about Italy is they have a culture of Chile. Yeah. They culture... I forget what they call it, but is it Siesta? No, that's Mexicans. They call it like that nap. They take during the middle of the day. Yeah, that's only... No, no, no. It's a Spanish thing, too. Oh, okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But they... I didn't know they did it, but it makes... Well, obviously it's a Spanish word, right? Oh, yeah. I didn't know they did it in Mexico, but it's Mexican thing. The Spanish are like, nah, middle of the afternoon, everybody's napping. Yeah, my friend went to the Ferrari factory in Italy. He said, dude, it's hilarious. He goes, they barely work. He goes, like, the reason why it takes so long to get a Ferrari, he goes like, these mother fuckers are just chilling. He goes, they take these big long... Oh, it's Lamborghini. Yeah, he said, they take these big long breaks for lunch. They pasta, they drink wine, and they lay down. They take really a couple hours for lunch. And they work a few more hours and they go home. They gotta figure it out. Well, I think we work too much, you know, and this is coming from someone who works too much, but I work too much at things I love. It's a different thing, I think than most people, most people are working too much. It's something that's just making the money and they're probably stressed out all the time. Don't enjoy it. But I think if you are working less and just having more enjoyment in life, what are we here for? See, that's why I think subconsciously, that's why I've been a fan of. I've been avoiding streaming. I've been talking about it for years because I'm like, if I start making money... Right, streaming... And then it becomes a job, bro. I'm gonna be like that. You know that fat kid in the chair in Wali? You ever see that movie? Yeah. I'm gonna transform into that. Just over each. Yeah, if I just stop looking for eight, just a million dollars just eating and laying there. Everybody's gonna do the good for it. And no exercise at all. Oh, yeah. Well, the more you stream, the more you make, right? So, this people are streaming more than eight hours a day, don't they? I mean, theoretically, yeah. But some people stream a lot and they don't make shit. Yeah, but that's also podcasting. There's a lot of people that are doing podcasts that aren't making any money. Yeah, so yeah, but you got a stream to make money, you gotta be on. Yeah, but it's a very specific type of audience too, though. It's people that are watching streams, very different audience than who's watching podcasts, I would imagine. That's hard to say. Yeah. It's hard to say, yeah, because I think I don't know if those... There's probably a lot of overlapping those audiences. So I don't, what we were talking about before with the smoking, I don't think smoking is good for your lungs. I think it's bad for your lungs, because everybody know that quit smoking and they say their cardio gets better. This stuff, this, that interview, our research, came up two years ago. Oh, did it? And there was some controversy around it. Well, clearly. Well, what is the wisdom? Blue zone. Well, that, that doctor says. It's places where people live longer. Oh, okay. So here, what it says, key details regarding Dr. Gungery statements, controversial claims in a conversation with Dr. Mike, Gungery suggested smoking could be linked to longer live observing that some long lived individuals in blue zone smoke. Mechanism theory, Gungery argues that nicotine functions as a mitochondrial uncomplers and that a high polyphenol diet may mitigate the negative effects of cigarette smoke. Criticism, experts strongly disagree, noting that smoke is leading cause of premature death and that any potential benefits are far outweighed by risks. Right, but they're not taking into consideration what he said about food. Despite the headlines, gunly stated he does not smoke and does not encourage others to do so. So he's just a scientist, relaying research. Yeah. So what are the critics strongly disagreeing? He said they're not, they're not making any sense because they're disagreeing, but they're not addressing what he's saying in terms of the high polyphenol diet mitigating the negative effects of smoking. Yeah. I mean, that's all he said was what he observed. This is what I think in my years of trying and using nicotine. I think there's something to nicotine. The reason why I am backing off of it is it fucks up my pool game. Really? Yeah, nicotine gives you a lot of energy and I think like these, like these alps, these are like six milligrams and then these loosees, I have loosees that are 12, but you put them in your mouth like you're sucking on a battery. It's like, it's so strong. It's ridiculous. They make a jittery and jittery's not good for pool. Pools a chill game. Pool is like you're concentrating, but you want to be completely calm when you're stroking the ball. Your hand, you're barely holding on to that cue. I hold on to the cue like I'm holding a baby bird. You know, it's very calm. You don't want to be like, you know, so a lot of people stop drinking coffee because they play pool. Where? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But nicotine in particular, which is interesting because I know a lot of people smoke cigarettes who play really well. it's a different feeling in terms of like how it affects your body. Then it says it's a good question. How much nicotine is in a cigarette versus like one of these alp pouches? These alp pouches is Tucker Carlson's company. It's probably also has to do with like your level of addiction. Like some people are fully. Yeah. Some people smoke all day. Yeah. And cigarette just to be back to zero. John Mellencamp, he was in here. That dude just, that was like one of the big things. Can I smoke during the podcast? My absolutely no worries. I go, we got a fan. We smoke cigars all the time. So he just changed smoke the entire podcast. And he said, fine what you love and let it kill you. That's what he said about cigarette smoking. Yeah. That's a, who's that, who's that quote from? I don't know. Typical nicotine amounts. Okay. Standard factory made cigarette usually contains about 10 to 14 milligrams of nicotine into backo, which an average smoker absorbs around one to two milligrams on smoking it. 18 pouches are sold in strength that commonly range from two milligrams up to 12. Or more of nicotine per pouch. CDC notes that they can contain high levels of nicotine. Pouches that with six milligrams nicotine or less were most common. But higher strength, eight milligram pouches have been growing quickly. Yeah, because people are getting addicted. Cigarettes deliver nicotine to the brain very fast within 10 to 20 seconds after inhalation, which makes them high, a highly reinforcing and strongly addictive. Pouches release nicotine through the lining of the mouth. So the rise in blood nicotine is slower and more prolonged compared with a cigarette hit. Though total absorbed dose over 20 to 60 minutes can be similar depending on one strength or how long the pouches use. The thing about like pouches is people just keep popping them like Shane. That dude just pops them every 10 minutes. He's popping six milligrams like every 10 minutes. Pouches will cigarette's clearly more harmful overall because smoke contains more than 7,000 chemicals, many toxic and carcinogenic. Whereas pouches avoid combustion but still expose you to an addictive drug with cardiovascular effects. Well, that's why I'm convinced that people that do all the other forms of nicotine are way more addicted than smokers are. Well, I'll tell you one thing that I felt was the most addictive version of that that I tried was vaping. Those like escobar things. Those are weird. Here's another weird thing about those vaping ones. The only good hit is the first hit. Maybe the second. Have you seen how they did? Have you seen how vapors act when they can't find their vape? Well, they freak out. It is, they get sketchy. It's crazy. They get crazy. I saw, I was in DC last year and I popped in on this comedy spot and I go, and I go to the bathroom and there's a vape sitting on the sink. Somebody put a vape there to wash their hands or something. I go out to the bar and I remember I bought the comics. The comics are at the bar waiting to go up and I bought it around for the comics. One of them was like, oh, thanks man. Got up, went to the bathroom, came back, sat next to his friend. I was like, oh bro, I found this vaping in. They both hit this vape. So they went, he took a vape out the bathroom. That somebody else was just sucking on. Some guy who could have been eating ass just 20 minutes. Also, it was on the sink in the bathroom. The men's room at a comedy club. That's crazy. I found it. Let's take hits off of it. Yeah, it's crazy. It would be tough if that was my vape and I said it on the counter. I'm like, all right. Because I probably, what happens when I said it there out of reflex and was like, I don't want that shit. It's right here with all this filthy. Maybe or maybe they're like, I gotta leave this thing here. Oh, this men's room in sync water? No, you can keep that. You could keep dead. These guys are just sucking on it at the bar. But I guess if you dip it in whiskey to be right. I don't know. I don't know. It's dipping in your glass before you take a hit. Bro, you could just wait till you get to your vape. Because it's that all that people want. The first hit is the only one that's good. The first hit is like, you fork. The first hit of like a escobar, you like this like, oh yeah. Everything's amazing. But that, you don't get that with a second hit. It doesn't like maintain. After a while, you're just taking hits and you just feel nervous. Like this is terrible. This doesn't feel good. But it's the first hit. The first hit is wonderful. You know how many vapeers I've had to curse out because they unplugged my phone. Yeah, it's like an issue. It's fucking me. Like yo, yo, you was at 30%. Like, what the fuck is wrong with you? I need it all day. Right. Don't unplug my junkies. They really are junkies. Oh, they're junkies. I see people hit them all the time. And they hit them like a fiend. And the one thing is the people that they try to start vaping. It's like to replace smoking. There is end up doing both. Well, I think the vaping is more addictive than smoking. Oh, yeah. Because you know why? It's because one, like you said, I think that you're getting delivered more nicotine than a smoker will get. Even though the smoking has other bad shit that you're putting in you. But in terms of addiction, that's what I'm saying. I'm not saying vaping is worse for you. But you're getting more nicotine. And you can vape in places you can smoke. And on top of that, you're getting all these weird oils and chemicals and stuff in there that aren't good for you. But you can vape any time. You can vape. But you know, people are getting these new diseases, like popcorn lung. Have you heard of that? I heard of that, but I ain't heard nobody got it. I've heard like, you know, it's one of those like, what do you call them? Urban myth or? There's a kid that I knew back in California. He was one of the people in our neighborhoods child. And he was 19 and he was in college and he was vaping like crazy. He was vaping all day long. And he got pneumonia and wound up dying. And they connected it to the vape. Like he had destroyed his lungs. Yeah, kids are damaging their lungs. You know, I think that started back when, you remember when some people have like, the adjustable ones, where they were like, other big ones. Yeah, crazy ones. Because now the popular ones are like, the disposable ones that happen. Adam Curry has one of them big jam. Yeah, one of them big rigs. I've got a lot of people on top. I think people were going crazy back then, not going to be getting of it when nobody knew a lot. The real vapors, man, they still go crazy. But they're doing it themselves. They think it's healthier. They're getting like their own like nicotine drops. They're putting it in the thing. And they're putting their own oil. They're using like MCT oil because it's healthy. This organic poison. Yeah. Whereas like, if you're getting it from a factory in China or Vietnam, if you're seeing that one, there's one video of a dude who has to test every vape when it comes out of the factory with his mouth. With his mouth. The ones you get, a very big sucked on. So this dude is just suck in Vietnam. Just, I don't know where he is. He might be in Laos. He just suck in this, wherever this vape factory is, this dude's just sucking on this vape over and over and over again. Everybody's vape, he sucks on once to make sure it's good before he sends it out. Where we're doomed. So this guy's got, what is his dose of caffeine in a day? It must be off the charts. Yeah, so that's the other thing. I think the vapors are more addicted because they get more nicotine. They just get to do it. Yes. You could definitely do it. But I'm telling you, it's like, you don't get the good feeling. Like it's weird. It's weird. Like a cigar. The relaxation, the good nicotine feeling of a cigar. You get that every time you take a hit out of a cigar. That's not the case with a vape, at least not for me. Look at this dude. He's sucking on every one of these, checking them out. Look, that's nuts. They got to make sure they're good. Like how vape doubt is this cat? That's probably how it, that's probably what he gets paid and just vapes, just smoke. I mean, how many, fuck it, thousands of vapes is this kid sucking on it? How many do you test in a day? He says, around seven to eight thousand tests per day. Jesus Christ. Does that do to sleep at all? He probably dreams in like horrible black and white, like lightning bolts and he also smokes after work. Oh my God. So much to see how long that guy lives. Bro, that boy's honor is done. Yeah, he's on the blue zone. That sucks. Oh, bro. I was just looking at popcorn long. Yeah. It's older. It's developed, according to this, it came around 2000 when people had an actual popcorn factory. Whoa. We're exposed to a chemical that is causing, what? Called broncholitis oblitter ends. Bro, look at this. It's first recognized from clusters of workers at a microwave popcorn factory exposed to the butter, flavoring chemical, diocedal. Wow. I thought it made your lungs look like popcorn. This is saying there's like, it's very, it's super rare for outside of that actually though. Uh, cancer researchers UK states that there have been no confirmed cases of popcorn long specifically caused by e-cigarettes, although some older e-liquid's contained diocedal before regulations tightened. Do you think that's like big tobacco trying to scare people away from vapes? No, no, no, I think they invested in that shit. Yeah, but if they don't, like, what if it's like some companies maybe don't and they're worried that these cheap vapes? Well, there's only, there's only three companies. To big tobacco, it's really big tobacco. So it's R.J. Reynolds, we're the other ones, for the more, is it for the more? And then there's a overseas one, maybe there's four companies. Who's making the American spirits? It's the same people. Is it the same people? There's only three or four big tobacco companies. This lady Suzanne Humphries, who's a doctor, she was making the argument that those cigarettes are probably not even that bad for you. And they own, and they see the writing on the wall. Like they own all the pets, all the patch companies? They own the mesh charts. Of course, why wouldn't they? Because the writing's on the wall, they were talking about it in Canada, and now I think they're trying to do it in the UK. We're basically like people of a certain age will never be able to buy cigarettes. They, yeah, I think they're doing that in Canada right now. Or they're definitely doing that in the UK. That's right. No American spirits cigarettes are not safe for the other cigarettes, despite marketing that highlights natural and addictive free tobacco. Studies show that contain similar levels of toxic, cancer-causing chemicals, as other brands. Research suggests they may even be more addictive due to higher nicotine levels. No reduced harm, no evidence of the absence of additives makes cigarette smoke less harmful. On high nicotine addiction, studies have found that many varieties have higher nicotine yields compared to other popular brands suggesting higher addictiveness, misleading marketing, FDA previously required the manufacturers to stop using natural and additive free in marketing as these terms falsely implied lower risk. Why is that implied lower risk, if you say additive free? Consumer misconception, 64% of American spirits smokers incorrectly believe they're less harmful, often because of their natural branding. This lady, this doctor was making that argument. She was saying the chemicals that they add to cigarettes that make them more addictive. Like remember that Russell Crowe movie The Insider? Remember that movie? Good movie. So we've got a guy who is a true story, but a guy who's a doctor who works at a tobacco company that makes cigarettes. And he's specifically formulating these chemicals in order to make people way more addicted. And then he has to go to court and they try to kill him. So they kind of whistle-blower-type drama. But that was the premise of that film, which is also based on real life. And what she's saying is that those chemicals that make you more addictive are probably much more dangerous and that just the actual tobacco itself is probably not as dangerous. She wasn't definitively stating this. She was just saying that most likely they're probably safer for you. Well, the American spirit ones also you smoke less because they take forever to smoke. So every time I was smoking around an American spirit smoke, you'll see them three quarters of a cigarette left in the ashtray. Do you think that those like mar bros and shit like that? Like they smoke quicker on purpose? Like smoke more of them? I think they're something they add to them. Because that's the American spirit. You sit it down. It'll go out. Right. But if I was the light of mar bro and sit it down there, it would burn all the way up. Right. I think they do that. So you wear cigarettes. That makes sense. Oh, yeah, for sure. That makes sense. Yeah, because they probably calculate over time how much money that would be. Yeah. In fact, I read somewhere like that is why there are 20 packs in the cigarette and 20 cigarettes in the pack is because they discovered that that's exactly how many you need it to smoke as much as possible in one day. Like in terms of how long it's in your system, when you start getting another craving, you can smoke. Well, that's crazy because some people smoke two packs a day. It's what? Yeah, for those people are like, oh, animals. How are they alive? I don't know, but I was getting close. What were you at? I was at a little over a pack a day when I would smoke a hole pack. And then tip into the next. And then dip into the next one. Yeah. It makes sense that they would buy patches. Why wouldn't they buy up the companies that have alternatives like gum, decorate, or what? Years ago, the VA tried to get me to quit. And they prescribed me the patches. Yeah. But like that's like I said, it's like there's 12 to 14 milligrams in a cigarette, but you only end up getting one or two. Right. But the patch is five. The lowest step of the patch is five. And do you feel it? Yeah. You have crazy fucking dreams too. Whoa. You put one in patches on before you go to bed. You don't have a fucking crazy dream. And now you're more addicted. Because you now used to getting five. Now you get in five all night. You wake up like, oh shit. You're not getting, you're not used to getting nicotine all night. Ron White used to wear a patch and smoke all day. Yeah. What I said, that's what I was about to tell you. It's like everybody I knew who got them in the patches was patching and smoking. Yeah, Ron was patching and smoking. And then one hypnotism session quit everything. Cold-dirking. Really? Yep. That's weird. Because he don't seem very suggestible. I know. Right? Yeah. I mean, I don't think I've ever seen him change his mind about nothing. But not that every the other arguments that he's had with Tony in the green rail, I live for this year. I live for those moments. There's hilarious. Ron digs his heels in. So it was like, you're wrong. I go, wait. I will. Yeah. I'll read you. Well, that's not my experience. He was wearing the patch and he was smoking those little cigars. You know those little cigars? He was smoking them like cigarettes. You're the most not inhaled those little suckers. Like those little suckers have way more nicotine. You know those little tiny money crystals? Those little things. You're supposed to smoke those like a cigar. Like when I smoke them, I try to smoke them like a cigar. You take, you hold it and you're, it's a tiny cigar. You can't tell that these ticks is generally in. Yeah. Not to smoke nothing. Well, Ron has got amazing willpower because he got off the alcohol and does done. Never touched it again. Got off the cigarettes. Done. Never touched them again. Yeah. I love that guy. He's the best. He's the best. But it's like that ability to just turn something off like that. You know how much money? Let's look at that. How much money is in the nicotine business overall in America? It's probably way more now with pouches and vapes on top of cigarettes. I think it's less now. But I bet the cigarettes probably been less. But now so many people are on the pouches and so many people are vaping. Well, what I think is, I think there's less money overall. But that's why there's less companies because they keep getting bought. Right. Because people are smoking wet. Like kid, the kids are smoking way less. They cigarettes. Way less cigarettes. And they don't vape as much as we think. But I think there are a lot of them around the zens. A lot of them around pouches. Let's guess. What do you think the overall industry of cigarettes or nicotine? Nicotine products in America. The collective amount of money that nicotine products in America generate every year. I'm going to say 10 billion. Yeah, that sounds about right. Less than 10 billion. For the whole country, I'll say six. Let's say six billion because there's 350 million people plus Mexicans. That's just for the oral nicotine. There's how much? Six. Wow. Cigarettes is way higher. What is cigarettes? 76. Civilian? Billion. Oh, shit. That's more than sports. That's crazy. That's crazy. It's like an interditional tobacco, which putting cigars. Cigars in, like, uh, uh, uh, uh, speak of wits and stuff. But, okay. But what was it 20 years ago? Was it higher? It was higher. It was a higher one years ago from what I looked, but it has grown. It's growing slowly every year. It's a total of 100 billion, and it includes everything together. That's crazy. Well, I mean, but it isn't really crazy. Because it's one of the, it's one of the, it's one of the, it's one of the legal and socially acceptable drugs to be on all that. Yeah, you can smoke it because you can't even drink it work. Especially if you use pouches now, everybody's using pouches. Is it predicting the pouches are going to go from around four to six billion now and by 2030. So it's only five to six years from now, could get up to $50 billion. Well, here's the thing. They have new tropic benefits. Like they do enhance your cognitive performance. Nicotine does. And there's a lot of people that's where by them, like for creativity and stuff. Like one of the things that Stephen King talked about in that book on writing was that one of his biggest bumps in the row with his writing careers when he quits smoking. Is that a really hard time like getting his synapses to fire the same way? It was really noticeable. The difference in quitting nicotine. But then again, his best shady wrote when he was on coke. He was doing coke and drinking beer. Yeah. And he wrote his best craziest shit when he was doing that. No, but I want to be honest about that though. Like I do feel less creative or less or less. Not creative, not less creative, but less. I don't know. It does feel like it feels like my brain where it's working different. What about cigars? Have you ever thought about cigars? Or you just think it's too much of a gateway? Yeah, I would be right back on it. I mean, right back on it. Maybe we can get some other nicotine drops, Jamie. You can just shoot it into your fucking eyeballs. You fuck with the pouches at all? Or do you worry that the pouches are... Right back on it. Maybe we can, can we get some, can we, other nicotine drops Jamie, you can just shoot it into your fucking eyeballs. You fuck with the pouches at all? Or do you worry that the pouches are bringing closer to the cigarettes? No, but I've never fucked with the pouches. I don't know. You want to try one? Now, I don't know. This doesn't have nicotine. That is no nicotine. That's an ultra pouch. Don't do it. No, no, no, no, no. Maybe the gum. Maybe I try to gum. Yeah, I've tried to gum. I like pouches. How is that? I like pouches better. Um, it's interesting that like, they would probably, I wonder how much money is spent. How, okay, what is the patch? What's the patch worth? Like how much does that generate? You know, you know as well, they were trying to give me nicotine in the hospital. For what? Because they, because they knew I was a smoker and they were like, you don't, you don't want any? I was like, no, how are they trying to give it to him? What what? I don't know if it was a pouch or gum, but, but they've meant to do. It had been prescribed to me and it was just sitting there and they, and they, you know, every time a shift change somebody, where I'm here, so you know, you guys, you know, you guys are just the rails, like, I'm okay. They, um, I, somebody sent me some nicotine mince and they made me nervous. Like I didn't like them. They made me feel uncomfortable. Tiny slice. Okay, nicotine patches are a tiny slice of the nicotine economy. The US, they amount to most of few hundred million dollars per year versus tens of billions for cigarettes and other nicotine products. Yeah, but you know what? The reason they, the reason they still invest in them is because every time you try to quit and you use the patches when you come back, you're more addicted. Right. Right. So it's just a cycle. Yeah, it's insurance that you'll get back on the cigarettes. Yeah, because I bet you they're not, they probably don't track how many people. What's so funny, Jen? Nicotine replacement therapy therapy. The global nicotine replacement therapy market patches, gum, lozenges, etcetera is around 3.1 billion therapy. Just reading that in this room. I know it's like a silly, we can spirit here or something like a, predicted to reach 4.7 billion US dollars by 2034. But it makes sense that they would invest in that. Like, yeah, it's sort of, you know, why wouldn't they? It's like if they're smart business people, you know? Yeah. Did you hear about that special force of soldier that got in trouble because he bet on polymarket that Maduro was going to be kidnapped? Or they found out who it was. Yeah, they caught the dude. Oh, no. Yeah, he made for, I believe he made $400,000 and he tried to cover his tracks. But I thought it was like Trump's son. People thought it was, it was, it was, it was John Jr. Well, who knows what they've done? Oh, yeah. I mean, they're probably not looking at them the same way they're looking at these special force. But Trump don't leave no crumbs on the table. You like, I need all this bread. I'm on the way out. I still need this bread. Yeah, I mean, think about that, the, the coin, the Trump coin. I mean, that's crazy. That's crazy. It's legal, but it's a Melania coin. Like if you, if you buy any celebrities coins, you deserve the lose your money. But I think it like Medzger explained to me, he goes, these are gambling addicts. They're gambling. He goes, they know, they know that it's going to crash. No one's under any illusion. This is going to last forever. They try to get in and get out and make money while they're doing it. It's like they just figure out when to buy and when to sell. Yeah, but there are people that think that, you know, those are, those are the suckers. Those are who you're getting money from. It's the ones that think it. You could look at it that way or you could look at it is, this is an effective way to pay people off legally. So here's the thing. I'm not accusing anybody doing this, but I'm saying, let's say if I started a JRE coin. And maybe some Middle Eastern government decided they were going to invest $500 million in a JRE coin. And then I announced the JRE coin. They put in the money to back this JRE coin. I get a substantial stake in the JRE coin. So I get a bunch of JRE coins. And then I just dump all my JRE coins and then it go, I get, I get all that money. And then it goes for being worth X amount of dollars to being worth almost nothing. Is that the pumping down? That's the pumping down. Oh yeah. Yeah. So that would be a way I pay you. So like say maybe if you and I had some sort of a deal that was a little shady and I said, Brian, how about this? I can't pay you outright. But what I can do is why don't you start a crypto coin? And I will invest in your crypto coin, which is a very legal venture. And I will put in $100 million into your crypto coin. And so now your crypto coin, a bunch of people will also throw money in because there's $100 million in it. And they know that it's going to pump it. Now it's going to happen. Like the real clever fuckers. And then you just get out. So you get out as soon as it hits the peak, like you get it set up so that like maybe peaks in 24 hours or whatever the fuck it is. Like let's again, we're not accusing anybody of anything. But let's look at nor are we taking notes. Let's look at Trump coin. How much was Trump coin worth like right after it came out versus five days later? So somewhere that money has to go somewhere. And so if I invested in Brian Simpson coin and then that money, it got to the coin was worth, I don't know what a coins worth, I don't know what it's worth. But let's just say it got to its peak and then you sell and you just dump all your coins. And so that you just rake in a big pile of money, millions of millions of dollars. And everybody else is like the people that like were dummies, they don't get anything. And then me, I didn't expect to get any money. I'm just trying to bribe you. I'm trying to pay you off. What do you think is a man? Does that make sense? The thing is America is like three quarters scams. You lost. If some people sit around complaining about the scams instead of getting in on them. Did you hear what Dr. Oside? No. Dr. Os works for the government now. They, California has a big hostile scam going on. You know how like Minneapolis and Minnesota had the daycare scam. California has a bunch of fake hostels where they're taking care of people. That's what it is, right? So they shut funding down to 400 of them, not one of them complained. It is like, well, see ya. And so it's his assertion that that's because they were all scams. So that Nick Shirley guy, the same guy that investigated the fraud in Minneapolis. He's investigated some of the fraud in California. And one of the things that they found in some of his videos is like a lot of these businesses are registered to like hotel. And like every room in this vacant hotel is a different office for whatever company. And so each room in the hotel is raking in money as an office that's supposed to be working as a hostel or as some sort of a, you know, a rehab center or, you know, filling the blank. The Appleies learning centers, all these different kinds of things. And it's all just government scams, Medicaid scams. Get in on the scam. Get in on the scam. Gammon is the American way. Look at it. How you asked isn't the best way to look at this. Here's what it said, but of course not. Show you what it says after this. So, okay. Trump's official Trump meme coin launched at around one US dollar range reported roughly 0.18 to 0 1.20. And within about five days, it crashed down from a brief spike near 70 to 75 US dollars down to a high of 30s per coin. So that's within five days. So it's spiked at 75 and then dropped down to 30 different data provides slightly different start points. But they are in the same general zone. Crypto analytics notes. Trump was launched on January 17, 2025 initially worth 18 cents per token. So everybody buys in when that happens. Other coverage in exchange post described trading beginning around $1 or about $1 within the first hours after launch. So reasonable takeaways. Launch price is 0.2 to 1.0 US dollars per Trump depending on which exact tick you chose. So within first hours after launch, the price skyrocketed from around $1 to around $75 US dollars. So that's when you want to get out within the first hours reports the same weekend site highs near 70 to 75 US dollars in a market cap over 10 to 12 billion. A finance report on days after launch, trading started around $7 US dollars on Friday jumped as high as 74 on Sunday. So that's when you're supposed to get out. So let me ask this, what is it worth now? That's like $2 now. Interesting. So it got as high as $74. Well maybe I hold on to it. It's not your fault. There's a little bit more. There's more into it because it's not the easiest coin to get and how do you get it and all those kinds of things come into play. And that's kind of what I think this sentence is more about. Right. But if it went to 75, somebody must have made a ton of loot. Right. That too. Yeah. That's what it says. Right. $800,000 which could be people. Collectively lost around $2 billion while the Trump Organization and Partners profited heavily from fees. Mmm. Interesting. This is the thing. Like that's just that one. What is the worst pump and dump in crypto coin history? Let's look at that. Wasn't that. That's fine out. Sam Bank from free. I think it was him. Well I think what he was doing, he said that if he was left alone, he would have recovered the debt and that he had been doing this back and forth. They just caught him in a moment where this one guy sold all his coins off to try to crash him on purpose like his rival. And then he didn't have the money to cover the spread. and then people wanted their money out and then they realized. But he had been, they all do that apparently. It was what his or I don't know. But that's what his argument was. I believe is that I think he said that if he was not that they didn't interfere with him, not only would those coins have gotten the money back but they would be profitable today. I see I have friends that have profited from it. But when I hit him talk about it, it's like I just don't quite understand it fully. I feel exactly. And I can't put my money in some shit that I can't articulate how I can make money. I can't do it. Yeah, not only do I not understand it, I don't trust it. It sounds crazy today. I have people that try to talk you into it, they freak me out. Well a lot of times they just know there's a new scam. Somebody in my family are getting caught up with these fucking scammers. But they're finding elderly. It's like going through the elderly community, a new ponzi, period, it's ponzi scheme. And basically they're telling these old folks that they are joining a crypto exchange. But the crypto isn't real. So they download this app and they tell them all you gotta do is get up every morning and make these trades and you make this much percent of your money back. And they go, and just so you know it's not a scam, I'm gonna put in a grant for you. I'm gonna put in two, I put in five grand for you. But you don't realize that money's fake too. You download the app, they can show you how much money you want. But you can't get that money out. So here's how they get you. So they get you either way. So if you do, the ultimate plan is to lull you into going, they want you to log on every day and see that number going up and going, oh shit, I'm gonna put my money in there so I can make you a more money. Right, that's the ultimate plan. But even if you got suspicious, and you like, I want to take my money out, what they go, okay, we'll just send us an early withdrawal fee. So they only get a little bit of money out of you, but they still get real money out of you for no money. And even if you end up getting social suspicious that you won't even do that, well, they got you to download this app on your phone. And so they got you information. Oh yeah. Most people use the same log of credentials across apps, so you don't gave them that as well. Right. Oh, you got your email address, they could sell that. And they have your security questions so they know your first dog's name and so it's like at the very least they get in the way with your info or some of your real money. And a lot of old folks, they hear crypto and they don't really understand it. So it's easy to convince them that, oh, it's just something I don't understand, but that makes it easy for me. Isn't it crazy that the polymarket thing for this special force soldier that he's going to jail for this, but Congress is allowed to insider trade? Oh, bro, bro. And that's kind of crazy because you can't be sure that the mission to try to overthrow Maduro is going to be successful, right? So if they're trying to overthrow Maduro, that's a military operation. They're not always successful. So if he's gambling on a military operation that he's about to embark in, he's kind of betting on his own life. Well, I think what they're getting him for is more that he endangered the mission. Really? Because I was saying because you're because if we're supposed to keep our military movements a secret and it gets out there that someone keeps on predicting when we're going to make certain movements, then our enemies will be watching polymarket for when people bet on. That actually makes sense, right? Is that really the case, Jamie? What is he in trouble for? I mean, I'm reading through the Justice.gov thing. What Brian was saying started to make sense off of here, but at the bottom it says the actual charges and the charges are three counts of violating the commodity exchange act each, which carries a maximum of 10 years, the amount of wire fraud, which is a 20-year max, one kind of unlawful monetary transaction, which is a 10-year max. And what's the other one? Well, that's my two, but scissors three. That's crazy because like how come no one in Congress ever gets in trouble? They do sometimes when they don't vote correctly. Not like every year somebody goes down to an insider trading. They get busted for other shit. You're right for like taking bribes and stuff. Yeah, as anybody who ever been busted Congress wise for insider trading on stocks, I don't think so. If I guess there was another controversy recently, they're accusing Federman of doing it. But the type of shit that average person goes to jail, oh my God, you want to talk about something that'll piss you off about somebody going to jail. This guy in Florida, what was his name? Yeah, few people have for sure. Really? Congress people for insider trading? Haven't recently. That's crazy. This is rep from New York, Chris Collins, pled guilty in 2019, insider trading and lying. I've been talking about a fake drug trial, 26 months in prison and a team mobile stock purchase. Definitely no senators though. Well, these are people that nobody knows. Look at these people. This ain't Nancy Pelosi. A 20-scandal. No, so occasionally. I know COVID. No powerful people are going to prison for that shit. I'm off the stool where it's the most powerful person that ever wanted to jail. So if you didn't even go to jail for that, when did you ever lie? 78 members have been arrested. One different continent. Not arrested, but all violated the stock act. Interesting, which requires reporting financial trades within 45 days. Maybe that's just because they tried to hide it and everybody else is just like, oh, I just made it good. No, they're saying just in this Congress, just in rule three candidates were fined by Kalashi for allegedly whatever. Political insider trading by betting on their own races. But wait a minute, you can't bet on your own race. That seems crazy. If you think you're going to win, you don't know if you're going to win. No one knows. But you're probably the first one to know which way it's going to go. I don't know about that. I don't think those polls are ever correct. Man, that's not true. They must be somewhat correct. They were suspended from Kalashi. So I don't think I'm so joking. Check this shit out. This is going to give me a skin. So let's do Michael Martin in Florida. He made an addition to his house, a million dollar addition to his house. He got approved by the city and everything. And after he put it up, his neighbors complained. They went and dug up some like 100 year old statue and complained. So they take them to court. And his argument is, well, it got approved by the city. Like that's why I built it. So fuck them. But he compromised already. He compromised and he put up a thing to block his view so it wouldn't bother them. And that wasn't good enough of them. So then the judge ended up ordering him to tear it all down. Oh my God. And he refused. And now he's still in jail. He's still in jail right now for contempt to court. Is this a homeowners association thing? No. It's just his neighbor. No, no, no, because he everything was approved. He got approved by the HOA, got approved by the city and everything. And he spent all his money. He spent all his money built it up. And then his neighbor had a problem with it. Oh, his neighbor's a piece of shit. And now the judge wants him to tear it down. Imagine your neighbor wanting you to take down an addition to your house. But why do you give up to the client now? If I'm going to jail over there, I'm going to go ask. I'm at least being there for something. That's so crazy that people can take someone to court for doing something to their house. Like what is it matter to you? Is it affecting your view? Like what is it? Yeah, I think it's one of those things where it's like, technically, I think the argument you can make is that I bought this house because the forest was right there. And he's chopping down the forest. Is that what he's doing now? No, it's not what he's doing. But it's like, I don't know. And I forget what the statute is that they found. His name was Michael Martin. But they found some old-ass technicality. Right? That the city didn't even know about because they approved it. You'd hate that name forever. That guy made you take down your addition. He spent 200 grand building up. Because that's my thing. It's like, how was the judge? How can you tell a man? Fuck your million dollars. Right. That's what's crazy for him. And you got approved by the city. And he can't appeal that. I don't know what he's doing. That's what he's doing. No, because he's in jail while it's being appealed. And that's what his lawyer is like. No, because he has the thing. He can get out of jail any time he wants. Always do his tear down the addition. Yes, it's tear down the addition. Yeah. But if he's appealing, why would he tear down the addition? Would he win the appeal? He builds it back up again. And then the guy appeals the appeal. He's also saying that demo is going to cost 800 grand. Oh my god. Oh my god. This fucking cunt neighbor. Yeah, you talk about being a fool. What is the specifics, though? Am I wrong? I mean, maybe the neighbor's right. I'm going to see how it went down. Yeah. Because what did the neighbor have any, how could that make sense? Yeah, it's starting off said the lawyer for a Tampa couple who asked the judge to find their neighbor and contempt of court over a disputed guesthouse says, there's more to the story than it first brought you about. Of course. There's always more to the story. What is he growing? I'm not trying to read that. It's not sharing. My old neighborhood, there was this guy built a house. And it was just kind of flat. It was a flat. It was kind of boring. It was like just to not creative. The guy was a builder. He wasn't much of an architect. And I don't think he hired an architect. He just had his own idea to how to build a house. But he got permits and he did it. But I remember my neighbor complaining. And he's like, you believe this guy built this fucking house? And like, what is a big deal? And he's like, you don't think that's an eyesore? I go, well, it's boring. It's boring house. Like, what do you care? I just didn't understand it. But he wanted to start complaining and get a bunch of people to file a complaint about this guy's house. Local news site. The location will allow the occupant of the guesthouse to appear into the backyard and pool area of the Babbitt's home. Oh. Martin subsequently removed any windows facing the Babbitt's property and installed bamboo along the property line to obstruct the view of the guesthouse. Yeah, they were mad. They were mad that you could see into their house to their yard where they're poolers. Yeah, that's how it started. That says that was the initial complaint. But there's 500 filings that they've had over five years over this. Oh, God. 1924, original subdivision said it was public space. They were supposed to be public space or something like that. But in 1924, they went and found a 1924 statue. They're saying that the company he hired that got the approval did that illegally. And that's their claim, I guess. And then it all has to do with the edits. So Martin signed a contract with the demolition company needs to pay $392,370 to dynamite demolition. What a great name. I want to get a t-shirt, dynamite demolition. To begin tearing down the structures, judge Nash rejected them until last week, finding Martin in contempt and ordering a writ of bodily attachment, which orders all law enforcement to take Martin into custody and take him to jail. No one has involved the law. But Clarence said, so we just want the courts willing to be complied with. And that's it. Boy. But somebody being able to see into your pool is wow for you to really go through this much trouble. She said, oh say, so this general contractor, Julie McGill, is one of the several outside contractors and developers, I asked to evaluate the case. She says she can't remember a time when a judge told the city that it didn't follow its own code on neighborhood conformity. Wow. But see, Mr. Martin, Mr. Martin, you fucking up the game. You know what you got to do, man? You know what you got to do, Mr. Martin? Just comply. OK, because you're not going to win like this. Do what they say, pay the money, tear it down. I'm guessing you got the money. If you bid an $1 million guess house with a pickleball court and a pool just for your guess, you got the bread. Pay that bread. And then you take the money you save from not being caught up in all of these lawsuits. And you spend it on revenge. You hire the most cold, blooded fucking creative people you can think of. And you make this person's life miserable. And all the legal ways possible. And all the ways where he knows it's you and he can't do shit about it. You hire a bunch of college students. You get in my prize for whoever finds any statute that can fuck this man's life up. That's what you do. Don't sit in jail. You cannot take any revenge that cost you something. It's got to be pure delight. It's got to be served cold. That's what I'm saying. The convenience is the best served cold. It's like you have to take care with the dish. You can't just react. It would be weird though. If you always had a backyard where your pool didn't face anybody, and also I'm a dude put a house right behind your pool. Put up a consumer money. No, it's not exactly what it was. It says there was already they put together some lots to make one bigger lot. And there was already something on that. And so when he bought it, they're like, we're seeing problem with fixing that, changing how it looked and that might be. But here's also the thing, no, Joe. He offered to block, like put up a wall of block the familiar. There's no windows. Yeah. Put up bamboo. And I feel like if it's a good neighbor, that's reasonable. Yeah. That's a reasonable compromise. I don't even think about the accuracy of the house. We'll just knock the windows out. That's feel like instead of being like, no, I want you to waste a million dollars. Right. Fuck to me. That's where you became the bad guy. When he offered a reasonable compromise and you said, fuck no, then fuck you. Fuck you. Yeah, fuck you. I'm telling you right now, they lucky it's not me with a million dollars. Because I'm Batman now. I'm Batman and you the Joker. And I'm going to spend my whole. Live my life is no, that's true. Yeah. I'm a tear down. I'm a setter house. I'm going to use all the money from selling this house. I'm going to use all that money to wake your life hard. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. I'm going to pay people with a break in your house. And throw it. Don't do that. That's illegal. You don't want to pay it. You're illegal. Let a crackhead do it. But that's illegal still. Okay. You'll be in jail. Cut your internet line. Wait till you call the repair shots. I've been throw dead mice in the back of the events. You can't have it be illegal. You've got to be illegal. You can't be illegal. It must be illegal. But I just can't think of anything legal right now. Well, you can sue people for all kinds of stupid shit and just make them go through legal problems. Don't sue. Just have just have people outside with a tape measure. They if they are centimeter from the curb. Oh, it's called the cops. Straight neighbor wars. The labor wars are real, man. People kill each other over neighbor wars. Oh, yeah. The hat feels into the McCoy's ain't shit. Yeah. I think that was over some other shit. Is nothing worse. There's nothing worse than living beside somebody that like this. No, it's completely unreasonable, completely unable to compromise. Nice neighbors are beautiful. Oh, man. You have good neighbors. It's great. I have nice neighbors. It's nice. And I have nice neighbors in California too. Because because he has a thing, it doesn't take much to be a good neighbor. You have to be thoughtful. And in the times that you're not thoughtful, when it's brought to your attention, you have to have the appropriate amount of shame. Well, here goes. Uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, it was over stolen hog. A illicit romance and long-standing judges. Two neighboring families in the backwoods of Appalachia. So here's the thing about that, though. I think this is from, is this from Malcolm Gladwell's book? I forget whose book it's on from. But there was a book where they explained that what it happened, I believe it's Malcolm Gladwell, was it explaining that the reason why the people in Appalachia are so violent is because they come from hurting populations in Europe. And so herders in Europe are very different than farmers. Because if herders, someone can come along and steal all your sheep and you're fucked. You can't really steal all someone's corn. It takes forever. Right. You got to chop it down. You know what I mean? So these people were used to defending their animals with violence because people would come in and try to steal them. Uh, yes, Malcolm Gladwell, yeah, outliers. That's the book. Chapter six, Hatfield McCord, few to analyze the prime example of a culture of honor. Where similar to the findings in this Reddit thread ancestral herding roots forced rapid brutal retaliation for insults to maintain reputation. This cultural legacy, not just poverty, drove generations of conflict. So culture of honor. Gladwell argues that families descending from Scottish and Irish herders brought a culture of honor to the Appalachian Mountains. And these regions law enforcement is weak and survival depends on establishing a reputation for strength and prompt often violent retaliation against slights. Yeah, that makes sense. What was the name of the book though? Outliers. Oh, I saw it. Fucking great book. It's a really good book. Yeah, I haven't read though. It's really good. It talks about like why people are successful. The one of the more interesting things is about the Beatles. In the Beatles it talks about how they got this gig in Hamburg, Germany, where they were performing every fucking day, every day. They were doing multiple sets every day. And they did it for like a few years. And they went back to Liverpool and everybody's like, what the fuck happened with you guys? Like how'd you get so good? And they got so good because they were just performing all the time. I think it was at a strip club. I think it was something crazy like that. Like they were performing music at a strip club, like something weird. And because of that, they were just getting in reps like crazy reps. And I think that's the key to like almost anything, almost anything. And this is the argument in Outliers. It's like, you know, the 10,000 hours of mastery like that argument. Yeah, but the 10,000 hours is not exactly what he said. No, it's a rough because there's obviously people that are sub-ants. Yeah, because I know I think he modified it because he talked about it's not about the amount of time as much as it's about the kind, the quality of practice. Right. So like intentional, directed practice, which would be like performing on stage. Exactly. For all those, where is what were they doing in Hamburg, Germany, Jamie? Were they at, were they at out? Was it a strip club? Something like that. It said they played in clubs and strip bars. Yeah. There's a lot of places, I guess they played. So they were just going off. They were just like doing as many sets as they can, which is the same with comedy. Everybody that we know that really progressed rapidly, they did as many sets as possible. They're hopping all over the place. Like guys in our club, like already Maddie, for instance, that fucking dude, he'll go up at the sunset, he'll go over here, go there, go there, doesn't show up to mothership. He's just in it, you know, he's in it, you know? All day. And when you're doing that, you just get better, quicker. Let's get better and better. And those dudes that we know that do a set a week, you know? Come in, drop in, do 15 minutes, that's it. You don't see him again for another week. They kind of like get stale, just stay flat. They get stagnant. Yeah, stagnant. Yeah. Whereas the Beatles just got after it, and then all of a sudden, love, love, maybe. They just got smooth, you know? Which makes sense. That's the case with everything though. But like everything you do, like you don't want a surgeon that does brain surgery once a year. You know, you want a guy who's like in it. Yeah, he's in it all day. He's fucking studying journals and practicing with robots. Yeah, I'm trying to be your third brain that day. That's right. Yeah. You don't want to be the fifth brain though. It gets tired. No. Yo, you know what's funny is I just saw something about, they did a study at a courthouse where, and they... You know, you know funny is I just saw something about They did a he did a study at a courthouse where And they found that that Judge whenever the judges had like how harsh of a sentence you received Was directly related to how long it had been since the judge ate something oh? Yeah, I've seen that before. Yeah. I've seen that. Yeah, that's crazy Like it's it it it it it it it's it's enough. It's statistically significant. Yeah Yeah, which makes sense cranky or if the judge get no pussy You know maybe it's going through a divorce. You know maybe his wife fucked her trainer Oh, yeah, give me the cute give me the con judge right after breakfast What if you come in and you're a your personal trainer too and you're dealing with some shit? I judge like my Some people give you a pity like that. They don't give a fuck about About like doing the right thing. Oh hell no, they just want to they want to feel power Fuck people over fuck you fuck all trainers. Well, you know another thing. I just found out about his um I think I think that the country's anguelo right Jamie they So you know how you know how like in America the website are all dot com. Yeah in Russia. It's like dot are you right? In anguela It's dot a I Oh, which didn't used to me shit, but now Now it's worth some money now. They're making so much money selling domains that it's like half of their money. Oh Wow It's completely changed the economy there. Oh, that's crazy because it seems like you're legit if you're of like Proplexity dot ai Right so anybody anything that yeah, they got a paid e-speed. Oh, wow Yeah, but there's so many domains now. Yeah. Just from something. We didn't used to think meant anything Does it used to be like you only had dot com and dot net? Yeah, you know, you never know what to show like bro somebody just held up a somebody I'm because I'm gonna one of them one of them. So bread. It's I'd be on it's called Why would you touch that or what is this? And usually usually the same post are on both because people are like what is this thing? Or and then also why did why did you why are you touching it? So I just saw one recently, but somebody held up a thing And they were like what is this? What is this? What is this? Oh F mean and it was like But it was it was from so you know Tyler the creator. Yes, so he when he first came out his group is called off-future So this is way before only fans and okay, and so if you saw of you know before Seven years ago it meant that's what it meant Right, and so it was one of their like stickers or promo things and something like that But this is a young kid he founded in an attic or something You know what the fuck it man. He was like, why's it? Because he knew how old it was so he's like it can't be only fans. What is this? Right? Yeah, and it's like Change all the time because they they got this Dada, yeah, I never thought it no my thought they would make any fucking money off of it right Well, well, there was other there's other ones like that too that are kind of interesting There's a bunch of different ones. I'm trying to remember some of them, but some of them were like dot biz Hmm with that come from. Oh, no. Who is that is that a? I don't know, but they have that like they have dot biz like I remember back when that used to mean something like that We used to have like no dot org. Mm-hmm. I think that edu still a thing Remember when people sell websites for a lot of money so people would like buy a bunch of domains and hold on to them like Business I think business dot com sold for a ton of money. Yeah, but now I think it's hard to do that now Yeah, what kind of business do you have that people are just looking up business dot com Why is it even worth anything? You know what I mean? That's like eating dot com is worth money I don't know if you remember back when when white when white house dot com was a porn site Baaaaa Because the actual site was it's always been white house dot gov But that was back when people didn't know so white house dot so people when everyone was looking for the white house They go white house dot com. They go to the porn site. Do you know what red band did no? Do you know the Pepsi spice thing? No? What is Pepsi spice? What what a red band's greatest trolls? Was he bought Pepsi spice dot com? So Pepsi spice was a type of Pepsi that came out and so red band bought Pepsi spice dot com And then he started documenting how he was drinking Pepsi spice and he was having bloody diarrhea That's all he was drinking. He was dying. He's getting cancer. It's like looking crazy as thing I mean 14 years ago, so It's pretty So he's losing weight. All right. This is Brian from Pepsispice.com A lot of people wouldn't believe me so that's why I'm making this video my pee has actually turned Not yellow not white, but it's gonna be I'm not making this it. That's why I'm filming losing this canon camera that For megapixel camera So that's how old this is So it is I'm going to be He's like pretend that his peace bloody He's so silly just kept doing it like he got worse and worse and worse and eventually Pepsi spice bought it from them Though the hardest part to believe my video is the 170 pounds. Oh, he was really skinny at one point in time Yeah Yeah, Brian at one point time got real heavy and then went on a crazy fitness kick He got a look at a stair climber in his house and he's fucking riding that bitch every day And he lost a ton of weight and he had a photo of him like with his old jeans Pepsi spice project Pepsi spice project He's so silly, but this one man. He committed a lot of fucking time to this It was very funny. I remember reading it and like dying laughing. I'm like you're so ridiculous Yeah, but you know if rib rib band decides fuck you He can really elevate to like a 50 cent level of Petter, oh yeah, but this wasn't even fuck you. This is just him having fun Did they come after you? I think eventually they did but the thing was like they were too stupid to buy Pepsi spice calm when they Had Pepsi spice like you got to buy that like who the fuck you should fire somebody So many in your organization slipping because he didn't know that Pepsi spice is gonna be a thing till after you released it So the fact that you knew that you were gonna release Pepsi spice and you didn't buy up Pepsi spice calm is kind of crazy That is kind of crazy kind of ridiculous. Yeah, that's just shitty planning. That's whoever works for they deserve whatever he did Yeah, I tried to I'm not trying to get cuz all my social media stuff is BS And I tried to get BS calm or it was or BS comedian back on or something like that And it made it somebody already owns it. It was like a like a Canadian Improv group or something oh Interesting and they I was like law buy from you How much and then the price they say it was so crazy? That was like what how much? I want to say they asked for like $10,000 or something And this was back when I that was like I wouldn't pay that now but back when I back then I didn't even have it Right, I was like what $10 is crazy for a website. Yo, cuz it wasn't like they were doing tons of business through this website Were they using it at all? How much would you paid for it back then? Yeah, how would a game a thousand months a thousand if they said two no way Maybe maybe 15 honey would have been a best in the final I think today though All anybody does is do a search of your name and then they find your website You're someone who wants to find your website. They just search and it's right there But but I but I need but pardon me always once everything to be the same and then it's not being that way anyway Because my TikTok is a different thing than everything else everything is BS comedian except that it's interesting You have TikTok don't you worry about the terms of service like all the access they have to your phone and access to computers Run your network and all that shit the Chinese mm-hmm. I mean well now I'm not the Chinese anymore Yeah, but it's like you know for me. I've never got the the once once it was Snowden told us what was up I'm like they are who gives a fuck that I care who's buying I'm getting spied on them out of what I'm doing. Yeah. Yeah with the Chinese is gonna do to me. They're gonna be like all these Basically they have Everything in that you have ever done and they only use it if they catch you think so if they're looking for something like say if you run for Congress You do some insider trading you do something shitty and they come after you then they go oh Brian It's interesting because we have a voicemail Oh, yeah on someone's we were talking about they got that shit though. They already got it Those have thought stuff with somebody got arrested today from Fauci's Administration See that's what they arrested the first guy who was involved in the cover up of the lab leak theory and He was using a Gmail account To avoid freedom of information act requests. So he was using Gmail instead of this is allegedly I don't know what the reality of all this is obviously about just read it read about it today Xfauci top adviser indicted over alleged COVID cover up hidden emails David Moran So allegedly receives gifts including wine and high-end meals from a collaborator prosecutor say uh-oh See this why I don't believe it in cognito mode Yeah, it's all bullshit. I'm like you'll jerk off on your main And delete that shit out to history because all in cognito mode is is just you going hey Google This is the stuff I don't want nobody to know about Then they put it in a file he served for years as the top adviser with a national institute of allergy and infectious diseases Indited and is accused Dogity Good as I said good as you can trust me. Yeah, Google's like hey, I know in God. You know, but it is legit he's not need no mode so It was using his personal email account to evade federal transparency laws and shield key discussions from freedom of information Act requests according to the DOJ indictment unsealed it was also apparently bragging about it Allegedly alleged that marens conspired with others during the pandemic to hide communications related to a controversial coronavirus research grant that involved collaboration with the Wuhan Institute of virology and China the grant was later terminated to mitzkroot neowether Could have been 19 may have originated from a lab leak. It's amazing that they did how did they catch him? Well, I mean they can't get fouchy right? This is the the the thing because they wanted to get fouchy That's why the Biden administration gave him a pardon from 2014 on which is really kind of wild But federal prosecutors also claim that marens received gifts from a collaborator Including wine and offers of high-end meals and later took steps to justify these perks by contributing to a Scientific publication supporting the theory that COVID-19 emerged naturally rather than from the Wuhan lab So they bragged him to get him to do this Allegedly He's one of I think a bunch of people that are gonna wind up going down. There's too many people at a pissed off There's too many people I mean too much money got lost too many people wound up dying Why do you think anybody's gonna go to prison? They never go to prison. Oh, you know This is a new thing I mean this kind of thing is a new thing and there's enough people that want heads to roll This is a weird thing I mean this is a weird thing where they shut the whole country down if you find out that these people actually paid to have this virus engineered And they were lying about it and hiding it and covering it up. Oh I see that that's it. I know that's a from that the virus came from the Wuhan lab Okay, these people were hiding the fact that they were funding the Wuhan lab They were funding of a creation of these part of a group that was funding you and he was also Allegedly being bribed with things to promote the idea that it came from naturally from natural spillover versus from a lab leak Alleged who's a legend who over the prosecutors are whoever the I mean I don't know I don't know what's going on. I don't know what they know and what they don't know But I do know that obviously there was a concerted effort to make it seem like this came naturally and not from the Wuhan lab There was a giant effort which is why on YouTube if you had posted during like 2020 About a lab leak if you said I think it came from a lab. They would literally pull you off of YouTube They would kick you off a Twitter back then before Elon bought Twitter They would kick you off Twitter if you were going on and on about it. This is a lab leak. I mean We live in an end times man. I hope that a cook a fucking world up. You can't even you can't even chew on it You can't even have a played devil's advocate. Well, you can now you can now because of Twitter because the Elon bought it but before then when the government was essentially in control I mean the government was conspiring to control and You want people do all day they're all day. Yeah all over Twitter in his defense. I mean I'm sure he blocks them But I mean if you block somebody but then you could talk people talk mad shit about it That motherfucker be on Twitter way too much for how rich he is not only that how busy he is I don't understand it boy busy tweeting what he doing, but he's busy making rockets and shit I mean I don't understand it. I don't know how he has the time. I can't do it. He ain't making the rack It's he got like slaves or whatever I don't know what he I'm sure he got like genius this change He does but he's in charge of a lot of it man I went to the rocket factory during the launch Jamie went to we all went and watched space X launch We went down to the to the cult. What's the golf right? Yeah, they're the main guys, but you know they just launched They or they're gonna launch to an on space X they can launch The new telescope yes The was it the Nancy Grace Roman the Roman the Roman tell Oh, this motherfuckers These the these new telescopes are kind of crazy because the more they find out the more they find out that like oh We didn't know that was crazy about this one is how fast they built it and and this is the craziest part It's under budget So they built it faster than they said for less than what they said and now What is the power of this one as opposed to like the James web? Apparently so I was listening to this shit I was fascinated earlier, but but uh they're saying So they were compared to the James where they compared to the hollow to hobble because the James web is more infrared this is more like the Hubble like it but The it takes a picture at the same resolution as the Hubble but way way bigger So they were coming they were saying that there is not a there's not a screen that exists that you could display the picture on Yeah, it's a wide field instrument Whereas the James telescope is near infrared Interesting so what is this gonna be able to detect that the James web can't exoplanets is one of the big Oh, like shit like way way way way way more than we can imagine if they find actual planets and you can see light on them Like a well, I don't know if that's possible One day Just imagine Imagine oh yeah, I think about it all the time Or anything that would be so yeah, so so see how huge holy shit It compares more of the hub last thing than James web in the type of telescope it is yeah, and just the amount of information that it can Take in they're fine and shit for the James web that's freaking them out They're finding things that make him question the age of the universe And this thing is gonna it's gonna do like we because I don't know if you remember this but the first time I was on this pod I told you about the James web wait like a year and a half before it came out What we tell me about I was just telling you that it existed right that it was gonna change everything Yeah, and it has and and this one is gonna do the same thing the formation of galaxies is freaking them out They find they find these galaxies that are formed way too quickly So they're confused And now they're starting to just like are we wrong about how long it takes to form a galaxy or I'll read what wrong about the age of the universe Yeah, I mean, there's there's the we're wrong about everything I mean, we're wrong about a lot of things, but but you know what thing about scientists love being wrong Yeah, they do well, especially these kind of scientists. They love new discoveries Not they're yet. They're not dogmatic also It's it's very difficult to argue when you get the data back from these things. I mean it is what it is We were talking about this recently that they found a black hole that's bigger than our galaxy Oh, yeah, yeah, that's what I think it was sending me that I think it's something Might may not be bigger than our galaxy or it's commensurate with our galaxy. It's like It's there's one that they found that was bigger than our entire solar system. It was tons something It's bigger than the solar system, but that's one, but there was the alpha. What was the other one? Did we looked at the other day? Um And then we brought it up the other day there's one that's even larger than that like they keep finding these ones that are just Impossible big and it would have to have been primordial right? They would have to have formed Well, this was the question they they said that it was so big it didn't make sense that it had enough time to suck up enough Stars to get that big That was the problem right there were like there's enough time from the birth of the universe for this thing to exist and be this big Yeah, because it would have had to have started at a time where the matter wasn't close enough together to even form things Oh, it's so fucked up. It's so crazy Just the idea of a black hole bigger than all the way out to Pluto Here's a rock hole gives a real sad thing this There's probably this there's a lot of things that we did are just not knowable to us like we just will never know right And that's you we just got to accept like like you hit every time you hear them talk about how We're you know we're expanding The the universe is expanding so so rapidly then eventually it's gonna be because it's speeding up So eventually it's gonna be expanding Close to the speed of light right and so it's like at some point If there's still people on earth by then at some point There's not gonna be any stars we're gonna be expanding so So rapidly that when you look up at the sky you're not gonna see anything Like they're gonna think they're gonna think that everything outside our galaxy doesn't exist I mean they're gonna see stars, but you're not gonna see they're not gonna know that there's other galaxies Because the light the light won't be reaching us Wow, so it's like so imagine the stuff that we That we can't know now that we already beyond what we couldn't even know I think it's called Phoenix I think that was the it's the same thing. I'm looking at the everything about ton 618 says it's the biggest They've ever found and how big is it exactly 88 it's got this lost the Mass is the size of roughly 66 billion That's so Great you can't even really you can't even really imagine that you know what they said that there are more planets in the in the universe then there are seconds since the big bang Yeah, yeah, that's What is surrounding ton 618? Oh, that's what it is. Okay, so Phoenix The quasar as a quasar ton 618 is believed to be the active active galactic nucleus at the center of a galaxy the engine of which is a super massive black hole feeding on intensely hot gas and matter in an accretion disk. What does that mean? That's the that's the disk around the black hole that Like when it eats something that's where the light is coming from When they discover this 1950 Nature of this object was first in 1957 13 years later 1970 discovered emissions from you Want to get it really gear freaked out. Jimmy. Look up the great attractor was that So So there is something On the other side of us that we can't see And everything is moving in that direction including us and we don't know what pull you what Hidden galaxies discovered in the zone of avoidance. What does that mean? The great attractor defeat dark energy. What Now look up what is it The great attractor is a region of gravitational attraction in intergalactic space and the apparent central gravitational point of the Lana key supercluster of galaxies that includes the Milky Way galaxy as well as about 100,000 other galaxies The observed attraction suggests a localized concentration of mass having the order of 10 to the 16 solar masses However, it's obscured by the Milky Way's galactic plane lying above the zone of avoidance so that Invisible light wavelengths the great attractor is difficult to observe directly Bro There's no way you can know everything. It's in the attraction too much information So we know everything's being sucked towards it What is that we don't know it's sucking all these galaxies all these super galaxies everything's moving towards it And we we can't we can't tell what it is imagine If you're it's your job to know what's going on the universe Hey Brian right me a paper on what's going on the universe like everything Everything I mean, but it would never end there's with every new Satellite that gets launched that can see into the space Every new telescope that gets utilized like we're fucked. Here's the other thing though. I I'm not could be wrong about this I mean, I'm wrong about a lot of shit But I think that it it it it actually physically impossible for you to know even our fraction of the things because Any any device that could store That amount of information would collapse into a black hole before you could get anywhere near storing enough So your brain couldn't even hold Even even a percentage of a percentage of the information that makes sense. We have pea brains There's no way we can have that information the south pole. What is this? Flat earthers are gonna love this. Okay? South pole wall or the south pole Well, it was a massive cosmic structure formed by a giant wall of galaxies a go galaxy filament That extends across at least 1.37 billion light years of space The nearest light and consequently part of which is aged at about a half a billion light years The structure and its astronomical angle is dense in five known places Including one very near the celestial south pole and is according to the internal International team of astronomers that discover the south pole wall the largest contiguous feature in the local volume and comparable to the Sloan Great Wall at half the distance. Okay You just like I just were a blackton by walls as long as getting that Uh-huh, maybe that's why they're confused. Maybe that's what they think the Antarctic wall or maybe the rest of the galaxy knows that we're a problem And they got us locked in You know perhaps we got we got not before him fuck the galaxy. Maybe Back in the Egyptian days. Maybe that's what they were doing something. You said you've seen that shit They found underneath the pyramids, right? No You haven't seen that? I don't think so. What's your name? Oh, you don't know. Okay? Oh, you don't know Oh, you don't know what you did sell t-shirts. Oh, you don't know They found these structures. They use What is it called radio tomography satellite radio tomography and there it's this ground penetrating Shit that they've found these structures underneath the pyramids that go like over kilometer deep into the earth Like pillars giant columns that are surrounded by coils that go down into the ground And they've used this technology Successfully to detect things that they know exists like certain voids that are in pyramids and certain chambers and certain temples that They know exist underground and they've accurately described these things including they use this radio tomography on They uh there's a mountain in Italy that has a particle collider at the bottom of the mountain over a kilometer into the mountain They built this particle collider and this thing this this information this uh technology shows an accurate Image of what this particle collider looks like the exact dimensions shows it exact And so they're using this underneath the pyramid and this guy philippo beyonde is a Italian scientist that I had on the podcast Explain that they've used this Underneath the pyramids and there's these undeniable structures that exist that go down into the ground like very deep into the ground Under so the pyramids are just the top of this immense structure When you say the Italian scientist I just keep thinking about him like taking a nap in the middle of Eat and pasta drinking wine eventually we've figured it out So you're saying that there's that there are machines down there or something? I don't know what it is so they haven't really dug into the ground and investigated it fully yet But they know that these Sensors these this technology is detecting these structures show Jamie show me what it looks like So show them the 3d model that they made a 3d model of them but a shock that week that we that we can Get in there and just go that's the thing it looks like Okay, what imagine if that's accurate if there really are columns underneath the pyramid I mean that's the same So impossible and it's in pops and there's heat No, I don't think it's heat. I don't think that's what it there's a water table underneath there too They think it has something to do with the use of the pyramid in the first place that it wasn't simply just a structure that it had some sort of a use and that These columns were doing something and then it was probably some sort of a technology Look how nuts that is Mega structures underneath the pyramids Could you go back to what that one said with the the yeah right there look at that Alleged megastructures under Egypt's pyramids Sparking fascination and fear skepticism worldwide Will you lose something? No, I think so if it's true that's nuts Yeah, I mean that that sounds absolutely fucking crazy to me that I was thinking about the work that would take to even do that right and what what kind of a society did that and for what purpose and it's at least 4,000 five-minute years old at least at least Yeah, and so apparently the those ancient pyramids were before We thought they like I thought like the like the modern Egyptians built those pyramids. No, they were ain't the pyramids were ancient to them Well, that seems to be the case with a lot. That's the labyrinth that's underneath It's outside of the pyramids. This is another insane structure that they found that Herodotus documented way back in You know thousands of years ago, but this is all Ben van Kirkwick from His uncharted ex YouTube channel sort of described all this and explained it and They've used scans ground penetrating radar to show that there's this immense structure that Herodotus described Being greater than Giza itself that's underneath the ground Inside the labyrinth. There's a 40 meter long metallic object that shaped like a tiktak So whatever the fuck that is who knows, but I think there's a lot of shit from that part of the world that's gonna show us that Civilization at one point in time had received very high level like probably even higher than we are today And then it was wiped out and then we're the rebuild Well, they didn't cure syphilis Actually, well, you know there's a new syphilis. I heard from Michigan or some shit. I know from Washington Probably from Michigan No, no, it was in Washington Washington. Yeah, the dude the dude a new kind of syphilis. Well, it's not a it was the dude had two We had two syphilis two different. Yeah, two ones. What a dirty pants and They and they like the same way that COVID was going through like genetic recombination. So like uh-huh They were exchanging traits inside his body. Oh boy and creating a superset. Yeah, and then Same way that COVID was going through like genetic recombination. So like, uh-huh. They were exchanging traits inside his body. Oh, boy. And creating a superset for this. Yeah. And then, and then, and then what happened is a bunch of old ladies kept going to the ER and they all kept describing the same man and they traded. He was spreading. He was a superset brother. He was spreading it. Yeah. And he went to the ER because it's because apparently like this, whatever strain he has, it just causes you to go blind super quickly. And all these, all these things. And there's the bait about whether he knew he was purposely spreading it and didn't give a fuck because they told him, yeah, you got to come back. He just kept fucking and didn't go back. And then, and then he went, he didn't go back until he had another emergency. He went to a different emergency room. How many times in human history is that in the cause of a plague? Some guys might want to stop fucking? It was not fucking. And just won't tell anybody. I mean, how you going to be met? You can't be mad at it. It's five cases of rare ocular syphilis, which can cause vision impairment or blindness, identified in Southwest Michigan, Michigan, June of March and July, 2022, all linked to a single heterosexual male partner. Wow. All five women age 40 to 60. He wasn't picky reported having sexual contact with the same man. This guy was a freak. Yeah, bro. He was out here fucking fucking people blind. And because this was crazy, imagine even the emergency room, because the first time he was a emergency room, they thought he had herpes and they gave him something for that. And he left. But imagine coming from the emergency room from an STD scare and going right back to fucking and going blind. All patients were hospitalized and successfully treated with intravenous penicillin. No further cases were linked to this man after this treatment. Whoo. All right, bro. What's wrong with the super syphilis? Mm-hmm. Um, anything going on? When is, uh, you're gonna put your special in that lady, yeah. When are you gonna put that out? Uh, I think it's gonna be a summertime July. Okay. I'm gonna put my special up on you two. Come back and join us. Yeah, we'll do that. I'll see you tonight. All right. Yeah. Yeah. Come on, we got some comedy.com. Brian Simpson, comedy dot com. Goodbye.