Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, my night, all day. So, James, what was your question? It was too lax, but it was really like, because I wouldn't know. Hard course science question. Yeah. Based on physics. OK. In theory, if you were in space and you maybe ejaculated, is it possible that the ejaculate would propel you backwards? Like send you, you know, like is it propulsion? Is there enough for power in there to propel you? There's only one way to find out. It depends on how long you hold it in for. Right? Right. But you didn't jerk off for like four months. And then you had like the mother load? Still not mean. You need something to go one way so you go the other way. Yeah. And Lex had an answer, but I don't know. What's the answer? Well, we had a thought. I guess. What if you blow out at the same time? Yeah. Yeah. I think in space, like the bio dynamics of the liquids is different. Oh, yeah. I think there's, it's actually difficult to have sex in space and to get people pregnant in space. That's what I've ever gotten pregnant on in the space station? Are they allowed to even have sex? No. Nobody has officially had sex in space. Officially. Officially. But unofficially, of course, people have tried. I wonder if they have. I mean, how monitored are they? There is a Wikipedia page about sex in space. And it's actually pretty detailed. But it's Wikipedia. So you know it's half bullshit. There's citations. I encourage people to look into it, read in detail. I mean, it's a serious problem. If you want to, you know, colonize space, you probably want to have a lot of sex and get pregnant and have kids. And well, don't you think they'll develop some sort of gravity generating machines? Yeah. Absolutely. You have to, like Jeff Bezos talks about this a lot. Like how you create artificial gravity in space. Because for, for Jeff Bezos, the likely way to colonize spaces to have space stations, Elon is more focused on colonizing planets. Mars. Yeah. So both, both are obviously going to be necessary. And you got need to have gravity in order to get laid. Brother, first people that make that trip. Ooh. Yeah, Jamie was saying he wants to go. No. That's a little bit of a bar than I mean, I'm a bad trip. But yeah, I'll trip. You go eventually? No, why not? Oh, dude, why? What have you dialed there? OK. We're going to die. Everybody dies. We don't want to die that way, dude. If you get to decide one way to die, that's not one of the worst thoughts. The worst way. You're going to die in space running out of air. You don't know how it's going to happen. What do you want? Reentry. You could get, yeah, you could just cook instantly. Could be on the way up. You get hit by a micro meteorite. Could be while you're asleep up there. Could be. Imagine standing on Mars looking back at Earth. Going, what the fuck did I do? Why did I do this? Yeah, and then having kids on Mars and they're teaching kids. We came from there. You think home schooling's bad? How about space schooling? Just imagine the crazy shit that happens on Mars. I mean, it's going to be 100,000 people. Yeah. And so you're going to get one psycho who's going to run everything. And they're going to take over. Yeah. Probably some cult leader convinces everybody to do it his way. It's going to be a sex cult, 100%. 100% more back to sex and space. Right. They're going to say, like, listen, if Elon is their man, Elon wants to procreate every chance he can. How many kids does he have now? Allegedly. Double digits. No, we don't even know how many. Well, because they think he's got secret kids. They think it looks the day. They'll keep people to run the world. Is there a Wikipedia page on this? They probably is. It's probably got secret kids. Secret kids. When you have, like, what does he have, like, 300 plus billion dollars gone? You can even have a few ladies here or then all over the place. Yeah, having kids. There's a lot of ladies who just want to have kids. They don't want to guy around. Yeah. There's a special thing to get a little older. There's a castle in the south of France with a, like, a harem, just a white kid. Wait, Kiphorm. Yeah. Yeah. Just waiting for daddy to lead you to the land is rocket. I wanted to fish this as at least 12. At least 12 kids. You know what he even knows. Imagine no one knows how many kids you have. That's kind of crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's the situation. Jengus Khan was in. Yeah. Wow. He was doing it a little differently. He was a little bit more forceful. Actually, I mean, there's a lot of different perspectives on that. I got you, what's the book on Jengus Khan? So first of all, there's obviously the Dan Carlin Wrath of the Cons. And in that series of podcasts, he criticizes the book, Jack Weatherford. Jengus Khan and the Makin' Al-Mata World. That's kind of the Mongols and the Makin' Al-Mata World. Yeah. So that's the, and now there it is. Nice. That is one of the things that Dan Carlin talks about, that when enough time has passed, that they sort of look at these marauders and murderers in a different light and saying, oh, he opened up trade to the east. Sure. Also, killed 10% of the population of earth. Let people on fire and launched them on catapults onto thatched roofs. Well, I think, I think actually Dan Khan makes a really good point. How long do you wait until, you know, that you could tell these kinds of stories about Hitler? I think that's the example of this. Yes, that's the uses. But you know, you want to be historically accurate here. And Jengus Khan, there's a lot of different perspectives, including opening up trade, and including what was the protocol based on what she was doing the murdering. So it was very clear, before the invasion, he always said you can surrender, and then we would not murder anybody. You just have to follow the law. And the law was very, very sort of clear. And it's, it's basically enforcing a law of the land, you know, free trade, free practice of religion. And you have to pay taxes instead of to your king. You have to pay taxes to the Mongol empire. Would they really say we won't kill anyone? Yes, 100%. That's, that's, they followed that. And this is very well documented. Really? Yes. So everybody can just lay down and 10% of the world's population wouldn't be dead. Yes. Really? So the nuance there is that sometimes they killed the upper classes. Mm-hmm. Well, you know, didn't they kill the royals by like crushing them to death? They'd have lunch over them? They were, listen, this is a different time, but they were brutal. If they, if they, because they want to, they use fear as part of the military tactics, right? Yeah. They want people to be terrified. And they want people to talk about how terrified the Mongol empire is. So that they forfeit more easily. Yeah. You know, that there's, there's a lot of aspects of it, not to say that jang is kind of the feminist, but there's a lot of progressive aspects. Like he put a lot of women in positions of power. He gave a lot of rights to, to women. This is a very strange perspective. Yeah, he did a lot of raping. Nope. There's not his kids. It's, I mean, it's, what do you mean? Nope. When he would conquer these places, he would take women. And he would be terrible. And he would be terrible. And he would be terrible. He wasn't their call. So that's kind of rapey. That's very rapey. Yeah. So, but there's a, if you just, we could take them and make them have your kids. There's the kind of mass rape that the Soviet soldiers did at the end of World War II when they're marching towards Berlin, which is extremely violent, vicious and sort of that kind of rape, which is part of the terror of war. And then there's like creating a harem of women. Right. So it's a different, I think the main point is that, you know, this is something you talk about that, you know, a large percent of the population as that one studied from like 20 years ago, found our descendants of Jengus Khan. Huge. Yeah. I think the way to do that is to, is to make everybody who's your descendant popular within the culture. Like you can't, you can't have that many, be, have your DNA propagate throughout civilization by raping. You have to have everybody who, like to have a hike status for people that are associated with Jengus Khan. You can't have that kind of thing with fear. You can only do it with respect and high status. And he for several generations created an empire that was flourishing. Okay. You're kind of whitewashing that. No. Well, I mean, they killed a million people in China and turned their bones to a stack of pile that they recognized as snow covered mountains from the distance. That's what they thought it was until they got up on it. When the Shah of Charisma came there to check it out, he's like, where is everybody? They had abandoned the roads because there were so many dead bodies that the roads had deteriorated into muck. Yeah, let me actually sort of backtrack a little bit here because I'm uncomfortable because I'm deeply involved in the military affairs of modern day. And so there's a kind of, I was just kind of having fun. Yes, there was mass murder that was happening. It was vicious. And I'm not a scholar, Jengus Khan. I was simply saying that it's interesting how history looks at these different empires. For example, we venerate the Roman Empire, not we, but ancient Greece. And they were equally, if not more brutal in their conquest and their destruction. And so there's never really been a time where there was a leading superpower that wasn't brutal. It's, I think, become less and less brutal over time than people document this. So war the number of people, as per the population killed is less and less. But what about laws? Ukraine and Russia, like how many people who died all told between the two? It's got to be close to a million. It's over a million casualties, which includes death and injuries. And the estimates vary, but I think a good estimate is over 400,000 total, maybe over 5,000 on both sides. And the dead on the Ukraine side is probably one third or one fourth of the total dead. Really? So my headquarters on the Russian side. On the Russian side. Really? I should be that too. I think there's military scholars that understand this really well. I think in general, the invading force loses more people than the defending force. That's one aspect. Of course, the Ukrainian military will say it's about the effectiveness of the Ukrainian military. Mm-hmm. And also one of the other things they say is that the medical capabilities, so the medics are really strong on the Ukrainian side, which is also tragic because you're able to save lives, but you have the injuries, the pain of war, you know, that the veterans have to go through. So they're able to save lives more effectively also. Right. But there is a big characteristic of the invading force usually loses more people. What was it like going over there and interviewing Zelensky? So I should say I went to Ukraine twice after February 24th, 2022 in Beijing. And maybe it's good for me to also say where I come from because it's surreal to be there for me. Sure. Both my parents are from Ukraine, from Kiev and Harkov. These are towns in Ukraine and cities in Ukraine. I've been there many times. I myself was born in Tajikistan, speaking of Jengus Khan. And I lived there in Tajikistan, and by the way, I'm procraining. Fending Jengus Khan in this conversation for fun. You didn't really defend. Yeah. I want to be sort of say that over and over again. War is how. And it's I'm almost attention between how much Roman Empire sees there. And these folks are venerated. And Jengus Khan has seen as this barbarian that was just destroying and raping and so on. They're all horrible, vicious, warmongers. All of them. Yeah. Anyway, Tajikistan, and I live for time in Kiev and another for time in Moscow. I have family in Ukraine, I have family in Russia. And so, and I should say in World War II, a lot of my family was slaughtered in Baba Yar, which is a ravine in Kiev, where they gather people around the Nazis, and they just put them in this ravine and just shot them and then put another layer of humans told them to get naked and face down, lay face down and slaughter and slaughter like this. It's mass mass, mass, mass, gray is mass slaughter. And my grandfather fought the Nazis. He's a machine gunner, which is one of the few that survives, which is the reason I'm here, that they basically tried to hold off the Nazi armada. And that this, this is a real aspect of all. This is the same land. I just still remember the song, the Vaztaro Vegena, the role of the United States, the Iraqi of Bambir and Nama, the Bivir National, and the Shilah Sway Nah. It's 22nd of June. The bombing at 4 a.m., the bombing of Kiev began. So this is in 1941, June 22nd. Just imagine speaking of Jengus Khan, complete surprise, just the Nazi armada, just like just coming, Operation Barbara Rosa, this massive military force invading your land. It's Kiev, and the greatest, the biggest battles of all time were in this land. The battle of Kiev, the battle of Stalingrad, the battle of Moscow, we're talking about hundreds of thousands of millions of people just slaughtering each other. And the way Hitler, of course, approached the battle, and so the Stalin is nobody cylinders. There's no, it's all in slaughter. It doesn't matter if it's winter, it doesn't matter. There's no guns, it doesn't matter. It's just victory or death on both sides. And so it's just brutal war. And so this is the land, right? And I have, for a lot of people in this land, this history is part of them. It's part of their blood. They remember these struggles. They remember this political, this geopolitical, this military, this social, this is real. This is like, imagine, it's because recent, imagine the United States living, maybe a few decades after the Civil War. You remember, you remember that the, you know, you have relatives that died, you have, you remember the real hatred, the real tensions, the real battle, so on. Yeah, it was surreal to be back there, and to try to do what I was doing, which is to push for peace. Since there's probably a lot to say about this war, I should say that I interviewed Vladimir Zelensky, and I will be traveling to Russia to interview Vladimir Putin. And I'm aware of the risks, except the risks, and the goal of the mission is to just push for peace, to do my small part in pushing for peace. And that's what I was trying to do in this conversation, and it required it just a huge amount of preparation for people who don't know, maybe I'll lay out where there was opportunities for peace. So since the beginning of the war, February 24, 2022, I think there was three moments to make peace. From the perspective of Ukraine, you want to make peace from strength. So when you're in a position of strength, the first time to make peace was March and April of 2022 when the Ukrainian forces were able to successfully defend the north, defend Kiev. There's this huge optimism, this belief that we push back this gigantic Russian military. That's a place for leverage, and the confidence both of the US funding, the European militaries, and the Ukrainian military that we can win this. This is when you make peace, when there is a perception and a reality of strength. The second time was in the fall of 2022, when there was a successful counteroffensive of the Ukrainian forces that recaptured Harkiv and Horsan. This is the south and the east of Ukraine. And there was this real sense that Ukrainian forces can defeat the Russian forces. Huge optimism. A lot of pressure from the US to make peace then. This is the strength and perhaps the weakness of Vladimir Zelensky, who I do think is a historic figure and a great leader, is that he, one deeply emotionally feels the suffering of the people. And the loss that work creates. And he single handedly has to unite the nation and carry the will of a people. And the morale of a people has to lift the morale of a people. And that kind of man struggles to make peace because he wants justice, not peace. And so from a position of strength there, he wants to go further, recapture all of the land that he sees belongs to Ukraine. But that's exactly when you make peace. And so his very strength, man, the state and Kiev that said, fuck you, we're not going to, we're going to win this. That kind of man that lifted a whole nation, the United Whole Nation, that man is also struggled to make peace. And so the third time to make peace, after all of that, the Russian military regrouped and has been capturing land gradually. And so the third time to make peace is now. The Trump administration, there's a momentum. They want to make peace. He's a great deal maker. He wants to end wars in all parts of the world. We've made the deal in Gaza now. Made the deal in Gaza. And that's a super complicated situation too because they made a ceasefire deal with the hostages. But isn't it amazing that the Biden administration, at two years, couldn't get anything done. And Trump gets it done at a day. He was saying that he was going to be able to do that. And everybody dismissed it. Yeah. And I think there's a political battle now taking credit for who made the ceasefire, which I think is silly. It's... Of course you're going to have that. Yeah. And that's the president. He's still the president for another few days. The point is, with Donald Trump, there's a real will and a momentum to make peace. There's a respect. There's a fear. There's, you know, whatever you think about Donald Trump, he is this person that world leaders respect in the full meaning of the word respect. Not like admire, but fear. I think both Zelensky and Putin fear Donald Trump. And that's a great person to then make peace because he has delivered all of them believe Putin and Zelensky that Trump can do some crazy shit. And he probably would, but he doesn't want to. Right. There's a long difference. But that's a very unique position that he's in. Were there afraid of him, but yet he wants peace. Exactly. Yeah. And this is the time. And if you don't make peace now, what's going to happen is the funding from US. And the support from US is going to dwindle gradually. And Putin is willing and able to just wait and to let the war continue for months and for years. And meanwhile, people are dying every single day. Thousands of people. And what's horrible about this war, too, is there's GoPro footage. Yeah. There's a lot of cell phone footage. There's a lot of GoPro footage. I've watched too much of it, unfortunately. But it's rough, man. It's a horrible war. And it's a war that's so confusing over here, especially to the uninitiated, for the people that are just like kind of reading the newspaper and getting a sort of a cursory understanding of what happened, Russia invaded. Why? You know, what they do. And then you got to get into the whole US back coup in 2014. And then you have to think about NATO and the agreement that was made, the fall of when the wall came down in Berlin, the agreement that NATO would not push forth and move closer to Russia, which they violated, over and over and over again. The whole thing is so complicated that it takes forever just to sort of get an understanding of the pieces that are involved. Forget about who's responsible for what, just like how many different things are happening, you know, simultaneously that are forcing Putin's hand, now Zelensky's hand and just to be on this side of the world, watching it take place, it's almost unbelievable. It's so hard to believe that Russia and Ukraine, which were both a part of the Soviet Union, just not that long ago, while during my lifetime, now it's another war. I should say that I believe, so how do you handle situations like this? I believe US actually gave not enough money to Ukraine. They should have given more money hit really hard and then make peace. This is the point. A month or two after the start of the war, you can learn the same kind of lesson with Iraq and Afghanistan. There's no reason those invasions, those military options. There's no other way than just give money. Give money and hit hard. There's no other way. What about what? What about avoiding? Yeah, what about we just NATO back out? A lot of this is about diplomatic rhetoric. And yes, NATO was consistently talking shit to Putin. And that's not, like a lot of this is about diplomacy. Right. And you can't just pressure with words. For some people, it seems almost silly that you need to show respect to world leaders. But there needs to be shown real respect. Putin has laid out the interest of the Russian Federation. He said he's been very clear about what the interests are. They want their security to be respected. They want their nation to be respected. He's very clear. And simply at the negotiation table, he just needs to be respected. Like his perspective needs to be understood and heard. You can't just say, Putin is evil. Bad guy, authoritarian, hates freedom. We need to destroy him. This kind of, this whole vibe and energy, you come with this idealistic sense that you bring to the table. You have to respect leaders. You have to respect Xi Jinping. You have to respect Putin when you're at the negotiation table. Not when you're on Twitter and X or talking shit or historians or activists find. You can criticize as much as you want, as vicious you want. You can mock, artists can mock as much as they want. Comedians doesn't matter. When you're a world leader and you come to the table, you have to show respect. You have to treat other world leaders as funny as it's to say, the way you want to be treated. With respect. It's not funny at all. Yeah, it makes sense. And if you want to get things done, if you want to get things done. And more importantly, if you want in this ward for the death to end, one of the things I kept pushing in an almost childlike way was Zelensky is getting him to open himself up for peace. Because he kept shutting it down. He kept mocking Putin. He kept criticizing Putin, which is OK to criticize and say that there's war crimes that there's real vicious violence and destruction is happening. But along that, there has to be a door open of respect. I'm willing to come to the table to negotiate and respect the other nations' interests. As opposed to saying, I'm only going to talk to the United States. You have to be open to negotiate. Because unfortunately, this is the mother fucker of peace. You have to compromise. You have to sit across the table as a world leader with a person you might fucking hate. Because unlike Putin, I should say, Zelensky goes to the front. He talks to the soldiers. He sees the dead bodies. He talks to the civilians, the mothers that lost their children, the wives that lost their husband. This person who is an empath who is an emotional being, he's wearing all that in his mind. There's a real pain there. Like he's tormented by this. If you're a leader, you have to put all that aside. And you have to sit and save your nation by compromising. That's it. And that's the hard thing of it, especially now there's an opportunity where the Trump figure rolls in who wants to make peace. You have to use this opportunity. Yeah. And it's tough. It's very, very tough. Yeah. You're putting it mildly. Very tough. What do you think Trump can do now when he gets an on what could possibly, if Zelensky wants victory, they want revenge? What can Trump do to sort of bring peace to the table? I think some of these notions sound naive, but literally meet, which they haven't been meeting. So meet with Putin, meet with Zelensky. They haven't been meeting at all? No. Post-Zolensky comes down. What they've been meeting with Zelensky, but there is no meeting with Putin. I think the right thing to do is to go to whether it's Switzerland or Turk Istanbul or Minsk. The biggest thing for me would be literally the three of them set together. I think I trust in Trump's negotiation ability. And the care and the stick of the United States military in the United States economy for being able to control oil prices, being able to control trade with tariffs, being able to threaten military force and funding and so on, plus sanctions, all of this. You can roll in with that carrot and stick implied or implicit or explicit and just sit at the table and talk like human beings and show each other respect. That is one of the things that actually COVID did. There's something that happens where remote communication just does not hit. The silly thing about this podcast being in person. There's a real power there. Everything else is fucking with the condom. I think that's it. You have to show up. It's part of the reason. He's jerking off for the condom on. Jerking off with the condom on. It's not even fucking with the condom on for the metaphor. Yeah. It's part of the reason I wanted to talk to President Zelensky in Russian, which I speak fluently. And he speaks fluently. It's his primary language. For people who seem to misunderstand this on the internet, he spoke Russian his whole life. That's his main language. He speaks with his wife, with his whole staff, with all of this. This is a language. For people who seem to misunderstand this on the internet, he spoke Russian his whole life That's his main language. He speaks with his wife with his whole staff with all of this. This is language It's just that now the Ukrainian language has become a simple of independence. So they're fighting for their independence for their sovereignty I understand it, but you know So he spoke with your Ukrainian he kept going back and forth But yeah, most of the powerful things were said in Ukrainian. So I'm listening to an interpreter There was shitty headset the interpreter does not forgive me Did the interpreter was not very good. He's delayed. There's noise God, but wouldn't you make more sense if he spoke to you in a language that you understand? Yeah, this would really try but this is a man once again. Yeah, he's a He's the leader of a nation in a time of war and he's not Stylistically who he is like he's all in This is like a brave heart type character Playoffs we're talking about playoffs. You bet we are get in on the action with draft king sports book an official sports betting partner of the NFL scoring touchdowns is key to winning the playoffs and you Can score big by betting on them at draft kings the number one place to bet touchdowns Ready to place your bet try betting on something simple like a player to score six go to draft king sports book app and make your pick New Draft King customers can bet five bucks to get two hundred dollars in bonus bets instantly Download the Draft King sports book app and use the code Rogan That's code Rogan for new customers to get two hundred dollars in bonus bets instantly when you bet just five bucks Only on Draft King sports book the crown is yours gambling problem called one eight hundred gambler in New York called eight seven seven eight open Y or text hope in Y four six seven three six nine In Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling called eight eight seven eight nine seven seven seven or visit ccpg.org Please play responsibly on behalf of Budhill Casino and resorting Kansas 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance four additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio Which is so crazy because you start as careers of comedian right? right I mean this You never know You never know who the who the leaders are that step up I think You know a lot of people sort of say that it's trivial that he stayed in key of when the Russian military invaded to me It's not trivial trivial at all I think that's a truly heroic To stay when you know when nobody knows what's going to happen and all the experts are saying key of is going to be taken To stay as a leader in that same place where you were the night before like working and Not flee when everybody the aa everybody's telling you to flee to stay there like a bad motherfucker It actually go outside and film yourself speaking to the nation That we're going to win this we're going to hold strong That's a that's an insane thing to do and maybe it does require like it's a Trump level insanity, right? It's similar to me to the Trump standing up when there's still bullets flying and saying fight fight fight fight right? That's a Where's that come from? I don't know but most people don't have that right? It's nice when it was refreshing It was refreshing when you see that they holy fuck yes We want that guy. Yeah, and he really united in nation here that the nation was fraction He was actually not popular at all up to that war Because the policies he was trying were not working What policies specifically so he's So the stuff that was working. I don't know the internals of the Ukrainian politics that well, but so key one in 2019 Based on his desire to fight corruption and to modernize Yeah, Ukrainian digital system which he did very successfully. It's actually super interesting you can They have a app called Dia which your passport all your identifications all Appified which I don't understand why they you United States doesn't have that you can like update your license you can get your license like instantly so it's like the 21st century version of what government should work Like the reason they did that is it's a way to fight corruption. It's a way like you Whenever you have paperwork There's a place for corruption to see been so he was very serious about fighting corruption And that's the other thing is there is corruption in Ukraine There's not as much as people perceive It's but it's a serious problem especially less now than before What I see I I want to be careful here because I don't think it's very difficult to know the perception There's a serious concern about corruption in a time of war. There's always going to be more corruption United States spent nine trillion dollars On the war in Afghanistan and Iraq and the Middle East after 9-11 on that part of the world is spent nine trillion dollars in its growing Using all that money you've had a lot of guests on this Program talking about how that money was used. There's a lot of shady shit that happened. Oh, yeah war breeds corruption This is one of the reasons you should be concerned about the military industrial complex is because that money is just not used well but That's all that's a discussion the reality of corruption in Ukraine is it should be dealt with after you make peace all the problems the Elections were suspended to the ideas of democracy. There is censorship in Ukraine now all of those ideas Cannot be all of those things cannot be fixed Until the war is ended the reason there is censorship now in Ukraine is because it's it's a It's a war but you can't The ideas of democracy in part have to be suspended during a war to effectively fight that war This is this is a whole idea of martial law the United States has this You don't you don't fuck around you have to win the war when your land is invaded you have to Everybody has to be focused on this the problem is it's a slippery slope when all the media channels are being controlled and The the president and everybody is so invested in quote-unquote winning the war Then where are the critical voices that say we need peace? Right there they're coming from the outside, but you need that The thing is it's it's a really complicated tension right you don't During the war with martial law. You do want to suspend elections Potentially it's it's a really difficult trade-off the United States has the same thing if we were to be invaded I don't know by who this is not you know if Canada evaded I don't want to make a joke out of this, but there's going to be a more yeah Exactly, but like there there would be a martial law Where elections would be delayed or suspended and so on so all those criticisms all those concerns Can only be dealt with once you make peace Yeah, and in terms of core in terms of corruption just my There's a lot of people that knows the last key well and this has been my impression Having met him There I don't think he and I have not heard anybody that knows him well say that he's personally corrupt This is really important like he himself is not personally corrupt and he's a he legitimately is fighting corruption Now he's in a system that has corruption Russia has corruption is really difficult to weed out corruption But he legitimately at least to me that's really important that he is a single human being and the people really close around him Like really close that's her corruption start to seep in of course when you go further out, but in in that direct human being That he is not personally corrupt. He Like financially speaking he singularly believes in the idea Of Ukraine is as a sovereign nation and he's willing to die for that idea That is his strength and that is also his weakness When it's time to make peace When you are Preparing to do something like this and you are You know, you're doing your research You're getting ready to go do it. What do you what are your concerns other than your own physical safety? Of course But like what what is your Like ultimately what's your concerns? What are your goals when you're setting out do this because this is very different than any other kind of podcast interview it's um There's no other Format really where a world leader in the middle of a Huge international conflict is gonna sit down for three hours and Talk to an American scientist Which is weird too, right? It's like why you doing it? You know what I mean? Like what this guy who works in AI just decides he's gonna start a podcast a podcast for It comes very successful and all of a sudden he's like I'd like to talk to everybody I'd like to go over and talk to Zelensky and talk to Putin and everyone's like why you what the fuck are you doing? So you get a lot of that and then unfortunately if you you read the comments So you get sucked into all that negativity Yeah, I mean there's a lot to say there first of all on the comments side. I always have a little Joe Rogan my show listening don't read the comments don't read the comments and In this situation it's especially intense Yeah, I should say like privately after I did the conversation with Zelensky every single person that knows the situation Well knows me personally Has written to me and it's all been really positive like really positive almost like In the desert wanting water positive because there's a lot of voices that are afraid to speak that want peace sure But online this is something we talked about line a little bit there there's just like these like swarms of People that are like not even necessarily people. That's I I don't want to sort of go too far in that territory Assuming that anybody who criticized me is a bot. No, but there is a saying that But there's a there's an enormous element of that that's real whether it's bots or whether it's hired people paid propagandist The the conversation is not a pure conversation between people Expressing their ideas. There's a lot of propaganda online and it's very confusing To try to discern what the percentage is You know, we've talked about this a bunch of times in the podcast, but there was a former FBI analyst who estimated that it's On Twitter alone. This is before the purchase. He believed it was around 80% So 80% fake accounts 80% Not just propaganda like government propaganda But most certainly corporations are hiring people to do similar things. I'm sure There's companies that will do that for public figures actors You know people that are involved in conflict. Now. This is part of the Blake lively dispute is that She's accusing that Justin Baldoni actor of an organized attack on her Which is probably what it feels like Anyway, when you're involved in something on social media like oh my god. This is organized. We're there attacking you, but It's a it's a very confusing landscape Ideally what we would want with social media is Different people informed and non-uninformed But at least expressing their ideas on things and exchanging information back and forth and talking It's not the whole story though. There's a lot of other players involved That are not real. There's a there's ai for sure There's definitely large language models that are involved in this back and forth with You know automation and you know, they look out for certain code words and these these accounts attack certain ideas So it's hard to know like what the actual will of the people is yeah, I mean It's definitely true and I've seen a lot of evidence that there's Ukrainian bot farms in Russian bought have you spoke to Elon about this? About bot farms. Yeah, because like he knows a lot more now of course, right because there was the big concern when he was buying Twitter They were trying to say that it was 5% it was only 5% bots and they were doing that on an extremely low sample size They were doing enough of 100 people so they got 100 people and now those 100 people five of them They determined were bots and so they went with 5% which is just ridiculous You know you dealing with how many people are on Twitter every day like what's the total Twitter audience? It's not it's biggest Facebook right Facebook is 3.2 billion worldwide which is unbelievable I think X has a Small number but very influential very active. Yeah very active influential 245 daily active What is the total amount of accounts on it though? Because you know there's daily active and then there's just people that just read them there's a lot of people that just read 541.56 million monthly active users so again, that's active users so Total users With the total users See it's all active. I want to know accounts That's the only I don't They delete counts all the time right Yeah, they definitely do so they must have some sort of a system where they weed out bots and You know, there's a lot of concern right now on Twitter about censorship. You know this is I'm I try to stay out of Twitter as much as I can honestly because I think it's bad for your mental health. I really do I think People just Barking at each other all day is not good to absorb. I want to absorb real people that I interact with I want to I mean, I try to pay attention to the news. I try to Pay attention to whatever controversial ideas are out there and try to see what I think but I don't think it's good to dive in to social media all day. I think it's uniquely bad And I think so many people are involved in it and they don't realize that they're they're poisoning their brain Just like they have poison their body if they're eating junk food all day I think it's Genuinely bad for you. Yeah, I mean and you and I And also in a particular you know doing a podcast and we're also very different human beings. I would say your psychological fortitude is is Pretty strong like and I'm more I wear my heart on my sleeve maybe a little bit more and when if I Like mmm-hmm and And you know when you try to put compassion out there in the world in the way Anyway, I did especially with this conversation with Zelensky the attacks like you just have to recognize who the kind of people that are doing that are yeah You know, those are just really weak people really weak Psychologically damaged mentally ill people that are probably medicated. I Sort of to push back. I think some of them are actually Good sophisticated people. They're just acting not their best selves like I've seen this There's people there like I know them personally and online they just like the worst shit comes out of them. Yeah Because they're mentally ill And they're all of us are a bit mentally ill. Yeah, but we're all a little mentally ill Like no one is enlightened that I've met. I've never met one person is perfect Right. I don't think it's possible with this journey that we're on as these meat vehicles these soul-carrying meat Vehicles Navigating of very confusing world. I don't think it's possible to be perfect But you can have a desire to be a good person and some people don't have that and the excuse that they always use is I mean this is the Donald Trump excuse you do anything you can to stop Hitler You know right and this is this is why they want to conflate and they always want to Pretend that everyone's Hitler the problem with that is it just after a while It's crying wolf and people like oh this is a bullshit game You're playing and you're just using it as an excuse. He even talked about this a lot about And he's absolutely correct is that people use woke ideology as an excuse to be an asshole and It's really just people that are assholes that are attaching themselves to things that make them feel righteous and so they wrap themselves in this idea to to give them virtue and to allow them to say the most awful things About other people that have different perspectives and then just by nature if you're doing that You're doing the wrong thing. You're a bad person You can justify it all you want you can find people that agree with you all you want But those people are also are on the right track of the wrong track rather the people that are listening to you and agreeing with you They're on the wrong track. They're the wrong track if we want to be collectively a kind Compassionate cohesive society a community of human beings that all live together That's totally possible if you can do it in small groups of people You can do it in enormous groups of people. It just has to be an ethic that gets promoted It has to be something that you you see people that you admire adhere to And in you do it as well whenever someone Goes outside of that and whenever someone starts making horrific unfounded personal attacks because someone has a different political ideology or You know just going after them every day all day long like you're just broken You're just you're on the wrong path period and Intelligent aware people that have control of their emotions recognize that and they're not going to take your perspective seriously So you're going to be less and less effective with what you do And in general the failure mode is to paint the world To draw a line between good and evil. Yeah, whether it's the line in geography Russians Putin is evil or if it's Trump Trump is evil Right the version of that is Hitler. Is there a big proponent of Solzhenitsyn's famous the author of a Gulag archipelago that the line between good and evil runs through the heart of every man That all of us have that in us and yeah to be It is good to be humbled by that reality and if you are humbled by that reality then you're not going to See any other people as purely evil or purely good all of that that kind of thing is used to just to just To hate others. Yeah Yeah, and even when it's unfounded You know even like I'm watching the Pete Hexeth the the confirmation hearings and They these ignorant people are going after us tattoo Not even knowing what the tattoo is and trying to pretend that it's some sort of radical hateful tattoo when it's just an ancient Christian tattoo It's so strange. I mean that tattoos and churches That that symbols and churches that symbols that symbols that symbols been around for a long fucking time it's just a Christian tattoo and I was watching the Pierce Morgan show and Pierce Morgan had Michael Knowles and these two Super whack and Dave Rubin and two super whacky leftist people that didn't know what the tattoo was and they were criticizing and Pierce Morgan came out what is the tattoo? What is it tell me what it and they would you the guy would go like go on you're not answering the question go back to it What is it? Well, let's look it up. He's like no, no, no, don't look it up I want you to tell me if you're saying it's offensive and so then the woman chimes in and Michael Knowles just clowns her just absolutely knows the history of the tattoo including like you know She's talking about it Before it existed before Islam You know and she's criticizing what it is and he's like do you understand that Islam didn't exist when this tattoo then this symbol? Existed like it's not an anti-Muslim symbol because there was no Muslims when this symbol was created like this is bonkers and They are all in digging their heels in Pretending it just trying to win this conversation just trying to win and Pierce Morgan's doing that He's like the Jerry Springer of political ideology now. He just has people get on the show and yell at each other It's very entertaining and he gets great sound bites out of it It's kind of genius in terms of like an engagement perspective If you looked at your show, it's just like how do I get more engagement? Well, that's how you do it He gets some wacky left. It's gonna say nutty things He gets some right-wing persons gonna say nutty things and you get them all together yelling at each other I wish he did less of that. I should say that Pierce Morgan. I think is a great interviewer like he's legit a great interviewer But he also has he could put on his Jerry Springer hat on to making money Listen, I mean, he does I mean he does both he does do long-form street interviews So that's he's found his lane. All right. His lane is Jerry Springer But he's doing a good job exposing these people. It's very valuable Like that conversation was very valuable for me because like this is adorable Watching this guy like flounder around trying to come up with a reason why this tattoo so offensive yet But see What I don't like about that is that guys foundering But there could be actually fastest to that person outside of this ridiculous. This is that that's interesting Right, so you got to cleanse that from your mind say do if you want to if you want to be the guy who's on television talking About important issues and you've got this stupid thing in your head where you're arguing about a tattoo that you don't even understand Yeah, you got to cleanse that stupidity out of your fucking mind Sometimes the best way to do that is to get clowned on television. Sure. So you got exposed She got exposed they both look like morons and then Michael Nola's who Did a fantastic job of like smiling Never raising his voice Calmly explaining it. Have you seen it? No, I haven't seen it. See me. You find it. Janet. It's pretty wonderful. Michael Nola's is a pro He's a pro the way handled it was remarkable. Yeah, I know people criticize that guy, but Fucking people criticize everybody. I'm just saying in this moment. Don't read the comments. You know, you don't read the comments. Yeah Um Yeah, even though about other people right Well, this is the thing I think you said that you sometimes read comments from friends of yours Yeah, I don't even like doing that. I try not to do that too This is the thing that bothers me about comments is I don't read them But like I don't know my mom will read them and she'll she'll text me something like don't listen to what people say Yeah, my mom will send me things. Is this true my mom Come on. This is the yeah, this is Yeah This is wonderful watch this the two people on the far right of the screen the lady in the big jacket and the dude with the beard They're fucked. They got cooked You could accuse Pete of is being too alert and energetic. I found it overwhelming actually while I was there Tired trying to dust the sand out of my eyes But you you suggest that the graduate of Princeton and Harvard who for decades has been in the US military served as country Honorable that he's somehow unqualified to work at the Pentagon The most egregious Accusation you make against him though is that he's an extremist because he has a tattoo could you tell us what the tattoo is? The tattoos specifically I don't know make the the allegation that he's an extremist it was actually you repeated The alcohol what's the ten visit insider threat? Right so what does it mean? This is fella I Simple question what is this tattoo that you're so upset about? I wasn't the one upset about it. I was talking about his fellow colleague. This exact question his fellow Call me what it was in the US army call them out as a potential insider threat What is the tattoo What is it also I call them an extremist based upon his own book read what takes the two words? He doesn't know what the tattoo is just a mitty oh my lord Is it What do you do? Let the lady talk When the lady talks to see the more brutal Genuinely A woman hasn't spoken yet let her speak a woman hasn't spoken yet I did hear a man sir, but they were all talking over each other He would I say the words yet. They weren't talking about the cross they're talking about a different tattoo Yeah, well, she is talking about that as well. She's did but it'll go on to that What that tattoo is on Listen what I do know This is No, go further see if you can find where the woman speaking because it gets even more brutal Because she's incorrect and Michael Knowles correct her and when he corrects her it's fucking great It's a good way to expose see if you can find the other one Jamie very narrow In here I go click up where miss the whole show sour long show We're all talking it quick right there. I'll know where it is Michael to question the tattoo is called a Jerusalem cross That this is a medieval Christian symbol goes back a long time in fact to Jimmy Carter's funeral There was a Jerusalem cross on the floor of the cathedral and on the program for the funeral There's one other tattoo that some have suggested could be extremist It's the phrase deus vault which is a medieval Christian slogan a long traditional slogan that refers to God's will and it goes back a long way. These are very traditional very mainstream Christian symbols That not only are not extreme in any way But which even the people who want to accuse him of extremism couldn't possibly name that is pathetic All right Guardsman did it which is what I said and also I said that he called himself to extreme for the US military in his book That's pathetic Okay, so you're gonna are you speed hacks at line that he's too extreme in his book Let me go to the two leaves be waste to you Let me get a duty Is he like be gentlemanly, please be ever lady is not spoken? Judy, be very patient. You're viewers this I tell you what before you answer I know you said in your sub stack about this under normal circumstances He Pete Hagg's death would be precluded from serving in any leadership role So explain why you why you said that Well, let me I will explain one second Let me go back to something that was said in the very beginning that he spent more than 10 years of Fox News And that's what qualifies him to be in In this position that he wants to be and I spent more than 10 years of Fox News I don't think I'm qualified to run the DoD. What's the number? You've seen that by 10 bucks I said that was one of the thing if you if you Well, I don't think that's even a remote qualification. That's one being able to communicate I mean the secretary of defense and explain policy is actually There are plenty there are plenty of qualified Republicans out there who can run the DoD Who also are a good on television? It does not need to be Pete Hagg's death Secondly, again, you talked about NDAs I am bound by an NDA Fox News if I were not bound by an NDA and the Fox News wanted to release me from the NDA I could tell you about my time with Pete Hagg's death Unfortunately, that's not possible But I will say that the reason that there are so many people who anonymously came forward at Fox News Is that because they're also bound by confidentiality provisions which one third of all American workers need to sign and their first day of work And if they were to go public they could get sued The reason this accuser is not heard from is because according to Which one third of all American workers need to sign in their first day of work and they if they were to go public They could get sued the reason this accuser is not heard from is because according to the New Yorker She tried desperately to meet with Joni Ernst on the committee and Joni Ernst turned her down So the reason that she has not been able to come out publicly is because she has an NDA and even privately She could not meet with a senator on this committee who's also a rape survivor to share her story because that rape survivor did not want to hear from a woman Who was going to put her potentially in a position to vote against Pete Heck Seth Pete Heck Seth has written himself while at Princeton Saying that women who are passed out if you have sex with them while they're unconscious. That's not really rape Right now the murder is that true? Is there isn't tremendous I don't know it doesn't sound true, but yeah, yeah, it's hard to say but scooter head to where they just start discussing the tattoo It's it's in the same flow. It's not that far away This is definitely not a good format though. No At least that letting her talk just go have your way with not really So I don't know which soldiers you've been talking to who think Pete Heck Seth is a great thing for the military There are not what there is not one woman out there Who cares about being assaulted on deployment who thinks that this is the person? That needs to be in charge of the United States military and ask for the cross that you talked about Yes, James Bolt, which is the cross that he has and the slogan that he has It's an old question process the part the part the phrase excuse me the phrase The phrase however was uttered by crusaders as they were slaughtering Jews and Muslims During the second crusade specifically, so it's not just a random cross Random phrase it is a phrase It is not true. It is phrase. The phrase was uttered after the council of Claremont when Pope urban the second declared the crusade It was actually probably do you liveu but it's it's been rendered in Latin as day was vault Nothing to do with slaughtering Muslims because the Muslims had invaded Europe not the other way around oh My god, are you really? Are you really saying that the reason the crusade which was sent to the Holy Land to liberate the Holy Land from whom Jews and Muslims I'll tell you why the crusade the crusade being because the eastern emperor asked for help from the Western Pope because the Seljic Turks were slaughtering Christians in the Holy Land because those lands were Christian before the Muslims invaded in the 7th century, so that's why Those lands became Christian after the first crusade Okay I Can I can I can I can Islam didn't exist before the 7th century. What are you talking about? Okay, I could listen listen I can go all the way I'm talking about the crusades, but the point is People's What that has to do with what that has to do with Pete Hexet is it's not that he has a random cross That talks about his faith in Jesus Christ. He used a very specific terminology But putting all that was first utter to defend the biggest you to Christians in the Middle East just like they're being persecuted today Okay You want to talk about who you want as a Secretary of Defense wonderful Yes To two I cannot even I cannot even believe that something the Vatican apologized for is something you're defending which is the slaughter Muslims during the crusade I'll see the Vatican said the crusade Oh my Jesus, you know what why don't you why don't you give me a call after this and I will walk you through exactly All right The worst way to have conversations I mean I'm getting a headache from this fuck fuck these people fuck all fuck that whole panel I'm sorry, but like you can't talk like this each of those individual people are not sure about this second Definitely even even the woman will be a fascinating four five-hour conversation. Yes, you should probably have run Yeah, well her and my canals and it appears Morgan. Yes. Yeah, this is not the right. And I'm so exhausted this fucking bullshit I know I can't I'm like angry right now. I know I want to play more for you this only Publish the column saying sex with unconscious women isn't rape Jesus imagine not just thinking that but publishing it Yeah, I mean what did he actually say? I don't read it. We can read it Uh, well rate and quotes intercourse But musing yet mandatory orientation program revolved entirely around whether in an instance of sexual intercourse constituted rape the actual instance portrayed in the skit was in fact Oh, the skit In fact, not a clear case of rape at least not in my home state So this is hexis saying this ensure though intercourse was not consented to there was no duress because the girl drank herself Into unconsciousness both criteria must be satisfied for rape Unfortunately, the panel is never cited any legal definition of rape yet the panel all females in the session I attended claimed that rape it was Huh, what year was this? So they talking about this is what's confusing are they talk it says a skit and then it says they're talking about A legal definition of rape has the legal definition changed over the years like when when was this? Is he talking about a legal definition or is he talking about his own opinion? Right, there's a giant difference between the two of them, right? Especially if you take it something out of context. You don't know if you elaborated article for his college newspaper stating that having sex with unconscious women isn't rape because the criteria for rape isn't met So this isn't his college newspaper. So how old see is he like 50? How old's Pete Higgseth? Yeah, it's up there, right? Which is really weird to think that 44 college would have been around 2000. Oh, well. Yeah I remember in 2000 ish I remember when we were doing the podcast there was a brief moment of time where people were talking about If a man had sex with a woman and they had both been drinking That it was rape that the woman could not consent because she was drunk But the man's drunk too Right, so it gets weird. It gets like we understand like traditionally men are pursuing women and that Applying someone with alcohol is a Famous thing that people do. It's kind of a weird legal thing. Come on one more drink Have another drink have another drink and we all know that when people get drunk they do stupid shit But we don't know what happened If you're both drunk, you know, so this is What I'm getting at is that 2000 these conversations are already being had the question is like is he saying this from his personal perspective? Or is he saying it from a legal perspective? I don't know what else was in the text, you know I'm trying to be as charitable as possible because if like more was in that like that's a reprehensible act That's like did he say anything like that or was it just specifically talking about the legal definition because he said in his state right? Also says to be clear he did not write it himself. He published it. Oh That's what this is in short. I accept it not publish a public screen He did not or did publish such a column while he held the role He did not write it himself. He did not write it was written by someone else. Okay, so he just published someone's opinions Okay, that's very different. That's very very very difference. She said he said that That's not what he said at all that would see that right there. I'm just so exhausted. That's exhausting both like over the thing That's wrong with both sides That right there is crazy because I my opinion of him shifted briefly when I was look You know, I was watching Daniel Negrono, you know the great poker player was on Tim Poole's show And they were talking about his shift in political ideologies and then a lot of it came from When they were accusing Trump of saying that thing that Obama repeated Falsely during the campaign was that he was talking about White nationalist and neo-Nazis and saying this is very fine people on both sides and Negrono Heard that he had heard the clip where Trump said it where it was edited He had never seen the full thing and then once you saw the full thing he was like what the fuck And it immediately made him realize like oh my god. They're lying They're lying and then he talked about how Obama repeated this is years after Daniel had known it was false Obama repeating it at the campaign speeches and then Obama sitting right next to Trump and they're joking around with each other You pal. I know you're neo-Nazi lover. You fucking rascal. I had you win Like it's Just what that lady did on that show and then when we find out that Higgs that didn't actually write that he just published it You know any published it in college as a 20-year-old or whatever it was I think there should be also room for that lady to then change her mind and apologize A lot of us parrot a lot of us parrot including probably you and I never Yeah, how dare you parrot bullshit? We see online. Yeah, of course And they we should give each other room to like yes safe. I fucked up that people don't want to say that This is what they have to understand even people I don't like listen to me It's their strength in that It's better than digging your heels in their strength and saying I was uninformed or I was misinformed I fucked up. I've said it for it's important to do you got to do it because you can't have you can't have an erroneous Idea and you're hadn't repeated over and over again. You can't have an incorrect false opinion that you have Defended and now you can't ever accept even with new information that shows that it's not true I should also say because it's fucking sitting in my head On this topic I'm probably gonna do like a five plus hour interview with Jack Weatherford on Genghis Khan and I read his book all right, and I don't I'm not proud of the way I formulated my For the beginning of the beginning. I'm still bothered by the looseness with which I talked about rape there is And I don't think I have In me the eloquence or the skill to improve on that. I think in general It's trying to find the right words Well, here's to describe the historic the historically accurate thing the data that we have And then the narratives I think the point Jack Weatherford makes is that we keep oscillating back and forth on Genghis Khan He's one like this epic Great conquer like currently Alexander the Great has that Good vibes all around him nobody talks about him as a horrible human horrible human yeah, but currently jang's con has this kind of Barbarian Evil just the ray bass. Well, they're so good at it. They were so good at murder. They're so good at war I mean just so uniquely good at military strategy So it's it's about you always kept the army to about a hundred thousand small So it's a hundred thousand horses each soldier had five horses so four spare horses with them So imagine 500 thousand horses. They're blood to the fuel them Yeah, they they were used for food. So it's very portable. They're not bringing right logistically the whole I mean this isn't it's just imagine this our motto moving at like You can they can move like 15 miles a day This entire army and they and they don't have to follow the roads Which are the military would follow the roads? You can go around you can surround you can and they did the as you know They can retreat Fame retreat and then attack from the size. Yep. It's the blitz greek. That's the genius stuff And a lot of people including Dan Collins said it's the the greatest military in history It would defeat every single military including Napoleon With the musket that everything. Yeah, they would destroy in the point and then of course in the 20th century You know they didn't defeat? Samurai's Right, but they never really fought they did they twice they fought It's not really glad these guys are fucking crazy They thought they were crazy these guys were like practicing their whole lives for one on one combat with swords As far as I know they never really had a full on battle I wish they did there were some battles there was battles on an island one of the islands outside of Japan But the Japanese successfully held off the Mongols and they were like one of the only civilizations to ever pull that off I think one of the issues of Mongols except Kubakhan Is they were not good water? They didn't order the ship thing was not oh? What a big mistake Well, they imagine they're as good with water as they were with horses that would have real problem Well a lot of things they had advantage on like for example they can ride on ice and so how'd they do that? They it's they among all yeah, they these people like do they have different horseshoes Did they even shoot their horses back then? No, I don't think so really no no it's all that like they don't have like when did they start Chew and horses that's a good question But that doesn't feel like a mongol thing. I mean they they could you can ride The archery they know what this the mountain archery is so insane They would they had the ability to hang off the side of the horse So they would shoot from under the horses neck So they were completely defended by the horse and they were shooting arrows and their bows were 160 pounds So you had to be insane they said that a lot of the skeletons they find from that era Their bones are deformed Because your whole body has just been pulling 160 pounds with your right arm or your left arm like your whole life So your right side is like insanely Muscled and your bones are all twisted and thicker and Dancer tendons and everything because they've been doing that since there were children. They were they start our two years old yeah insanely formidable army insanely formidable but here's something to take into consideration We're saying about like how Genghis Khan's Genghis Genghis were spread But just right off the bat. It's all awful all horrible. I wish no one ever got killed by anybody ever It's all off all war is hell all of it all's hell There was so much of it going on throughout human history that women would there was a Survival mechanism and accepting This conquerors your new husband when he slaughtered your husband is the only way your genes passed on So these women were able I mean even if they said they fell in love with him You know even if they did marry him even if they were happy to marry him there was like almost an evolutionary Requirement because we slaughtered each other so much that if you wanted your genes to pass on You had to accept the slaughter of your former mate and then in modern society. We will call that rape right but it's it's it's We have to use different words for that time because there is rape where it's like a violent Rape as part of war as part of a mechanism of terror I think even as just part of society up until like a few thousand years ago or even a few hundred years ago I think human beings, you know like I've had a bunch of friends who've served overseas and the stories they tell from Afghanistan Especially with the child raping fucking Bone-curdling like you blood-curdling Just like you just want to leave the room when they're talking you don't even hear this you don't want to think that this is happening Right now Because it's an old culture It's an old culture and it's separate from the rest of the world. It's very remote very difficult to access You have warlords and herders who are living in these nomadic tribes to this day Not much different than what Alex ended the great conquered it. So I should say that J.K.S.K.M. from everything understand Was not progressive because very pragmatic. This is why he fell out all religions all religions Which is Thomas Jefferson I should say Deeply admired jengus kon for this the freedom of religion and he didn't just say freedom of religion It's freedom of an individual to practice any religion. They want which is a It's like individualism. It's a really revolutionary badass idea for that time for that place Well, he was what he recognized strength and the value of accepting strength and taking it and their strength and unity The strength and community if people can worship whatever they want, but I'll be united under one banner Is it's better than dividing everybody like in the feminist thing that I mentioned He would put women in power. Why is he a feminist? No, he understood that women are able to Men conquer better in his perspective and women rule better because they keep a stable society so he would do he would Mary a woman to the king of the place and then send the king off the fight The rule of delight knowing for sure he's going to die But the woman is not ruling and then there's a lot of like Progressive things about like there were a lot to show their face especially in the in the Persian lands where they conquered Like there are a lot to wear these fancy Had dresses and which is you know take a floss a little yeah excited about that exactly the rules and the other thing you know On the tricky thing is the Mongolian tribes where jengas Khan Came up by the way came up from nothing Father slaughtered I mean this is a yeah from nothing Though they all that was a common practice to steal wives to steal women. Yeah, and the way had one of his wives stolen and she came back pregnant That was like the origin story The origin story jengas Khan right is like his The love of his life who was married to him for his whole life that he Proposed like he said you're gonna we're gonna marry at nine years old at She was kidnapped and he had to raise an army in order to rescue her back That's the that was the the sort of the split in the road He would have been a normal Mongol But here he has to raise an army to rescue her back Wow, and then he realized he's really fucking good at this whole rescue But it started with you know What was like it? Finers that the horses were unshued enshued but they did do something that this is here They used some sort of skin to cover it Interesting allowed a dry and place in order to acquire the shape of a hoof Perfect the technique to cover the hoof which offered greater abilities their armies to move faster more efficiently than their opponents Interest issues were around for at least two or three hundred years Interesting so they probably knew about them skins that's interesting What you're saying about him developing the ability and like really really good at this Do you know that's exactly what the Somali pirates? Do you know the Somali pirates origin story no the Somali pirates called themselves the people's Coast Guard of Somalia They were they were defending their waters against Europeans dumping toxic waste in the ocean They were fishermen so they had found that these ships were dumping water and killing all their fish and say that these motherfuckers We're gonna hold them responsible So they boarded these ships kidnapped them and said hey you have to pay us We've lost all this money from all our fish We don't have any fish give us money or we're killed these motherfuckers and they gave them money and they said hey Let's start killing kidnapping people like this This is way better and then you know There's obviously there's a narcotic aspect to it because of cat because the widespread use of this narcotic cat Which is like an amphetamine that they if is it a leaf K. A. T That's like you know the guy on the boat. Look good give me I'm the captain now that guy is cracked out I mean they're all real skinny and What's really important in that dynamic is who is the leader that emerges? That's the interesting thing about jangas Khan? He became super powerful that person could have been incompetent of jangas con could have been a bunch of different people right he instilled one of the really revolutionary things is meritocracy Right by the way he appointed his kids Several people including Marcus Aurelius wrote fancy, you know meditation He he failed as an emperor by pointing his kids the Before him the five emperors all appointed based generals based on merit Right so jangas Khan always appointed based on merit who's the best person here to to lead the The groups which is a revolutionary idea for the time because it was usually based on kin like your relationship Your brothers your sister's your father so on. That was really important and the other thing I mentioned about the tribes the origin story is Everybody would kidnap and actual rape The woman there was still women in the Mongol Empire as soon as he Won over the entire original Mongolia He banned those are strict rule. There's no kidnapping of wise That was a rule from Mongolia and that rule Propagated everywhere. That's wild. It's like this is what got us into the shit. Yeah So which is one of the pieces of evidence where they're like it's like that was a lot of cracking down on the whole rape thing, but There's a caveat of like well, why is there so many dead bodies where like we're atmosphere change? Why is the carbon footprint different of the human race during the time that he was alive? But it's that it's interesting because we also have to look at things in a perspective of living in the year 1200 or what does a 1240's like what when was he around? Why should not this 12 or 13? So yeah, well, we'll jamo find out it's so you have to it's very hard to do And it's not apologized for these people I'm not like saying that we should apply the way they looked at the world today I think the way we look at the world is infinitely better and we're moving in an infinitely better direction And I think we have like large extremes that go in one direction and things push back in the other direction too far There's an over correction and then they balance out I think we're generally moving in a direction of a more kind more peaceful society. I think we're better That's it 1200 years ago the world was hell there was no newspapers no one could read okay, where did you get your information from you got your information from priests and from Generals and you know you shared information if you're farmers you The world was horrific people fought with bows and arrows and cannons and catapults and Murder was commonplace if you were 12 years old you're probably seeing a few people killed already It was a different time to be alive diseases would kill everybody there was no medicine You broke your leg your dead, you know you you get infected your dead. It was just the world was a very very different place It was so so dangerous and so fucking terrifying and people relied on their base instincts and They're the the worst aspects of humanity They were live on that to survive because that was all around you you had to become a monster if you wanted to live in monstrous times and that's why the rule of law Had to be enforced in a brutal way. Yeah, one of the really powerful things He did is protect merchants people that traded if you fuck with people that trade that that that on the Silk Road You're going to get slaughtered. It's not like there's going to be a process you get slaughtered. Yeah, in fact one of the one of the reasons I hesitate to say this because people were projected to the future, but he slaughtered he took key of and Slaughter people because they broke the rule of I forget the term for this, but the people that are sent out to communicate before the battle starts ambassadors and the ambassadors the rule is you don't fuck with them yeah, and The key even residents killed them and that's where the you break the rule It's like that's it then is total war and you have to do that I mean you don't have to do that, but that is one of the well if you're living back then you have to do that and And then you look at like But the result is complete slaughter and by the way thank you for Rescuing me for I said a bunch of stupid shit and you're adding more complexity in depth and nuance and Well, we just got started You know, I love you too. I love you to death man. You know how you when you begin a podcast You know, I don't know if you're you're like this, but for me I got to get cooking. You know sometimes I this one of the reasons why I like to talk to people I like to talk sometimes like 15 minutes even before we go on here The danger is they're gonna say something and I'm gonna ask them to repeat it. I don't want that so sometimes I'll come in hot and I'm like, let's just go right now, but you're bringing You don't know we're gonna talk about the Mongols and rape Right and so then all of a sudden you were in this very intense conversation About the responsibility you have as a podcast or which is a crazy thing to say But you do you have probably more responsibility than anybody and then this Subject comes up in the middle of that and then you will like Before that we were joking about ejaculating in space. Yeah, that's how we started it. Yeah I mean we used to open up some of the most serious conversations this podcast ever had with a flashlight ad Yeah They're early days of the podcast. That was the only sponsor we had so it's like You know This is again you reacting to criticism, right? It's like the fear of the criticism of you yourself Knowing you could have done a better job of explaining that had you prepared something Which is really the difference between off the cuff conversations and like Your your actual well considered thoughts on things expressed in the best way possible Which is what you would do if you're gonna write it out if you're gonna write a sub stack piece about it Well one of the things I'm trying to do for myself person I think a lot of people have to do this one young kids have to do this Figure out how to create like a psychological framework where I'm not affected By the internet It sounds like ridiculous to say but you say don't read the comments, but they they get they come at you like they they you'll they'll find their way And I need to you but yeah, it doesn't work. Nobody Nobody's good at it even Elon's not good. Just post and ghost Post and ghost but these things that you think are interesting and just get out of there Don't read stuff about yourself Someone said this. I think was anything Hopkins who was talking about someone's opinion of him. He said that doesn't concern me No, was it anything Hopkins? I think it was but it was like Their opinions of me are not my business But let's let's add to this little puzzle. What if a bunch of your friends Say you're getting cancer online by the way, talk across. I was good at this. He doesn't read Yeah, he doesn't even have social media. Yeah. I know I always want to send him things What if like all your friends have read the thing? Right like that you're or your parents or so on your loved ones like And the thing could be just a bunch of lies about you sure like what that's it Like for me, that's a little bit of a tricky thing Well, that's not something you should ignore right if you want to make a statement There's nothing wrong with that what I'm saying is don't regularly Regurgly engage in people's opinions of the product that you put out. Yeah, I don't think it's healthy for you because I think first of all This is you know, I've said this before I'm only kind of joking, but I'm kind of serious Most people commenting or losers Sorry if you're doing it all the time and you're doing it in a negative way all the time This is not everybody there's a lot of like really well thought out commentary on YouTube videos that I see on If I occasionally I'll read someone's Instagram page and I'll read my friends comments Some people are brilliant don't get me wrong, but it is a haven for fuckheads It's a place where people can go and just try to insult people and say the most negative thing possible and They generally I think there's generally a lot of like dull-minded people and just try to insult people and say the most negative thing possible. And they generally, I think there's generally a lot of like, dull-minded people that gravitate towards the negativity. You know, where that differs is Christians, which is interesting. Like a lot of like low-wattage Christians are still super nice. And they'll just praise Jesus and look for forgiveness. The real ones, right? Which is a great thing that we should all aspire to. Yeah, like the default state is super nice. Yes, the fault state, what you're supposed to do if you really follow Jesus' teaching is like be completely nonviolent and be a beautiful person and love everybody like it's your brother. That's what he wants. That's like, you know, and if you follow that. But there's just too many assholes and too many disgruntled people out there that have terrible lives. You know, the most mentally lives of quiet desperation, the throw line that I fucking love so dearly. It's such a great line. That's so true and maybe even more true today because of the unnatural world in which we're thrust in. So not only are people doing things that they hate most of the time, but they're also engaging with their phone more than they are with people. So they're engaging in this very bizarre, non-physical way that is detached from any human interaction. Detached from emotions, eye contact, the feel of being with someone, the back and forth of a conversation with two people. Like if you and I were going to disagree about something, if there was like some political thing or some social thing that you and I disagreed about, we could sit and just I want to know why you think the way you think. Like I want to know. Like if you think a thing and I disagree with it, the first thing I want to know is, and this is not something I always had. I got way better at this in my life as I've gotten older and had more conversations with people, you got to like absolutely know what this person thinks. Don't like attack it, don't twist it around, don't distort it. You have to kind of steal man it. You have to be as charitable to that position as possible. And then occasionally when you find things that you disagree with, you have to stop and you have to say, okay, here's my problem with this and it has to be done in good faith. You have to be doing it not to win. You have to be doing it to figure out what's right. And everybody's so fucking attached their opinions and their ideology that most of the time, most conversations are had where one person, at least on social media, one person is trying to win. You're trying to win all the time. You're playing this stupid game. It's a dumb-ass game where everybody's a loser. But we just watch the Pierce Morgan thing. That's the same thing. It clearly pulled in your attention. You're aware of it. See, you love it. You're the, you're part of the problem, Joe. Oh, 100%. Yeah. I'm a huge part of the problem. You're doing it. You're getting me wrong. Looking in your human being. Well, yeah. Well, also like how much do I contribute to people wasting their time? TikTok reels, like Instagram reels, Twitter things. How many fucking Twitter articles get written about every stupid thing I said? I mean, for three days, dragon believer was trending. Just guess of wacky old lady thinks I believe in dragons. But this is just the nature of the world. I love that aspect of the internet. I love the wacky shit. Even the Ukraine war footage, which is horrible. What it's doing is giving you a more nuanced version of the world. And some of it's not good. Like I watched a video today of a guy who got killed by a tiger, well, you didn't get killed by a tiger. You got torn apart by a tiger. The wounds, man. The wounds. So this guy like, I didn't think like, what would a tiger do to you? A tiger bit your victim. I'll say yeah. Yeah. I need to do it. Because I'm, you're sitting here a little curious. I'm switching over to Android buddy. Welcome. Yeah. I just have a few more steps that I have to do before I switch over. And I'm going to try to communicate only with encrypted apps from now on. No, it's just sort of like limiting Twitter replies to register to counts. You know, to do that. I'm going to try to do that. I'm going to try to use WhatsApp for everything. I was going to use signal, but yeah, I don't know. The people that use signal, I don't know if that it's a seems too secret squirrel. I didn't know that means, you don't like your a spy of using signal. I use it though. I use it all the time. I don't, I mean, I'm totally being hypocritical here. What was I looking at? Oh, the tiger thing. Bro, this one's rough. This one's rough. This is Tom Sagoer. I sent it to him today. Tom Sagoer and I sent each other every day the worst shit that we can find on the internet. And it's been like, legitimately, it's been one of the worst aspects of modern life for me. Like every fucking day me and Tom are sending each other guys getting killed by assassins. Nice. It's every day. It's there's so many footage, so many videos of cartel members whacking people like after while you're like, holy shit, I don't know if I could do this anymore. Like every day, someone's getting run over by a truck every day. And you're, that's, so here it is. So this guy, they're shooting at it. Give me some volume. So I can hear this. So they shot at the tigers just before this because this guy been bitten up. And so see, they're shooting out of right now. And the tiger was like, nah, bitch, and the tiger is just biting down on this guy. So this is what the guy looks like. This is wounds. Wow. That bro. Look at his head. I mean, his bone is exposed. Yeah, no, he's alive, dude. Look at his face watching his show his face. So this guy climbed into a wildlife enclosure. Those were not wild tigers. It was, uh, they're, you know, I don't say tamed. They're not tamed, but there's some, in some way, at least minimized in their effectiveness. Because that, you know, our buddy Paul sent me that. Paul rose. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So this doesn't remind me of the jungle. Yeah. Our buddy Paul is fearless. He's a bad motherfucker. Yeah. Paul rose leaves a bad motherfucker. That guy is literally putting his money where his mouth is, where his life is, trying to save the Amazon, like living in it, helping people, you know, hiring people to guard it, taking people that were chopping the, the wood chopping the trees down and then giving them a new job to protect the trees. It's fucking amazing. And he feels, and he feels the pain. Like, he literally, like, physically feels the pain of lost trees. He sent me something. I don't even know, I'm a lot of talk about it. But I, if, if we're not, I'll edit it out afterwards, but he sent me a video. I can't show the video. But he sent me a video of an uncontacted tribe that he discovered. Yeah. Did you, he said, knew that? Yeah. Fucking insane. Yeah. It's just complete uncontacted tribe naked in the forest hundreds of them. And they're, they're like pushing these boats filled with bananas out to them to give them food. Yeah. There isn't, we could probably talk about it. They, they, they try not to show it. So that people don't show up and try to find that. Exactly. You want to kind of protect them. Exactly. That's why I don't know if we could even talk about it. But he has brought up the uncontacted tribes before on the show. And one of his friends was murdered by one. One of the tribes, he was, uh, these guys drop off food to these people one day. They're like, you know what, enough, whap. I'm just going to kill you. Fuck you. I don't trust you. Yeah. And we, uh, we hung out. We talked to, to, to a guy that, that works with Paul's that has like a scar from, from a spear. Jeez. Jeez. And bro. Uh, at least a hundred uncontacted groups in the rainforest. Unbelievable, man. They're living like they were living 20,000 years ago. Maybe even more, you know, completely uncontacted. That is, that is to me. One of the most fascinating aspects of human life today. It's not just that we're on the verge of quantum computing and AI becoming sentient. It's a, we're co-existing at the same time with people that have a completely subsistence based lifestyle with the, the stuff that's around them, you know, stone tools literally pointed sticks for spears that they've been doing this for thousands and thousands of years. And they're living at the same time as smartphone addiction. Not only that, those people probably, their roots they could be the original civilization. I mean, I believe that there is, look at that. Isn't that crazy? Look at those people. That is so wild. It's taken in June. Man, that would be so, if you could just be a fucking fly on the wall and observe that life, like without interfering somehow, such as remotely, God, that would be so incredible. It would be doing what the aliens are doing right now. I think that is what they're doing. I think it's real similar. I really do. I think if you just looked at the natural progression of human beings and what we're talking about with quantum computing and AI and the technological innovations that are without doubt gonna hit us like a tsunami over the next 20 years, 30 years, whatever it is. What are we going to become? We're going to become what they are, the same kind of thing. And if there was a planet that had something like us that's emerging and just figuring out how to split the atom and, you know, and still involved in tribal warfare, a primate that's still involved with tribal warfare but now has nuclear bombs. That's us. Also, dick picks. Also, you know, also only fans. Also, you know, just massive social media addicts all over the entire planet while we're engaging in tribal warfare with hypersonic weapons. So they would be studying us the same way where we're studying these folks. Same thing, you know. When we find out a guy got hit with a spear like, oh fuck, what happened? These people are crazy. Like you got to be careful. Like when Paul was saying that they were there and they realized that the tribe was close like they were starting to hear things and they realized they were probably being hunted and they just got the fuck out of there as quick as they could. That's terrifying. I do not want to wake up to a news on my feed that Paul Rosley got killed by an uncontactant. Well, he's a, I mean, that guy leaps into adventure. I got in the chance to hang out with him and it is great. There's certain people. I haven't met many people like him in the way that you've described but also in the way where he sees, you know, I was a little bit like this actually, like he sees the opportunity for adventure and he just leaps into it. It's not like a deep, deliberate process of strategy and planning and so on. It's just something pulls at him and that's a really fun person to be with. But a couple of that with just extreme competence. Like he's good at surviving. He's just, he's good at taking risks and good at surviving and that's a, so like the uncontacted tribes or the crazy shit within the jungle just like getting lost and have almost dying, all that kind of stuff. And he's a really nice guy. Super nice. I mean, really nice guy and it's just like there's something too that he's an actual good person. He's really doing this for good cause. Yeah. Yeah. And it's not just the Amazon rainforest. He's also going to Africa and Indian sort of trying to save nature. I mean, I mean, you go out hunting. The forest is a bit different than like the Amazon rainforest. Their life is like different. It's like real intense. Like there's a lot. You're in the middle of a soup of life. When you have that much life, just think about the amount of insects. You were around it, the buzzing at night. Explain that. What that sounds like. It's an orchestra. It means millions of little organisms. And if you just, just no silence at night, they're all fucking, they're all screaming and fucking and killing each other. Yeah. And it's all life eats life all around you. It's life eating life. And with one of the ways the experience says the sound, the other way is just the standing there stuff starts crawling on you pretty quickly. So, and you get to get bit by a bullet ant. No, but you know, stop very close to it. There's a lot. I mean, I want to get bit by one. In the context here, I would love to get bit by one. Would you do it on a podcast? We brought in bullet ants? Let's go. Yeah. So we have to take a day off of everything else, I think. What are you pussy? I think you do. I think you don't want to be interviewing so person about AI, just sweating, just sweating and agony. I think everybody likes to think they have like super high pain tolerance. You know that about men? It's fun. Man always like to think, oh, man, I've got fucking crazy pain tolerance. Yeah. I mean, why don't women have a much higher time? Much higher time. You know, it's the highest redheaded women. Oh, that explains a lot. This is up for debate, but I sent Jamie something recently. Do you remember that thing? I sent you. So we were talking about on the podcast multiple times because I had read that that they had a higher pain threshold. I'm like, that's weird. I wonder why? Well, because everybody's been fucking with ginger's forever. They've been beating their ass. They're like an MMA guy who's got two older brothers. You know, the fucking they can take it. The scariest MMA fighters have older brothers used to beat them up because they're ready to fucking throw down all the time. Like the scariest guys or a abusive stepdad, those two. That makes a scary guy or abusive father. The guys that I know that are the fucking scariest, they had abusive dads that people that beat them up whenever young. They just get fucking used to go and just ready to go. They don't have a fear of going. They want to go. They want to go all the time. Let's fucking go. Like they've just been the same way to survive. If you're a kid and you have a brother who's four years old and your dad is a raging alcohol can he beat your mom in front of you and your brother beats your ass too. Like fuck, man, you better be hard or you're not going to make it. There's no pill to cry into it. You got to fight your brother. He's four years old and you might knock you out today. He knocked you out last week. He laughs at you when you're on your back. Yeah. I mean, not to return to the topic, but jeng is gone. Murdered his older brother. Yeah. Because he's picking on him. He stole his fish. He stole his fish. Yeah. He said, fuck you. Shot him in the bone arrow. The mom freaked out. Yeah. Called him a monster. Yeah. She was right. Well, also you learn how to kill your brother when you're, you know, what was he six? Wasn't he? Yeah. Something like that. Yeah. Like it gets married in nine. You getting off on the wrong foot and conquer's an empire at 16. But they didn't expect you to live past 30. You know, if you got to 30, you were an old fuck back then. Meanwhile, he lived like into his 60s. Yeah. He lived really long and he was consulting with monks because he was trying to figure out how to live longer, how to live forever. He was like, you know, he felt the iron ebbing from his blood. He felt the body weakened. And he wanted to visit today beyond TRT. He'd be fucking great. You know what? His kids are kind of disappointing. I mean, this like, well, of course, isn't that always the case? Yeah. That's the thing. Like show me a man who's a great man who's the son of a great man. It's tough. It's tough. It's a hard road. I mean, you have to have a very exceptional father who recognizes the requirements that this kid is going to go through if you're fucking Genkis Khan son. And meanwhile, you're also running an empire. Like raising kids is, it is a very involving thing. And it's a nuanced thing. And you have to know which ones to push and which ones to just let them be themselves, which ones to support, which ones to encourage and how to encourage and how to, how to instill discipline, how to show them how important it is to feel the pain of loss and to feel like failure and to understand that this doesn't make you a bad person. These are just the lessons of life in the energy that comes with doing something well and throwing yourself into something and finding success versus half-assing your existence and feeling filled with misery and regret. And that's a difficult thing when you're sleeping on silk sheets. You know, that was like what Marvin Hagel you used to talk about. Like, you know, it's hard to get up in the morning and run when you're sleeping in silk sheets. You're talking about the pull of as you become successful, boxers get softer. And it's because they start getting rich. You know, and then, you know, there's chill a little bit. Well, if you have a son then, the son's growing up rich and you're chill, like fuck, man, like you want to make a conqueror, you want to make a, you want to make a champion fighter, give them a rough childhood. I don't think you should do it. It definitely shouldn't be me and your kid just so that they could be a badass fighter. Well, I think it's also, there's probably a balance you can hit, but a lot of these folks, because they had nothing they want to spoil their kids. They go to find the other direction. Yeah, it's not, it's a harder to be a strict parent. I think Mitzi sure you still ignore Paulie just to make them funnier. She talked about it. She talked about ignoring him when he was crying. Yeah, it'll make him funny. She was right. She knew what she was doing. But it's like to do that, if you're a conqueror and you came up from shooting brother with a bow and arrow and then raising an army to take back your wife and then you have children and your children are born when you're 40. You know, you've got this insane empire. That's like one of the most spectacular and impressive military accomplishments. If you just look at in terms of just like this year, numbers of human beings, they sent into the reincarnation cycle. It's a crazy number, man. They killed somewhere between, I think the estimates are 50 to 60 million people over the course of his lifetime. 10% of the population of earth. Yeah, and they, you know, how by brutal one on one contact bows and arrows, fire, catapults, swords, spears, trampled, and through all of that, it doesn't seem like power corrupted the guy. So he was, he was big on unmarked grave. No statues were allowed to be made. I have no paintings, not anything. Look, that's that. They killed everybody that was involved in it. Yeah. The people that went to bury him, another group came out to kill them. And then another group came out to kill the people that killed them. They came in three waves so that no one would have any idea where Genghis Khan is buried. And we still don't know. You know, that's one of the qualities of there's a perception, it's a lot of the keys, sort of the actor, the showmen, all that kind of stuff. Some of that is true, but in his interactions that I'm aware of with the soldiers, there is no like he wants to be in the exact same level, sleep on the same banks. No glam or none of that, which I personally admire in the leader in general, just walk amongst the soldiers. It's a very admirable thing. Maybe if you're going to ask people to leave, could you imagine Biden was at the front line? You know what I'm saying? Yeah. Yeah. You may be, maybe you see Kamala Harris at the front line in Afghanistan. Could you see that? No. Could you see Obama at the front line? No. You see Trump at the front line? If I go out of here, seven, eight years old, leave him alone. Yeah. It's a very admirable thing. And if, you know, that's a thing if people will always said the number one concern that people have with the military industrial complex is sending young men to die in a war that's unnecessary for profit while you are in an air conditioned office. Right? That was during fear and loathing in Las Vegas. Who was it? McGovern? Did McGovern say that? But it was a very powerful speech. So I'm tired of watching these old men in air conditioned offices send young men to die in these unnecessary wars. Actually, if you're willing to be out there too, that's a very different thing. It's a very different thing. I mean, some people make the argument that a president should moderate how much they do that because you can do it. You can die. But also, where is I? To make compromise decisions in the realm of geopolitics and in the realm of war, you have to have a bit of coldness. If you really feel the pain of soldiers, you may make unwise decisions. In terms of diplomatic decisions, in terms of, for example, you've seen a lot of people die, children die. And if you've seen enough, there's no, the idea of quote unquote piece is a dirty word. Right. Like, you won justice. Isn't that a problem right now, not just in Ukraine, but also in Gaza? Yeah. I mean, this is the thing that the sheer number of people that died, had nothing to do with it is crazy. It's crazy. I think the most recent estimate, and they don't even know because there's so many people that are under rubble, the most recent estimate was somewhere north of 60,000 people. And how many of them are kids? Like, what's the number of kids that have been killed by missiles that had done nothing wrong? Like, what's that number? And those kids have families, and those kids have mothers and brothers and sisters and some people that lived and some people that died. And whoever makes it out of that, you want to radicalize somebody. You want to radicalize somebody to just want nothing but revenge. I can think of no better way. No better way. And here Donald Trump is tasked with going in there and trying to make peace. I think I'm pretty optimistic about just knowing the skill set of all the people involved in Israel, Palestine, and Russia, Ukraine, I'm pretty optimistic about. I can't believe those people, those hostages are still alive. How many of them are still alive now? I don't know. The exact numbers are. But it's crazy that they were not freed sooner. The whole thing is horrible from top to bottom, including all the people that have decided what happened. People that are saying it was definitely a false flag. Like, or these things are complicated. These things are complicated. It's definitely like whenever something horrible happens, it's someone fucked up. Like someone fucked up. Israel is the most protected place on earth. It's one of the most secure countries on earth. For them to let something like that happen, it's just a huge fuckup. But what I had heard was that there was also a lot of troops that were stationed near where there were protests. So there was a lot of protests about Netanyahu before October 7th happened. Most people weren't even aware of. There was hundreds of thousands of people in the streets protesting Netanyahu before October 7th. So then October 7th comes. And then all of a sudden, now whenever you have any sort of military engagement, any sort of U.R. at war right now, when those things happen, one of the first things that happens is all the protests and all the bullshit stops. Because now a bunch of people got killed. And when anything like that happens and you are now involved in a countrywide assault on this other country, everything else gets put aside. And so the big conspiracy fear has always been when a leader knows that they're going to get pushed out, they'll start a false flag or start a war. So they look at October 7th and they say they let that happen. Or they say they had knowledge of it, they knew it was going to happen, they knew it, but they wanted an excuse to raise Gaza. They wanted an excuse to just have a full-on bombing campaign against Hamas. I mean, you definitely need to look at the incentives there. That is one of the concerns in Ukraine for President Zelensky. The prospect of ending the war, because right now the country is unified. If you end the war and you have elections, now you have to face a lot of the consequences internally about the potential discovery of corruption, about the suspension of democracy, about all these things, and the same thing with Netanyahu. Who, by the way, also, they want to do a three-hour podcast. I talked to him before October 7th for an hour. I regret talking to him for an hour. One of the things I really learned a lot from you and from just myself, you can't do. One of the things I really don't like what happened with me talking to Donald Trump is like 40 minutes with Donald Trump. It was a mistake. I was almost willing to do that with Kamo Harris. We're calling my statement. I was entertaining the 45-minute one. I was entertaining, because it was like maybe if I could just come in at a ten, it was like, work my brain up, like really come in and just engage with it real quick. I just wanted to get loose. The problem is I want to see how you are as a real person. I think actually genuinely with you and Kamo Harris, I think 45 minutes is horrible, but I think you're so skilled and compassionate. It's just fun to talk to you. I think you would just end up being much, much longer. That's the hope. If that's the hope. If it's if there would be questions, though, and some questions would be very complicated, like the immigration question, like I would say, what's happening? Like, what is happening? What do you think that there should be limitations to this? You think it should be stopped. Do you think we should round up all the people that we know that are terrorists that made it across? Are we keeping track of them? Do we know how many? Do we know what happened? Do we know why it happened? Why are people opposed to the idea of cracking down on border patrol? Making more soldiers available, putting walls up everywhere? What is the reason to not do this? Tell me what you're thinking. When people start talking about labor, they're talking about bringing labor and then our population is lower. Chuck Schumer brought that up. We need workers. What do we say? Is that really what the problem is? That Americans aren't willing to do jobs and you want to bring in illegal people. How about just make legal immigration easier for poor people that are trying to get over here? How about just scan them? Screen them make sure that they're not fucking murderers. Make sure that our cartel members and then let them in easier. Wouldn't that be a better way to do it to vet people? But the idea of not vetting people just doesn't make any sense at all. That would have been a problem. That conversation would have been a problem because it doesn't make any sense at all. And I'm a grandchild of immigrants. I believe in immigration. I think America is the fucking shining light in the world. If you can get here, you can actually make something happen. There's not a caste system. They actually reward people from the bottom nowhere here. That's a thing here. Although that's Drake, he's Canada. That's going to be America soon, right? Yeah, we're going to take over Canada for sure. That needs to happen. Yeah, 51st state. Let's go. Puerto Rico's next. You've got to become a real state now. Puerto Rico's got a weird thing where you're allowed to not pay taxes, but you can't vote. Do you know that deal? That's the Peter Schiff deal. You don't vote, but you don't pay federal income tax like, all right, I feel like I think you're going to go to jail someday. I think one day they're going to fucking pull you inside. We changed that rule. And you owe us $4 billion in back taxes. You fucking criminal. What are you doing out here hanging out on this aisle and just stealing money? Yeah, we definitely need legal immigration. The idea of bringing the best people in the world here. But also, my country, St. talks about this. We need to make sure we recruit the Midwest, the farm boys get them to do epic shit inside Americans. Here's step one, ramp up the fucking education system. Yeah, Jesus Christ. At what point in time, do we not say, how far do we have to slip? Here's step one, ramp up the fucking education system. Jesus Christ. At what point in time do we not say, how far do we have to slip down the list of like the best performing students in the world before someone comes along and says, hey, the whole thing about this place is if our kids are losers, they're going to grow up to become loser adults, make it way easier to be a winner. What's the best way to do that? Have a way better education system. Just imagine if they completely revamp the education system in this country, just poured a shitload of money and had the wisest minds come up with a brilliant strategy for more creative ways of approaching learning, pushing people into viable pathways that maybe didn't even exist when the education system was structured because things have changed so much in the world. You could probably do a way better job than we're doing which would make people come out of that. They would emerge better qualified people. So we would get more shit done in America. So America would prosper overall. The GDP would grow. The fuck, everything would be better. You'd have less poverty. You'd have more. This is, that's where they need to start. It's not just letting all the immigrants. How about fix what we got here and then expand that outward? Make this place the best it can be and then expand that idea out to the rest of the world. So instead of letting everybody walk here from third world countries, because third world countries suck, expand what's better out to the rest of the world. And a big part of that is actually culturally changing, accepting, celebrating, venerating meritocracy. So like the guy in the class, see, having gone to school in the Soviet Union, like I was good at math and I was actually believe it or not super cool because I was good at math in class. Like I was the cool kid because I was good at math. Like I was getting like, I think we all found one out. It's not fun. But no, I think it's wrong. I think they're wrong. I'm sure you get about it. You should, but I think they're wrong because it's a fascinating thing to make fun of the smart kid. It's especially math. We have fucking robot over there, science. But actually just all weird. But honestly, even in all walks of life, sports is a little better. We do celebrate great athletes, but there's still kind of the participation trophy thing. There's still a kind of sense where we want to help the people that aren't quite as good at a thing. That's only with little kids though. Right. Sports are, but it's hard to bear. Mm. What, how little? Like boards, once kids get into like the teenage years, sports is meritocracy. Yes, but culturally, do we really say like, this is like, this is amazing that this person is winning. Yeah. We do get better. I want to take you to a Texas football game. What Texas, I mean, Texas. This is what America should be. This is what America should be. It should all be fired up. But not just about football. No, but all. But all the things. Everything. Music, here's the problem. Football, like physics. Quarterbacks, get laid. All right. Let's have some guys. I'm trying to tell you. Okay. Physicist used to be a union will get a lot of pussy. What about Feynman? Well, he got, yes. Yeah. But he's another level. The levels guys were freaks, right? Oppenheimer, you saw the movie. He was a freak. Those guys were studs because they were the smart people. And there was a lot of grad students that wanted to fuck the professor. And that was normal stuff back then. But I don't know if they were studs in the general population. They were studs in a way. They were like, look, Einstein was a national hero. Right? There's no one like that today. There's no one scientist that's a groundbreaking research of theory of relativity, where everybody's aware of it. He's nothing like that today. Well, we celebrate people like me, but like, Neil deGrasse Tyson, who are communicators of science. Yeah, but not to the same extent. Like he's criticized way more than Einstein ever was. Einstein was pretty celebrated. It's just an even Feynman, like for the people that knew him, like he was a cultural figure. He wasn't an obscure name. Like if you brought up Richard Feynman, most people that like watched the news and read newspapers, probably know who he is if they were in their 30s. That's not the case today for, you know, say someone who's groundbreaking research at the AI or someone who's involving quantum computing or just a few of these science communicators, you know, Brian Cox, like guys like him were great at it when in terms of like space. You know, and some guys are better at it in terms of like talking about AI or talking about all the different emerging technologies because there's so many of them. But there's no one person who's like other than Elon, but Elon's such a unique character. You can't even like you can't put him in the same categories in Einstein because he's just like a cultural weirdness. Like who is this guy like making memes, cracking jokes, dunking on people, telling people to go fuck themselves, buys Twitter, you know, it runs a bunch of different companies simultaneously while playing video games constantly. It's like that doesn't fit in anywhere else. That's like a very unique thing that exists. This Elon Musk guy. Like he's one of the most unique human beings in all of history. But you can't even move to like even the Jeff Bezos who, by the way, successfully launched the first Rocket yesterday to orbit, which is which is incredible. Amazing. Even he is gets like I think that that should be that should be venerated. Sure. But he's not the guy that's making the, he's not doing the calculations and designing and engineering the machines. Right. Like Warner von Braun was. So it's like what we're fascinated by today is different. And it's like we're fascinated by these public figures that talk about the worth is being that's going on. But the people that are actually doing it, there's not like one stand out. Although to say both Jeff Bezos and Elon are legit good engineers. Like they just never thought you're floor. They know what they're doing. Yeah, for sure. But like the thing about Elon is weird. It's like he's just have so many things. You get confused. Like how can you do this? And I was talking about possibly buying TikTok. Yeah. Like I wonder if they'd go after him if you do that. Would that be like a minute book. But Bezos or rather Zuckerberg rather they bought Instagram. Right. So they're Facebook and Instagram. Right. Why couldn't you have TikTok and Twitter? What do you talk about Monopoly wise? Yeah. Oh yeah. I don't think they'll go after them. They're trying to split up Google right now alphabet. Really? Like to make maybe Chrome or YouTube its own business. I think there's an argument. There's some argument. But like they... The crazy thing about YouTube is how effective it is. Right. Like YouTube is just think it seems so straightforward. You just have a place where people can upload videos. Okay. That's straightforward. Everybody should be able to make one of those. By the way. No. There's just one. Really hard to actually pull that off in an engineering side to be able to like... Oh yeah. Just there's just no other place like it to be able to post how much data. The scale. Just the volume. The volume of fucking data that comes into their site every day. Yeah. And then there's people of course online sort of criticizing YouTube for censorship blah blah and I'm like oh they should. They should. But like hey, more people need to be like this fucking thing exists. It's like wifi on the airplane. It's like this is... There's no other platform like YouTube in terms of like the set of features, the community they create, the search and discovery. Do you think Apple regrets having it one of the first built-in apps on the iPhone? I could have had a lot to do with the growth. Well definitely did. I'm sure. They didn't make it but they included it. Right. And they made their own. Well I mean you probably want to have the best shit on your phone if you want people to buy it. You kind of trapped. Everybody knows YouTube is the best shit. And if you get YouTube on an Android phone natively instantly, which you can when you get an Android phone it already has YouTube loaded onto it. Why wouldn't you load it on an iPhone? Everybody uses YouTube. You got to pick your battles. It's just 2007 though. That's true. I'm gonna have three minute videos. You were right. They probably didn't realize how big YouTube is gonna be. Right? But what they did do, that's the sneakiest thing that drives me crazy is the 30%. So if you start an app, you put an app in the app store, the Apple store, 30, they get 30%, that's crazy. Because YouTube dominates so much if people get censored, that's really painful. Like that's not. Well they're so in control of the video market. And I don't want to envy it. It's got to be an insane place to try to manage. But it's just kind of wild that no one else has been able to come up with anything even remotely close. You know, you've got rumble. They do really well. But it's like rumble's like a very conservative, either mecton using libertarian service space. It's the opposite of blue sky. Like these guys like, they're just exactly. But there's a lot of left-wing shows on rumble. People's essentially legitimate free speech platform. They don't censor left-wing views. You know, isn't breaking points? Are they on rumble? I watch them on YouTube. I think it's Twitch for a while though was kind of close. And then Amazon was on it. Right. Twitch was close. I mean, but then when Amazon bought it, it's some like Twitch kind of disappeared. It's still a thing, but it doesn't make money. It's not profitable. Which I arguably neither is YouTube. But it did not crazy like if they didn't buy, maybe it would have been. Because Twitch was huge. It still is. Really? I mean, that's all that that's what kids watch. But a lot of kids, they stream everywhere now, right? And there's a bunch of like video games different. That's all. It's a bunch of different Twitch became more. It was Justin TV and it's kind of reverted back to it now. Most of the popular stuff is IRL streaming. People walking around, going places, doing this stream and going, you know, doing nonsense. It's so weird. And so what are the video games streamed on? What does everybody like? It's still that. There's been a few other ones that have tried people like YouTube tried to do it, Facebook tried to do it, Microsoft tried to do it. We didn't work. Twitch is still. I watched video games streams on YouTube. You can still feel there. Twitter is now tried to do it. But like the Microsoft one went away. YouTube doesn't really advertise the live streaming stuff very well. You can find it. So essentially it's just Twitch for video games. It's dominant for sure. Domino. OK. So Twitch didn't go away. I'm just old. I thought there was a bunch of new ones that were good though that people were using. It took off. Yeah, it took off. It took off. Everyone sort of went back to Twitch after the day. So was that a deal where they like get like a famous streamer and they said, hey, we're going to give you money to come over to this new platform and then they try to start the platform? Yeah, that's a good idea. You buy everyone to come over and hopefully everyone sticks just didn't stick. Just think about the resources you would have to have if you wanted to take on YouTube. Look if Elon had decided like, OK, we need to turn X into the new YouTube. Well, he kind of wants to do that. Yeah. Which is kind of what he wanted to start a separate app. Because Twitch or excuse me, X is still mostly people exchanging information, mostly exchanging hyperlinks. The closest thing it's too is like TikTok on the video. They short video clips is good. So I could see actually a long buying TikTok. It makes it makes total sense and integrating into X. Yeah. But in terms of long-form content, it's just not quite there because you have to implement all of these features. And it is engineering wise, really difficult to have that much video. You can weaken up. We upload hours on a time, hours. So think about it. Like each one of our shows is at least two hours, three hours, mostly. That's so much fucking data. If you're letting everybody do that, how much are you paying for bandwidth? Like, what is that like? Because it's free. And then you have to get ads. And you have to be like, put, and then you have to, the ads like, hey, we don't want anybody saying fuck. Oh shit. All right, put up a filter, get rid of all the fuck so that Paul Moll have can sell their fucking handsop. Whatever it is, whoever's getting upset at us. Oh, did someone talk about the vaccine? Yeah, you can't get an ad because we're trying to sell vaccine ads. So don't be a cocksucker. Don't ruin my giant business that I've created on your data. But it is surprising that nobody's built a competitor. Not even close. I need to show us how incredibly the teams are. Right, thanks. Well, they nailed it. This is what they did. They made the perfect algorithm to constantly show you things you're interested in. You know, when I go to my YouTube feed, they're right every day, every day they're right. I'm like, oh, I'm interested in that. Oh, when was that built? Oh, look at that. Oh, is that real? That's what they got me every fucking day. Yeah, I actually tweeted complaining a little bit while YouTube recently and we had a whole meeting and stuff. What were you complaining about? So they have this incredible, I don't want to complain about why I find on the airplane before seeing the positive. So they have this incredible feature called MLA Multi-Language Audio. I don't know if you know about this, but you can have multiple tracks of audio for a single podcast of video in different languages. So I had to do that for as a landscape interview. Over dubbed into three languages for the different. Did you use AI to do that or do you hire people? So did both, but in this case, you did AI because of the voice cloning. You want, there's something really intimate and powerful about hearing the person speak in that language. And I've just found out that, you know, for example, on audio, people listen to this lens gain review. He's, it's dubbed into English. She's speaking Russian or Ukrainian. They listen and they enjoy it. They, they, you could see the numbers. You could see how they write to me personal messages, how they, you know, on Instagram, stories, they're listening to it in English. Right. And they're able to listen to it for a prolonged period of time. Like it's in English. Did you review it and listen to it and make sure the context translates correctly? Yeah. So I should give a shout out to a company called 11 labs that do the voice cloning, that do the translation and this, what's called text to speech. They're incredible people. Not just the product. Actually, there's certain companies that I work with. Nothing frustrates me more than incompetence and nothing excites me more than competence. Like they're just sweet people, by the way, like state up crazy hours through the holidays. A lot of big companies like take like two months off. They're just, you know, they're nine to five. Mm-hmm. There's a manager of a manager and there's meetings and it's slow and there's bureaucracy. And with 11 labs with a lot of startups, good startups. You like have this just vibrancy and kindness and everybody's excited, all that kind of stuff. Anyway, they do the text to speech. You know, you have like text on the page that you can speak in the Joe Rogan voice. I mean, you're aware of this thing. So if you want to translate, you first translate, transcribe the original language, translate it on the page and then text to speech, bring it to life in that other different language. The translation step is the tricky one, is the hardest one, where human should correct and help. I got, I wrote, well, I mean, we had very little time to do this. We had to do it really rapidly. You get into trouble. So for example, how much time did you have? I don't remember the exact number of days, but probably five or six days to do everything. So in three languages. In three languages and he and I did the asshole thing, which is we kept switching languages sentence to sentence. Because we kept and he was swearing, rushing, mid sentence. So of course the translator's like sweating because most of the sentences Ukrainian and he says fuck or go fuck his, his war lot. Like, you know, that that part would be in Russian, the, the, the swear. So you have to catch all of that. If to not make mistakes and some of it there was AI in the loop went to figure out because nobody really has done this kind of thing before. So we had to figure it all out. And mistakes can be made when you're Russian like this, rushing like this. Like I just did. By the way, me saying that could be transcribed into me saying Russian and Russian. Right. Like that. So for example, we said he was talking about corruption. Since the topic he said something like anybody who we caught doing something with the weapons or being corrupt, we would beat the exact term is beat them on the hands. He was speaking Ukrainian, which in Ukrainian means we'll crack down on them. That was automatically translated to slap them on the wrist, which makes sense as a direct literal translation. Right. Beat them on the hands, slap them on the wrist, make sense. But like, and I didn't catch it. No, not sleeping. I'm like reading it. I speak all the languages. So like I'm trying to like figure out this puzzle and we didn't catch it. And then of course like a lot of people got really mad and they spoke up, you know, the internet in general is like, how can you translate this? Are you, of course it must be because I'm a Putin shell and getting funded and I'm not translating. But yeah, that's, you see, it's very, there could be sensitive moments like you had a lot of really hypo-phosphate gears here. There could be sensitive moments if translated could do a lot of damage on the flip side. It makes it accessible, especially for important conversations and makes it accessible to people that really need to hear it. Why were you under such a time constraint? Because the, the seriousness of the conversation, like the every single day that's major and missile. Right. And so did you, it just, you didn't have a five day deadline. You just, it took you five days to do it. Yes. And the, I don't want to sort of put it on them. But the President Zelensky's office was asking like when this was coming out. So we're really pushing it and they were implying probably correctly that there's just going to be a lot of dynamic stuff happening on the, on the peace negotiations. Right. So he wanted to use this as a statement in the same, because, you know, the Kremlin watched it. So everybody's watching it and like it's part of the puzzle pieces that they're using to figure out when it were going to meet, when it were going to, what are going to be the outlines of a, of a treaty, you know, so like you have to take it very seriously. But then, you know, I've learned a lot because I, you need to probably hire more and trust everybody involved and turn it around much quicker, you know what I mean? You know me, but in terms of production, everything, the team is one person. And then there's now folks helping with, helping with editing, but it's just tiny team. There's no, and so for things like this, you have to take it seriously. You have to like maybe have like a special, special force team that kind of steps up. Right. It helps reg group of people that are translators that you could really count on to get it right. Because a lot of the view it, but you would want to have to personally review it anyway. On a percent, but that you want the translators you trust to do a good job. And one of the things we'll learn really quickly is you can't just get any translator. There are, I mean, translations in art, it truly is. And like people were, they were translating it. It's like open my comedy. It really like, right. You think, even the same joke in the mouth of different comics would just be way different. And the way they were translating it was cold, they were missing the points, they were not in the same context. Oh, the AI where is genius? Yeah. But the translation piece of the AI is still needs the human and needs the human to fix it. And how does the human emphasize emotion? Like if he has a specific intonation, if the way he's like, he's talking about how does the, how does AI know how to say the words in translation which ones to emphasize? So this is where 11 labs are really incredible, but they, it uses the actual words to figure out the intonation. So the, okay. So the translation of the words. For the original word hearing the word. No, it's always working on the text. So let's just stick with English for now before I say translation. Text on the page. I have like a, have a Dwight Eisenhower speech here. Every gun that is made, every worship launched, every rocket fire signifies. That feels like a serious thing. Like we can probably infer how to read that. If I gave you that text, you would infer the heaviness, the timing. And the eye is pretty good at doing that. Not perfect. And you can, I should have delivered that speech like Hitler. Like, like I want to know like how are they getting the, like when, what, what, what, would, would yell about stuff. And then they had a translation of it in English. And so are they doing it off text or they're doing off the sound of the, like when he's saying the words and translating it, because then you would know he's conveying a certain amount of emotion. Or are they editing it in post and saying he's got to be louder here. He's yelling, is a human involved in that? Or is that human involved in every part of that? So they're setting the hyperparameters of like how, yeah, like how loud is it, how like dynamic it is, they can, they can change all of that and they can change specific. They can basically generate, you know, like five different options for the sentence. And then that's so crazy. But that is an art form, right? Yeah. Really is so crazy that we're not going to be able to tell if you said something. Yeah. Like we're kind of there. There's, there's real cheap ones of me selling everything. I see all the time on Instagram, like, you know, different rappers and country western songs and go to this, go to this restaurant. Like you just generate them from AI. But you can still kind of tell. But then I've seen some ones. I'm sure you've seen that one of the one guy where it's a completely AI generated thing voice and everything and he's talking and he's telling you like this is completely AI generated and you probably can't believe this, but it's true. He's explaining how it's done and it's nuts. It's so realistic. And I mean, I should say like from my experience with the Zelensky conversation, it's dubbed into all these languages is dubbed into English. He's speaking Ukrainian and Russian. There's a lot of people like I've seen this that think he's speaking English just because it's so close. Right. And so like now I have this responsibility here I am with my fucking exhausted sleep deprived translating like his exact words. I could put whatever words in his mouth. Like I could have the slap on the wrist thing. I, you know, let me just take responsibility. I guess I fucked up, you know, it's three hours. It's very tough to like, but like I could have, you know, put it in like I like Dix in there. Just throw it in there. Just throw it in there. You know, just for fun. Yeah. That's kind of crazy, right? Yeah. And it's out. And there's a lot of people that believe like, okay, this is what he's saying. Right. So I mean, there's a huge responsibility with that. And I think that's why people trust a particular podcast or someone like you're not going to fuck with that responsibility. Right. You're very aware of it. And you take it very seriously. Yeah, but it's still hard to decide who and how the talk to is really, really difficult to think through the Zelensky conversation. I think difficult to think about whether to talk to Putin or not and how the talk to him is difficult to think about Benjamin Netanyahu to talk to him after October 7th. It's one of the most university hated people on the planet. No. Right. And it's like, okay. So how do you talk to him? And what do you get him to say about the innocent people that have been killed? But he has a certain perspective, which I should say that a lot of people inside Israel probably support. I mean, I should also say not now, but earlier in Qatar when the Hamas was in Qatar, they were interested in doing a podcast. The members of Hamas who are not in hiding. So the representatives were interested in doing a podcast and they decided not to because it's like everyone knows what Hamas is. It's almost like easy when I do a podcast. But it was like, well, that just feels, I mean, you are platforming. Hate there. That's in a way where you can't properly dissect and present and analyze and push and pull. You can't criticize them. Right. You're not going to be in a position where you can criticize them. Well, I should say in Qatar, it's safe. What's up? In Qatar, it's safe. So there I could criticize. And in fact, one of the ways I would imagine talking to Hamas is pushing them actually pretty hard. And they would actually push hard and they would probably, because a lot of them are kind of just a pretty shallow and insane. So they would just get really angry. There's a real anger. They would not come off as good. One of the fears talking to dictators is just the charisma. They would, my opening statement to Netanyahu was, a lot of people hate you. And I talked to him and I was like, a lot of people were protesting outside. There's a lot of people that hate you. What do you have to say to those people? That's the opening thing. He says, like, he said something like, everybody loves me. I just gave a talk in Iran and 20 million people listened to me and they loved me. So how do you talk to a person where there are realities? Well, no. No, there are people that love you, Prime Minister Netanyahu. What did you quite a lot of people outside? They don't love you. What did you expect him when you brought that up? Did you have expectations? Which expect him to say? I expected for him to analyze where that hate comes from, to start to empathize, fake or not, to understand that perspective. To understand the perspective, maybe, of the Palestinians or the the Ghazans that hate him. And then maybe make the case of Israel. After steel manning the Palestinian case, say, well, listen, word like this tiny country that everybody's shooting rockets at, then make the case for Israel, the historic case, the military case, the geopolitical case. But he didn't. It was like, every love me. But in that answer, I think he really believed that. Yeah. Yeah. He's locked in. Locked in. But or I mean, he's complicated. He's just so that was definitely a wall. How much more times do you have in power? I mean, that's a consistent minute by minute thing. He as long as he is being elected. And it's the same question for Zelensky. How long does he have in power? It's the same question. When is Israel have their elections again? Are they doing that while they're in the middle of this conflict? I'm not deeply familiar with like the dynamics of it, but I think they can have elections at any time. Like there's coalitions. I think it's a bunch of countries have this kind of thing. So I think there's elections coming up. There might be a martial law type of situation. Forgive me, I'm not exactly sure. But it's basically under constant internal political pressure where he can lose power. Are you aware at all of his political opponents? Yeah, there's a bunch. There's a bunch of people. I mean, they have to walk a tight rope because there is a lot of fear and anger inside of Israel now. And like you said, after October 7th, there's like an existential fear when the whole assumption of the Israeli people was that like this kind of attack cannot possibly happen with iron dome and the defenses. And so you have a more there's more room in this capacity to elect more radical people that are more right wing. They're more aggressive. They're more altruistic. Well, this is why we want to make big reasons why people love to dive into the false flag narrative because they find an incentive for people to allow something to take place because if you allow something to take place and you sacrifice a certain percentage of your population, you have now. to allow something to take place because if you allow something to take place and you sacrifice a certain percentage of your population, you have now new rules and you have much more power and you have a society that's behind you now, because there's a reason why they want to fight. And this is why anytime there's anything that ever happens, there's a bunch of people that think it's a false flag. A bunch of people think 9-11 was a false flag. And then there's real ones that we know about, like Operation Northwoods didn't happen, but they really did sign the Joint Chiefs of Staff signed proposal where they wanted to blow up American airliner and blame Cuba. We wanted to arm Cuban friend, Lee's in Taquan, Taunomobay, and they wanted in Vay Cuba under false pretenses of a false flag. We really do stuff like that. It's a... and I say by we, I mean humans. Humans in power, Nero burned Rome, like Hitler burned a rice tag. There's false flags that they create these situations to force people to fight. And that's a real thing. But it's also like people get caught with their pants down too. So it's hard to know what's what. It's hard to know what's what. But the same organization that did the whole page of thing, the sophisticated intelligence, required for that, somehow missed an obvious breach of a... Right. And they were warned by Egypt. The whole thing is very, very, very tragic. Jamie, just cook or quest. Are you tracking the Starship launch? I know you want to watch. We've got five minutes, I think. Okay. Four minutes. It's 356 right now. So the launch is a launch. Yeah, I know you do. America, we're gonna wrap it up with that. Is it launch in live? Yeah, it's live. Yeah. Yeah. It's hope it doesn't blow up. That's what... What if it blows up while we're watching? I don't think at this stage blowing up, I mean it'll be really awesome if it doesn't blow up, if it flies and then it's caught by the... In 13 minutes. In 13 minutes. Okay. We got time. Jamie, keep it on it. At this time, I mean it's called Starship Test 7 for a reason. Right. Like you want to... Blow a few up every now and again. So far what the tolerance is are. It is nice for Jeff Bezos to succeed on the first try. Like the first one is really important because there's a lot of skepticism. Can this even be done with the new Glenn rocket? And now Bezos and Elon and homies again. Homies. They're expressing platitudes on Twitter. Yeah, they're gonna sit together at the inauguration. What, Jamie? I'm trying to check something. I'm not finding another video. Okay. No worries. We're shy, though, because I tried typing SpaceX. Yeah, be really careful just finding that official SpaceX channel or you can go on X. Yeah, go on X. It's gonna be a bunch of bots selling you crypto if you're not careful. Oh, don't go on Pornhub. That's a different one. Go on Pornhub and get in Texas. You got an entering violation of human rights. That's what I'm saying. That's what I'm saying. Are you going to the inauguration? Perhaps. Are you? Unfortunately. Really? Unfortunately. So formalizing all the socializing. Oh, you do it in a purpose for work? No. I just... No. I never... I never go out to things for work. I don't work. It's more like... I felt like it's an opportunity to meet people. No, like you would regret it if you didn't go. Like it's a historic moment. And also George St. Pierce that he's gone. Oh, okay. Yeah. I think Gordon's gone too. Yeah. Yeah. It's a very different thing this time around. People were very hopeful with him as president now, which is very different than in 2016. 2016 is like this existential crisis that the media just blasted into everybody's head. I think enough time has passed and enough faith has been lost in the media. The people have sort of woken up out of that and realized like we can't keep going the way we're going. I hope the good vibes continue in general. Like the politicization of everything will not escalate quickly here. It's possible. Even the inauguration itself. Yeah. I hope they're not... It's not a divisive event. It's more of an inspiring event. Well, it's going to be divisive with some people. There's no getting around that. Some people just their psychology. Like that lady in the pink that was yelling. Like the lady that said the peat hexet said that when he really didn't say it. Just bubbly it. It's when else wrote it. This is 37 minutes. 37. We don't have that kind of time. This just went live so it doesn't say anything. Not just a B.O. space X. And there it is. Is that it sitting there chilling? I'm trying to double check most of these. They all say it's 37 minutes and counting. Wow. Let's see. Who's Felix? These are just channeles. Oh, so a bunch of different channels are correct. There's tons of channels with it. So I'm trying to find the most accurate for real one. Because someone could be live streaming. Right. Or take one. What are they live streaming though? Is there... There's not a space X. Does not have its own page? So that's... I just went to live on YouTube. This is where I was bringing up a Twitch. It's hard to find. Right. Does space X have an account? That's when I typed it in. That's when he was bringing it up. You start getting all sorts of crazy shit. And I get all these weird... That's not them. That's not them. Space X live? That's not them. That would not. That would not. That would not. With that in their official account. Oh, what? Space X might have just closed their YouTube channel. I'm guessing. Because they want to do it on X. Makes sense. So I went to there. Oh, how weird. How weird. How weird. Three minutes ago. So it's just a bunch of fakers. What's coming on? Pretending to be space X. Space X live. Like that. You're not space X. Yeah. Tricking me in looking at your channel. They're boosting the algorithm. I guess. So this is it. This is an older one. Oh, this is old. And some of them... Some of them. Everyday astronaut is really great. I recommend people stream him. He's a great... Wait, I feel like... Have you talked to him? I'm not exactly sure. But he was a... He went after Bart. What is his name? And Boris. Yeah. Did he? He's really... I mean, not went after, I should say. He's the opportunity to educate. Like he has this really long... I've got to get some... I've got to get some... I've got to get some... I'm going to get some room. Yeah, for sure. That's what he wants. He keeps being on my case. I wanted to beat him. Did you ever have Bart on your podcast? No. Bart wants to debate him. I was like, do I want this? Right. Of course he do. Not. Shut the fuck up. Do it. I think... I think there's... Yeah. It's something that happened in the past. Like what are we going to learn from it? Say it was completely fake. Right? What's the... I would rather focus on modern day conspiracies. What? You don't want to know if they fake the moonland. Are you crazy? No, I do want to know. But like... Okay. To me. How does your life change? A lot. A lot. Okay. This is how. Yeah. Because you know that the government is able to... The government is able to fake the fucking moon landing. And to get people to shut their mouths. And a bunch of people disappeared. Yeah. The story is nuts, dude. Yeah. Do you know the story about God? What was his name? I don't remember, but he was a journalist. What was he assigned to do? Although I got my design to do an audit of NASA. And he wrote a hundred pages. And his analysis. This was like 1964, 65, 66 somewhere around that. So his years before the moon landing. God, I don't can't remember his fucking name. I used to have this shit at the tip of my tongue. But he parked his car with his family in it on a train track. And a train smashed their car. And the document was never retrieved. It was vanished. He went away. Bye bye. And then a few years later, everyone's on the moon. What do I do? I got a lot of inspiration. The pilot of Apollo 1, the guy that burned alive in that thing. He hung a lemon on that thing saying that it would never work. They couldn't communicate with the tower. How's this thing supposed to get us to the moon? And I got people, his family believes he was murdered for that. There's a lot of weirdness in the moon landing, buddy. See, there's a lot of people. And God, if they really did pull it off. And then all these people are cooking for the fucking government of the 1960s, it's kind of hilarious. Wait, they pulled off the faking? The faking. The faking. So Tim God, every day astronaut apparently has an answer to all of this. What's his answer to the Van Allen radiation belt? There is an answer. I'm not going to turn the debate. I don't. Took cute one. Whatever it is. The answer? Whatever. I think it's like to send people through thousands of miles of intense radiation and have no biological animal that you've ever done that to that's come back alive. And just let's try it on people. So let me try to convince you as an agent of the Mossad and the CIA. I think, okay, this is from me looking at Wikipedia for about five seconds. So I thought the belt is not all the way around so you can go around the belt. No, you can get through the top and the bottom, but you have to fly out of Antarctica. And you really can't do that. And then the way we did it, we had to go through it. And we had to go through it, I think it was for a couple hours. Maybe it's possible. Maybe we're going to find out soon, right? Hopefully, unless they go through Antarctica. So it's like a donut. That's what it is. The intense band of radiation is like a donut. Apparently the actual amount of radiation is not that intense. I mean, I guess speaking as a Mossad say, it's a It depends on who you are asking. Van Allen thought it was pretty fucking intense. Also, there was an Operation Starfish Prime, do you know about that? Operation Starfish Prime, they were trying to blow a hole through the radiation belt. So they launched nuclear weapons into space and detonated them and had the opposite effect. Supercharged the radiation belt. I mean, if you were radioactive. Yeah. Operation Starfish Prime, Google that. Temporary, what's that? I think it was temporary, like just an anticipated over. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Changes is also a Mossad. No, he's right. No, he's right. But it mean like when they measured it, when they measured it, it was like way more radiation. They didn't blow a hole through it at all. They fucked it up. They supercharged it. But just the fact that they were trying to do that, they were trying to blow up nuclear weapons in space. Like if I was the aliens, that's when I would start showing up. Like look at these fucking assholes. Hi, altitude nuclear test. What are people doing? Not only that, it shut off the power at Hawaii. It fucked Hawaii up. Hawaii had like a brown out. Like these guys are psycho bats. Can you imagine sitting in a table with a bunch of generals? And this guy comes in with a cigar. I want to launch a fucking nook in space. I want to see what happens. I just want to see what happens. You don't want my favorite one of those. The very first detonation of the very first nuclear bomb. There was a non-zero chance that that bomb was going to destroy the entire atmosphere of the earth. Let's imagine what that feels like, right? Yeah. And they were like, let's see. Let's see. Boom. Nope. We're still here. They were reasonably sure that it wasn't going to do that. But you know, you've never done that before. Who knows? And there's a lot of people asking the question of like in the war you crane. Where they're Putin is willing to use even tactical nuclear weapons. Yeah. Just so in the statement. That's an open question. It is an open question. And it's like a terrifying possibility. I think, generationally, have forgotten what nuclear weapons are. Right. Like most people think it's like a fun TikTok meme. Right. Right. The mushroom collages. And then what happens next? Yeah. What do you want to do? Two back and forth, back and forth. Now everything's gone. Like that. And that's why I'm excited about Starship launches because they're on the back of the back of the book. Look at it. Yeah. I love how the sex cult on Mars. No. I prefer Earth. The sex cult. Right. But if you had to be a person who lived and Earth was going to blow, you'd probably try it. You'd try it. You'd say, listen, maybe we can maybe be the fucking Davy Crockett of Mars. And then years from now, this would be a mall. And everybody remember when Lex came over on the rocket? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's really exciting to see what kind of society's form on Mars. Even just 100 people, 1,000 people, 10,000 people, 100,000 people. What are the prospects of terraforming? Because the problem is like Mars is too far from the sun. Like it's just not warm enough. Like so what are they going to do in terms of like oxygen? Do you know Terrence Howard, the actor? You know Terrence Howard and his theory? He's got a great theory. It's really interesting theory. He thinks that all solar systems that instead of it being like a collection of debris from the outer galaxies, it's that too. But what it really is, is the sun is ejecting matter. And we know that, right? After millions and millions of years, the sun ejecting matter. The matter coalesces and becomes a planet. As it gets further and further from the sun, it becomes more hospitable to life. As it gets that Goldilocks zone, where Earth is, it peeples. And he thinks that this is happening all throughout the galaxy. That planets get to a certain stage and then they people. And then those planets are slowly going to move further and further out of a way further and get colder and colder. And it's up to these creatures to figure out how to get the fuck out of there before it becomes inhospitable. And that's where the advanced civilizations come in. And this is why he thinks the most advanced civilizations are on the planets of the furthest from the sun, because of the ones who have adapted and figured out a way to exist off of some other form of energy other than just sunlight. What does he have an idea about which planets in our solar system might be people? It probably used to be Mars. Still or no? No. There's nothing on there now. I mean, it's not as suitable. But there could have been the ones in our atmosphere. It could be life there. Now there's water there. There could be, well, there's probably some sort of bacterial life, right? There's probably, the real question is, is there any evidence that there was other life? Like think about how difficult it is for us to find like dinosaur bones, right? Like dinosaurs have to become a fossil. It's like the very complicated process. They have to die in mud or something. They have to get covered up and then they calcify. And if you don't know, when you get a fossil, the bone that's fossilized, it's not really that bone. What it is, is it's been remineralized by all the earth elements. And so it's kind of a different thing. But it's in the shape of the bone. That's fossilized bone. And what if you're talking about like 30 million years, 50 million years, 100 million years, 200 million years, a billion years, what if Mars a billion years ago had life on it? What would be left? Nothing. That mean in that case, nothing. What would be left? Like earth is four point something billion years old, right? How old's Mars? Do we know? How old's Mars? Yeah, that's good. That's the most of that. Like is Mars older? I believe it's older. Yeah. So that's pretty similar, right? When did the solar system start forming? See, these are just wild guessing by a bunch of fucking things. That's four and four point five billion years. Blanchag eggheads with wild guesses. I'm going with Terence Howard. I think he's right. I think it was what a brilliant idea though. I'm offended you call him an actor. Well, he's a mathematician physicist. He's a lot of things. Brilliant guy. His conversation with Eric with Eric Weinstein and you was just his art. It was a good conversation. Some conversations are art. Yeah, that was a good one. Because he's a good guy. He's a good guy and Eric's a very good guy the way he handled it. You know, he used Stern and very clear and obvious that who is right, but very kind and very friendly, which is a quality that Eric has. Like the ability to do that, especially when you're talking about something that's so incredibly complex and esoteric. You're talking about like super complicated math and he's showing it to him. Do you know how to do this? When you're showing it on the board, you can tell he does know how to do this. He's like, let me explain how this works. And then you realize like, oh boy. Self-taught. You know, this is a thing. Like there's a lot of brilliant people that just don't get the correct education, but they're still brilliant. Yeah, there are horse powers there. Yes, there are horse powers there. Yeah, but I think this theory that he has about planets, people, I find it so fascinating. I couldn't stop thinking about it for days. I was like, I think he's right. Yeah, I mean, we're going to find out. We're going to find like even if we discover bacteria, Mars, that's kind of a change of life. That's kind of a change of everything. I'm convinced that there's alien life throughout the even the galaxy, but that's a really open question. And most people don't think so. You know what I think? I don't think he gets past where we are very often. I think it probably fucks up a lot. I think it's too difficult to harness the power of the sun while you're a tribal monkey and not blow yourself up or fucks up horribly or just get involved in natural disasters that you didn't adequately prepare for. I mean, we're still not prepared at all for asteroid impacts. I mean, yeah, young addressing bacteria. Yeah, it's very recent. Yeah, and also super volcanoes. We're not prepared at all. If we have a super volcano of Yellowstone blows, which it's going to, one of these is going to, one of the big ones is going to blow. They just do. They might blow 100,000 years from now. It might blow next week. They fucking happen. And we're not prepared. We're not prepared for that. Even if you just look at the LA fire started to interrupt like they think. Yeah, imagine the chaos that's going to be created. And imagine the LA fires with no fire department. Right. Okay. Imagine that. Imagine that there's no one out there trying to put that fire out. That would be fucking insane. And, you know, I think civilization has probably gone through a gang of those before. I think Graham Hancock is much as he gets criticized. I think he's on something. I think Randall Carlson is as well. as they're on to something. I think that's probably the end of the ice age is probably asteroid impacts. There's too much physical evidence that corresponds with the timeline for it to be ignored. I mean, it's a pretty accepted theory now, the younger dryer's impact there. It's just like what happened during that time and what existed before that time. And all the stuff that we see a few thousand years later is that a reimagining of civilization out of complete and utter chaos? I think it might be. And it might be one of the reasons why we're so fucking barbaric. It might be that our ancestors were the ones who survived the most horrific time in history. Where we got hit by asteroids and civilization just evaporated instantaneously. Millions of people probably instantaneously died. We were left with chaos in a completely different climate places that were covered in ice or now raging rivers. The whole thing's fucked. All the animals are dead. Most people you know that are anywhere near the impact are dead. People get washed away in the floods. Entire civilizations just instantaneously flooded and destroyed. That could happen again. That could happen again tomorrow. That could happen again next month. It's we're in the shooting gallery. We're in the shooting gallery of the universe. And I bet that's pretty common. So I bet the race is to try to get intelligent enough that you can do all these different things, but also intelligent enough that you abandon these ancient primal instincts that you have. And that's where we're at the cusp of that. We're at the cusp of our tribal chaos mixed in with impossible knowledge. And it's all like happening at the same time. And so this is wild race that's going on. And people like you and people like me and people that are hopeful, we hope we get it right. We hope we get it right. But we might not get it right. And I think out there in the universe, I think it's probably more likely that people don't get it right than do get it right. And if they do get wiped out, I mean we got the Toba volcano. We got down somewhere around 70,000 years ago to a few thousand people on earth. What are those motherfuckers like? Like Jesus Christ. Those are our ancestors. Those people must have been brutal. Well that's one of the things I've just seen, even on the smaller scale of the war in Ukraine, is your house or the city gets destroyed and people adapt immediately. Like the tough people rise up. Like it changes you immediately. There's a resilience to the human spirit. It's crazy. You could adjust. So if an asteroid hits earth, like the United States, you know, I'll say 70% of people dead. Yeah. You get an unlocked power that your character in the video game has. Yeah. I mean this is where the people in Texas immediately become the valued commodity versus like people still come out of something. Yeah. Technology doesn't matter. None of that matters. Survival matters. Individual, radical individual, is a matter. And that's one of the things that gives me community matters. You have to go look very local. You got to band together. But like it's really his attention because it's not collectivism. It's not like... Right. So governments that rely on central authorities fall apart from that kind of thing. Well a 100% any natural disaster government, like a real big one, like an asteroid impact, it's gone. No, the government doesn't do anything anymore. The useless power goes out for a month they're gone. Everybody's gone. It's any man from self. No one's protecting you from outlaws. You're seeing that already in the California fires. There's gangs of kids, 100 at a time, breaking in the houses and looting them in the middle of these evacuation zones. You're seeing chaos. They can't protect you from that if something happens. And this is something we're not prepared for. We're spending so much time doing other things and not recognizing the incredible vulnerability that our society has. This very fragile system that we put in place that's so much better than at any time in human history. This is the best time to be alive ever by far. And it's so fragile. And we don't think it's fragile because the power stays on. Yeah, one of the things you don't just have in travel across the world, like the thing that really America stands out with and why I'm excited about what's happening now is the radical individual freedom. I think the freer the country is the individual back to Jangis Khan with the free freedom of their practice religion. The freer the people are, the more resilient they are to the terrors, the catastrophes of the world. Yeah, they just respond there, much more dynamic. The more centralized and collectivists of society as the more you're susceptible to corruption, to this kind of propaganda, that you're not able to respond to even the pandemic. The governments are not able to do that. The fowlgies of the world will always emerge. Right. It's not even say even fowlgies wanted to do the right thing or something. It's just very impossible for the centralized authorities to do the right thing. You have to have a distributed, you have to put much more weight on the freedom of the individual. That's a really important thing that you just said. It's impossible for the centralized authorities to do the right thing. It really almost is if they want to do their job. That's why doge it. I mean, there's a lot of problems there. Yeah. You want to decrease the power, the size, and the bureaucracy of the federal government. You want them to be mobile, agile, small, efficient, and distributed to the state or to just small companies to companies. Now, about stop going after the American people. About that too. Which part? In every part. All sorts of things. You know, attacking people, what's happened with this country because of January 6th, and their version of it, and what actually happened. Then, you know, the FBI did with the Twitter files with influencing things, what they did with Facebook, where they contacted them. We're taking a tell them to take down memes. Can I actually just say about that? I don't know if he gets enough credit, but I think what Mark is actually talking about. I think that's a good thing. I think that's what Mark did on the podcast. It's actually, you may not seem that way, but it's courageous. I think it's courageous. I think you had to do it too. I think it's both things. But internally, he's running a gigantic company. He's running a gigantic company, but also this is the way things are rolling. Like, you either get in the way and get rolled over, or you get on board. If you want your company to succeed in today's day and age, and not be distained and universally, whether it's whether people boycott it, or people just start hating on it, stock drops. Like, if a new thing that's like Facebook, because Facebook is, although it's so common, it's one of those ones you could do without, kind of. It doesn't have the kind of information gathering aspect that X does. If I want to find out what's going on in the world, I go to X. Facebook's not like that. It's like people talking about stuff and posting videos and things. There's also what's happening. That one could take a hit. That could take a big hit if people just decided to fuck you in your censorship. I think more people are inclined to say fuck you in your censorship now than ever before. So it's a good business decision to stop censoring people. And the community notes thing is fucking genius. It's the greatest invention ever. In terms of like the ability to find out what's right or what's wrong. Let's let people post things and it was not true. Enough people report it. People look at it and go, oh, it turns out that's not true at all. And here's why it's not true. That shit's huge. It's you. It's funny when Elon gets community noted too. He can't even get community noted. It's so great. It's so great. Yeah, you get community noted, son. Everybody does. But it's the best way. It's the best way to find out what's real and what's not real. But then it's also like, you know, should you let people on your platform that are just fucking straight up Nazis and trying to recruit people? Should you let horrible racism exist on your platform? The problem is that slippery slope, man. If you say no. Yeah. If you say no, then you then other people are going to decide. You remember Panchanati, what people say you should Panchanati? I remember like Kurt Metzger was he was like, well, who the fucking gets to say who's a Nazi? If it was just like a guy, you know, running a gas chamber, yeah, Panchanati. But if it's just some guy who doesn't think that a trans woman should be competing against his daughter in high school sports, like that's not a Nazi. Like you've changed the term. I think the slippery slope is important. There's people like Paul would do a giraffe who's running telegram. He was, you know, Europe, uh, rest in peace is going after him for like, you got arrested. Yeah. Because there is legitimate terrorists talking to each other on telegram, but like what's the alternative? But if it's an encrypted app, how are you going to stop it? How are you going to stop if it really is encrypted if they can't read it? Right? Like this is WhatsApp. If you use WhatsApp, if you and I message each other on WhatsApp, no one can read it but us. Yeah, but the government wants the back door. That's what they wanted would talk. Right. But that's crazy because you could use that backdoor in all kinds of ways. Like they use that backdoor for signal. That's how they found out that Tucker Carlson was talking to Putin's people about setting up an interview. He was like, we know you did it on signals. Talkers like, I didn't even know you could do that. That's what Tucker says. So Tucker's lying. No, there he is. He's not lying. You son of the blinds. You are a Russian plant. No, yeah. Yeah. I'm a side. And Russian. Oh, you got a meeting bro. I want to see what they do with that goat. You got a, well Tucker said they read his signal. Well, it's very possible. But technology, I'm not sure how it's possible to do that. I mean, I'm spotting that. But the way it's been explained to me is even though your phone is encrypted. It's not encrypted to you. Like you see it. You see it's encrypted peer to peer. Right? So if they can just see your phone. You mean all that is green. Oh, yeah. 100%. Yeah, not just screen recording. Get access to your phone. Find out all your contacts, all your emails. But all your accounts or your notifications and content encrypted. So it's difficult. I mean, it's possible it's difficult. But it's not through signal. If you go through the phone. So if you use. Contacts all your emails, but all your Sounds were all your notifications and tend to encrypt it's difficult. I mean it's possible. It's difficult But it's not through signal if you go through the phone. So if you're using Pegasus You just compromising the entire phone if you if signals on that phone you know the passwords already you go into signal You can go in anything. Oh and that way. Yeah. You have access to the phone, but that's right. That's that's legitimate hacking right But this is what they're doing right like That's not what they wanted with telegram. They wanted legitimate like full on backdoor But with Gavin de Becker explained this to him. He said with with Pegasus one you needed to click a link Right there's this this is the Jeff Bezos thing someone sent him a bad link on what's happy clicked it They had access to his phone. They got compromising information on them With Pegasus to they just need your phone number So they got your phone number boom during your phone. That's it And so if that's the case if you have a An app like signal like I would assume they could read your signal That's like right there on your phone like if you already got the phone open and they've got a compromise where they can get into your into your phone That's actually by the way why you know I'm going to Ukraine going to Russia going back to Ukraine Trying your phone hacked well. I also tried to make sure like Dick picks that sent to you in terms of the other side. I try not to there's nothing to hide right Do you have a burner to get a burner phone do you bring me go overseas? You bring a real phone I wouldn't tell you that phone is hearing everything we saw. Yeah for sure for sure What what are we saying that we need to hide I mean there's someone bear saying things for sure like you know drop texts drunk Yeah, I mean from the past I'm some shit from the past Glad I grew up when I did oh my god I imagine if you were 15 with a phone you take a picture of your dick so somebody Somebody so there's like a hit piece on me fine great wonderful I love you all setting it right some more but this journalist found like some shit poetry I wrote oh No, I mean it when you were young yet well Comedians so it was like late it might have been late 20s early 30s. It's not like there's not even excuse You're not that young. It just sucked. It just sucked. Yeah, and it and I was just reading it Because they they know how to get who is this article for? Because for the person running it they want to hate on you and it's clicks and you're popular So they want to hate on you by attacking your shitty poetry hilarious because like well they got you you gave him a little rope Yeah, and I don't even with it But like what I'm saying is that's not a big deal the the bigger deal is like if you grew up with that So there's like shit you said when you're 14 or 16 Yeah, exactly yeah, even the piece like you know that that stuff like the article all that kind of stuff You could even I mean one of the big things we have to do is a lot of people to evolve and just say you know Yeah, yeah, that was shit poetry well I'm still horrible I'm more support right now, but like that was embarrassing that I would be publishing I Think that these people that attack almost all of them are leftists and I think left ism is a religion Just like being a Christian is religion in that there's like a there's a way that you Approach it Mark and Jason says it best he was describing that it has all of the attributes of a cult and I think people have a default System in their mind we all do that we fall into that gives us like a religious like adherence to some ideas and The thing that this cult is lacking which is paramount Christianity is forgiveness There's no Root road to redemption Everyone is ostracized and kicked out and what you wind up doing is you wind up cannibalizing your own thing You can never be left enough. There's always crazy people that are like far to the end of it and every ideological group gets defined by its most extreme members That's why when people think about far right people who do you think either worse people you think of like people who want war? War mongers assholes, you know stupid people on you know uneducated That's what people think of when they think of when they think of like the worst They think of like white nationalists. That's what they think of when they think of far right So you can kind of like you flavor everything else in the group by the worst members of the group and if you don't have forgiveness in your religion Like you have a fucking terrible religion if you don't have a path to redemption and You want extreme adherence to dogma even if like even if whatever this idea with his ideology the pushing is like clearly Clearly destructive to a bunch of humans That's what they're dealing with. It's like people fall in the thought patterns man the most people are too busy to Formulize their own opinion so they develop opinions to sort of merge with the people that they're in touch with all the time and If you get stuck in one of those fucking woke hives Like you're you're basically surrounded by mentally ill people that are preaching in a logical version of the world that no one No one believes could ever exist. I hope there there will be left weighing Leaders that emerge that kind of shed that I think they will have to just by virtue of sort there's survival I think the woke thing is so widely rejected now And when I say the woke thing I mean this this what Elon calls the mind virus the crazy aspect of it Like your kid knows its trans when it's too that kind of shit like the people that are just far off the rails That's gonna die off It's just it's just too nutty and it doesn't make any sense and it's ultimately destructive to a lot of different groups of people And it's not fair it's like the trans women in sports thing is the most unfair aspect of it That one that one's so crazy when you see people argue for it Inclusivity on like you're out of your fucking mind like you're out of your mind and the inability to discern who's a pervert and who's actually trans Like the impossible nature and then just green lighting perverts to do whatever they want and that You know my concern is I do think the the wokeism is either dying or dead my concern is those folks who are not looking for a new religion People like that in the right. I think they're mostly rejected No, there's a lot of people like that on the right the right has a woke right they have an attacking woke Fucking they they they're not united There's there's an aspect to the right that attacks other people on the right Especially now because the right has like more attention than ever before there's like there's a whole always gonna be a group in any sort of ideology is gonna be a group of people that use the opportunity to Attack people to elevate themselves. Yeah, I think Mark Andre's Five minutes I think Mark Andre's and calls the battle I think on the right maybe between the the techno libertarian versus the Nationalists so there's these like protectionist people that say like no more immigration Right master port everybody and then there's these people which they align a lot of ideas These people that say we need to fucking build yeah, yeah, like they're both America first But they just have a different flavor of that, you know the Mark Andre's is the world probably are or at least Silicon Valley accepts immigration like we need to Right allow legal immigration of the best people in the world right and put the nationalist Part of the right. They're like no fuck that fuck you with your H1B Fucking with them. Yeah, but we don't need anymore. We need marker. Yeah, we don't need What is your take on the H1B thing because I I? Saw the argument and I was like wait What is it do you guys want cheap labor? Are you trying to get like super skillful engineers from other places like what are we asking for here? I think as I understand H1B is just abused to get cheap labor. Yeah, but so you need to be reformed I think the argument got really muddled right because everybody was looking at the worst aspects of H1B which is the cheap labor Right, but there is an aspect and I think this there's an old one visa. There's different kinds of visas We're like we need to get the bat the the best baddest motherfuckers from the all the rest of the world and have them work here Look at that baby three fifty three to go look at it steaming Look at all those carbons being admitted into the atmosphere by people who sell electric cars You have to drive a hundred thousand fucking cars 24 hours a day for a year To get any of the release of carbon that that thing has here you go with your world bullshit again You have to drive my chivel into the universe died of heat death to get as much as You're gonna get off of this one rocket turns out you need a combustion engine to get off this Do you think we do man? What do you think is going on with the UAPs? Do you think these motherfuckers have some new shit? Well, that's the Eric Weinstein like you don't need to worry about the rockets you need to crack physics Yeah, I think I think yeah, I think last time has a very unusual theory involving that one university that has a completely Overqualified physics department. It's also connected to a Stockbroker or not a stockbroker a financial thing What are those things called what they you know, I'm talking about Jamie? Key worders god damn it The porn is nothing thing no, it's like some financial investment group that does better numbers They do like birdie made off numbers like nutty number What's up venture capital venture? Thank you. That's it so this company is connected to this university this company makes Extradinary about some money this university has an insane physics department and like they're not publishing anything and Eric's like What are you guys doing? What the fuck are you doing? So he thinks that these motherfuckers branched off? He thinks that they the government probably got a bunch of like super top secret squirrel type dudes They're working on some high-level shit and they branched off decades ago and that they've been working on this for a long time Of course the military often swoops in and wants that talent wants that technology What are those ideas right? They're probably connected all inner inner? Twined with the military because who's gonna build these things right you need the defense department you need Defense contractors rather you need like Raytheon you need someone like that who knows how to make spaceships like make this fucking thing You know and they probably back engineer to do all they probably found some crash things That are probably left here on purpose and like figured out monkeys and then and you know 1947 these dudes are fucking fumbling around and then also and they figure out fiber optics also and they figure out transistors Also, they'll like there's a bunch of weird shit that just kind of emerges After these crash sites. That's what I like to believe Yeah, I kind of believe that I also believe that there's That they're they're not so focused on us. They're doing it here and everywhere else too like this is maybe I wouldn't maybe focus on us. I was just feel like there's a lot a lot of tribes I think I'm sorry, but it takes a long-ass time for it to get to the distance that our earth got from the Sun Well, you can get liquid water and it only lasts for a little while to a phrase Oh, maybe if that's the case and they understand that then yes The more spicy you thought about like the way let's just assume that the way life was created on earth Is the only way life is created anywhere in the universe? Let's assume that all those rules apply Let's assume that terence Howard's on to something People and the peopleing you would imagine that it would have to get where we are where the water melts where the ice melts 17 seconds and then life emerges from the sea like it did here Right doesn't that make sense that that would happen everywhere? 10 oh Jesus Wherever there's water there we go Five four three three two One Here goes That's a hundred million diesel trucks blowin coal As America, baby look at that thing beakles that you got rich Holy shit, man, and that that thing's gonna get caught Bro, I Want to rock it I just decided I want to rock it go up in that dude I need a rocket podcast some space. I want to rock it Look down all right. We're more than 30 seconds into flight 30 seconds 33 edges is a bit you down range look how high that is in 30 seconds Aviotic power in symmetry nominal Good call out. It's on the snap off You just heard the real day. That's about six miles away when it snaps off. Where's it go? You don't want to the drop it in the ocean no in lands. Oh That's right. That's right. That's the Falcon. Yeah, it gets caught by these Yeah, I know I was thinking about like the Saturn five I think it was like a bush I forgot it actually can land Which is even nuttier it's nutty it's that this gigantic thing that size of the skyscraper is gonna Just in lands they just pass through the greatest stress the vehicle's gonna experience going uphill speed is 2,000 kilometers an hour what the fuck it keeps getting faster Look how it is huh as they get away from the gravity of Earth look how it gets faster you fucking flatter of dorks It gets easier and easier. I don't know looks flat from here It does look flat they're right Oh my god, bro, you believe this CGI you really believe this is happening you are a chill Lex Watch the camera might go off for a little bit which will explain everything have you seen the guy who takes the flatter with people to Antarctica Or they could see that the sun's been around and like oh shit Well, you can go to Antarctica. There's done a nice ball. No I mean I like people that can change their mind in that way Let's see let's see if it lands Corners like all the different boosters or something so it's 54 miles or 54 kilometers in the sky right now And it actually has I think satellites on boards. I was I was active Turn them all off just slow down Stage separation So that fuckers gonna go land that's gonna go land that's so that's a building right that take now like two minutes for comes back down Maybe three four more that is so fucking crazy. It's gonna go land now Look at the earth it looks round Looks the earth looks the earth looks kind of round as mother. Oh, wait. It looks flat there. This is a new camera this different Oh, this is the real camera that other one is bullshit That other one is a fish island Yeah, oh, oh the fucking where's the stars this is bullshit. This isn't a lab in Nevada This is a screen saver I think they have a payload of Of a satellite that they're like testing releasing so bro imagine what it feels like looking out the window Right it's going to waste their now tumbling the It's almost a 6,000 kilometers an hour. Oh my yeah, they're going to sit back down still slowing down Ooh Space station What is that? Is that the space station? Is that what that is? I hope so. I don't know what she just said it. She just said it That was we just awesome She just said it definitely your fault Is it possible to get that close to the space station like hey guys Yeah, I mean they're extremely precise about their flight trajectory That will then go down to you would would you ever fly around runny's How much how much would you how much would I need to pay you no no no no no I'm already rich With that One even yeah, I don't I don't have that expensive tastes Good for that so far now I would love to find one of these man from the flat That's so incredibly flat Look at CGI bro Firing it's engines right now What do you think would happen if you did send flat earthers up in that and they got to say do you think they would believe? What they were how many of them are schizophrenic though? Oh? They'll think ever send like what percentage of the flat earth community look at the percentage of all communities It's like one percent that are schizophrenic right? But they're doing isn't it like across the boards something like that. Yeah, so is not disparaging the flat earth community I'm just saying well Could you be like one at light or percentage can you just be a little schizophrenic? You definitely can I know it dudes you got a touch. They got a touch. Yeah, I looked like just a touch I told the story once I was talking to this comedian and I've known this guy forever I thought he's totally normal And but he's always like odd and he starts showing me pictures on his phone of clouds He's like see that I go. Yeah, it's gonna go through a cloud right now. Whoa, it's a high-ass cloud 20 kilometers up Wow For that you think that's so fucking cool how fucking cool is that this thing is gonna go land now You want to make a bet about if he's gonna catch oh, it's gonna catch all right. Yeah, I believe so too. Yeah, no, I wouldn't bet against it They'll be on American Look how cool that is They're focusing on it now from a distance. It just dropped fast now only three kilometer two kilometers above Quick Bro, this is so insane This is so insane so it has this it's controlling Look at this position wild this is look at the tower coming in to catch it too. Oh my god Fuck yeah Holy shit man, that is so fucking badass Seven minutes for the whole flight. Yeah, wow That's a fucking building That is so dope Look at the other ones. What is that? I'm being in speed 16,000 kilometers an hour. Oh my god 40 kilometers away. Wow New Glen yesterday Starship today. This is why I fucking love America. That's so incredible dude. It's so incredible Hey, the question is like how tall is that in reference to like a building? Isn't it like a 20 story building or something crazy before it took off right there? Yeah, wow It is looking at much bigger. It is the Millennium Falcon Millennium Falcon how fucking amazing is that what's the other one is that blue origin? Oh, that's another it is basically it's bigger than the blue origin rocket But quite a bit it is I think it's the biggest rocket ever made 123 meters Yeah, and that part right here halfway that's what came back right so that's gotta be I Mean you think it's it looks higher than half how many floors of like yeah, it's gotta be 70 meters. That's so crazy That's so big Yeah, it's like 33 Raptor engines. So it's just the rock power Just just even one of those engines is You hear it see it live. It's so much cooler watching it actually happened live that it is watching a video Yeah, when you watch a video you're like yeah, that's cool But like we didn't know what was gonna happen. Yeah, that's the cool thing about life. Yeah, fuck. Yeah, that was awesome What's that with that? No, American ingenuity baby. Let's go on the earth. Good with all love you. Love you too, man