The Jerogean experience. And the more you study, the ancient past, whether it's an ancient Greece, or a lot of my book focuses on paleo Christianity. The more you see this kind of ritual. Can I show you some images of paleo-Christian ritual? Yeah. Okay, cool. I love it. I love talking to you. Okay, cool. What do you got? Jamie, there should be a folder called Circe. Circe like the lady from Game of Thrones? Like the lady from Game of Thrones. And she's my favorite. Then you'll get to know her a lot better. That's a great character. You'll get to know her a lot better. Shame. Shame. What am I looking for here? It's in my Google Drive. Oh, no, no, yeah. I have the folder. What do you want me to pull up? Oh, just a few pictures. Yeah, just from the first one. Yeah. We can start with with, we can go into the pictures. At my point, I'm just, at my point. It's just words. That's fine. Okay. We can move forward from there. So what I'm going to show you are some images from a hypogeum. And I don't think we got around to this last time. But hypogeum was this underground chamber. And it was the site where most of the early Christian ritual took place. So if you think back to Paleo Christianity, between the death of Christ and Constantine, which is 300 years later, give or take, Christianity was this illegal cult. It was this underground religion. And some cases literally. So the only places where you would celebrate the Eucharist and the proto-mass were in, like small and private homes in this agape meal. And then sometimes you'd go underground into these, like necropolis, like these places of the dead. And that for some reason was the place where the mass was celebrated. And so as part of my research for the book, I went into some of these underground chambers to see what the earliest Christians would have seen and some of the evidence that was left behind in terms of like frescoes. So there's no botanical chemical analysis of what was happening in these places. But we do have images. We have frescoes. And we have the idea of what the early ritual would have looked like. And a couple weeks ago, I reached out to the Vatican specifically to ask them if I could show these images to you today. And they said yes. All right. Thank you, Vatican. They're actually... Take back all the shutters, Vatican. Yeah. They're actually... They're great research partners. It's the Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology. So it's the archaeological team that is responsible for the preservation and conservation of all these ancient sites. And I think it's an aspect of a really Christianity, like very few people know about. And so what was happening underground, if you want to go back to the first slide just quickly, there was this Yale professor who sadly died in recent years. And was Ramsey McMullen. And what he talks about are these underground chilouts. They were called the Gilea. The Latin word for them is refragarium, where we get the word refridgerator. So they were like underground chilouts, where certainly the Romans, and it's believed the earliest Christians would have gone to celebrate the dead with sacramental wine, with celebratory wine. They would have a wine ceremony, and these dank chambers underground to like usher the dead into the afterlife, or bring them refreshment. They were called refrageria. And so it's kind of unclear when the refrageria, a pagan Roman ceremony, became like a proto-Eucharistic Christian mass. Like the line... Again, the line is very blurred at this period of time, which I call the pagan continuity hypothesis. This notion that the older wine drinking consumption by the Romans, the Greeks before them, somehow influenced, at least in some cases, the earliest celebrations of the mass. And so I just show this quickly to show that, in these wine parties, Ramsey has this great line saying that this was not just picnicking at the bottom there. He said, this was religion. So even though it looks like a picnic, it looks like they were gathering over like almost like a Mexican day of the dead ceremony. Like they would meet by the graveyard to remember the dead and the ancestors. Yeah, there was wine and food, but this was religion to the ancient Romans. And I think to the Romanized Christians who followed them in the first century, second century, third century. So the next slide is... That's just a bunch more text from a Catholic encyclopedia, by the way, from 1907 if I'm not mistaken. And it talks about how the celebration of the dead and this funeral banquet you see right in the middle there, this notion that the funeral banquet is really kind of at the core of what the early mass was. Even if you go back to the Gospels, it was, you know, Jesus asking for the commemoration of this event, you know, do this in memory of me. As you do this in memory of me, remember my life, death, and eventual resurrection. This is sort of the prototype for the mass. And so it's important to remember that the funeral banquet was there to bind those together who remained faithful to the memory of Jesus after his death. It's very similar to this Roman-refrigerium. So I give that all that was background just to show you the first couple of images from the hypogeum. So if you skip to the next one, or maybe... So that's what it looks like when you go underground. There was... It was discovered in 1919, I think, as a fiat shop around the corner, it was trying to expand into a sunken garage. They came across these monuments, which is not uncommon in Greece and Italy and around the Mediterranean. So I found this hypogeum, which dates to the third century AD. So we don't have firm dates. It could be anywhere from like 220 to 250 AD. So this is the time period we're talking about. So these were tombs. They're rock cut tombs in the hypogeum here. If you go to the next one, one of the first things I saw when I went into the hypogeum was this, which... You know, it's a little strange because again, I'm trying to figure out if this is a Roman pagan refugerium, or if this is a Christian celebration of some sort of Eucharist. Because again, this site is controlled by the Vatican. The Vatican has preserved this for reasons. And it's been said by the Pontifical Commission. These are some of the most explicit and concrete evidence for the origins of Christianity. So this is... Whether this is purely pagan or Christian is sort of a moment of debate. But if you just look at it, what's odd is that you see 12 people gathered around the table. And when you think of 12 people gathered around the table, you think of something like the Last Supper. And so it's pretty clear that what's important to this dinner is the chalice that's being lifted by the servant there. Or maybe it's a priest of some sort. So it's clear that whatever's happening, wine is important to this gathering of 12 people. The interesting part is the woman who's appearing in the back. And so, you know, the woman who's sitting in the back of the house is very closely. There is sort of like this effigy of a woman descending exactly from the background to the foreground. It's thought that she is Aurelia Prima. And Aurelia was one of the dead women to whom the hypogeum was dedicated. And so what they think of that's her, this is one of the Vatican's interpretations, is that that's her emerging from the world of the dead to take place in this funeral banquet, in this ceremony. So we're not really sure how to interpret that. Because she's not seated at the table. And because what they think this is, is that whenever, especially because of the place that we're in, which is underground, that when wine is being served at a referendum, that the Romans would habitually do this in order to commune with the dead. Not as a picnic, but as religion, as Ramsey McMillan says. So this was their religion for keeping alive that relationship to the dead and refreshing the dead in the afterlife. So if we were to celebrate them, they would appear. And Ramsey has this great line in his scholarship, where he says, the dead themselves participated. One of my favorite lines in his research, the dead themselves participated. So that's Aurelia participating in a funeral banquet. That's happening underground. Okay, so if we go to the next slide, so again, unclear if that's Christian or pagan, and then you see some of these images, that's interpreted as Jesus as the good shepherd from the Gospel of John. You see the goats down below. So that's either interpreted as Saint Paul or Plotinus. Plotinus was this Neoplatonic philosopher who lived around that time in the third century. And so it's unclear if that's Saint Paul or Plotinus, or maybe it's Paul using the image of Plotinus to call up the imagery. And again, everything's very ambiguous because Christianity is illegal. So you don't go down there and paint very explicit images of Jesus or the last supper or Christian elements because you could get in trouble for that. Obviously, so there's a lot of ambiguity in these frescoes. So if you move past that, this is the most important one, which is kind of mind-boggling. So this is just to the right of that banquet scene. And it's called the Homeric Fresco. And it's called the Homeric Fresco because it seems to portray a very famous scene from Homer's Odyssey. And it's when Odysus is stuck on the island with Cersei, the witch Cersei, the prototypical witch of antiquity, Cersei. He's stuck on the island with her. And the three dudes you see there on the bottom to the left have just been transformed from pigs back into men. It's one of the most famous scenes in Book 10 of the Odyssey where Cersei delivers a potion. She concocts a potion. And in Greek it says that the verb that they use for concoct the potion is kukkyo, like she just like the ancient potion at alluses. This is one of the mythical precedents for what would become the actual kukkyon that was used in the early-sending mysteries. And so she uses this mythical kukkyon in which she casts these drugs. It says that she puts drugs into this potion to transform the men into pigs than back to men. So it's a very, I mean, like of all the 27,000 and changed lines of the Odyssey and the Iliad, it's a particularly strange image to evoke from Homer. Because Cersei amongst all the many things she's famous for is for being a witch. And for having this profound knowledge of the botanical world and potions and things that we might call psychedelics today. And so it's a really strange image to have there. And so the Vatican produced this monograph over a decade ago where one of their scholars, Alexia Latini, goes over this in great detail to demonstrate why exactly this is this is Cersei. And up above, that's another image of Cersei with all her animals on this magical island. And what they found there exactly was with Cinnabar. And during the conservation process, they were able to identify the mercury sulfide that had been used to paint this red image of Cinnabar around the house, which is a very telling detail because there's a line just before this in the Odyssey where it talks about the fiery smoke coming out of Cersei's palace. So between the fiery smoke and the Cinnabar and the web down below, there's a lot of certainty that this is probably Cersei. If you go to the next slide. What is G-to-O-M? What are those people laying down? Do you zoom in on Cersei? Right here. Yeah. Up above? What are those people laying down? Yeah, that's what we're presenting. That's the interpretation from the monograph is that that's some sort of funeral beer. Oh, so those are dead people. That could be dead people. Yeah. Which is also strange. What's that? Satan. That was insane. That we can't make out. So the loom was another telltale sign. So there's the fiery smoke at the palace and the loom is another telltale sign. So this is if it were just this, you would think, OK, maybe it's just Cersei and a loom. But if you go to the next slide, there's the next one. Yeah, there's a manuscript in the Pope's library called the Vergilius Vatikanos. You can find this online. And the Vergilius Vatikanos manuscript, which is from about 400 to 430 AD. There's this picture of Cersei and the loom, which corresponds to Cersei and the loom on the right. So they know for sure, you know, with relative certainty, at least, that there's some image continuity between Cersei and the loom. And she talked about in the ancient literature as always being at the loom. So the confidence is rising. This is... And for folks who don't know what a loom is, it's how you create cloth with threads. Some people, yeah. Yeah. So with this, for your just listening to this, what she has is like, if you've ever seen people make cloth in a traditional way with a loom, she's got the... Why did they depict her with a loom? Why was she known as a person to make cloth? Because that's what Homer says in his epic poetry. And that's what Virgil also says in his epic poetry. So Homer writes the Odyssey centuries later, Virgil writes the Annead. And that's sort of the mythical founding of Rome, the main character, Anneas. And in both versions, there's a Cersei character. So this Cersei character survives for centuries in the ancient world from the Greek to the Latin. And in both cases, the loom is mentioned. And also, what's mentioned in these passages are the fact that Cersei uses potent herbs. And the Latin says Potentibus Eterbeis. So she's using potent herbs and mixing up potions from these men into pigs and vice versa. So it's a very strange idea to have a pagan witch in a fresco that's been preserved in this paleo-Christian monument. Combined with this referegium, sort of eucharistic celebration of the dead. And then in the last few images, what it depicts is a woman being initiated into these high mysteries. So things you don't normally associate with early Christianity.