Thank you. Walking out is always such a trip at these things. I just got here and I feel like I missed the first part of the program. I hope I didn't miss anything meaningful. But I just want to say, I don't think I did. No, I'm just getting, I watched it. I laughed. I laughed at the kind of bitter sardonic laugh that emerges from you and upside down world arrives. When your dog starts doing your taxes and you're like, wait, it sounds good to work this way. To hear calls for like de-platforming and denouncing people at a Charlie Kirk event. I'm like, what? That's hilarious. Yeah, this is hilarious. Actually, one of the clips I was listening to myself, thinking as I often do when I hear myself speak, which is never because I never watch myself. But at these events, I always play like the role of you. And I'm like, that guy is pompous. Woo! Sorry about that. We don't see ourselves clearly. But the prediction that at some point when Republicans took power again, which I did everything I could to help and really felt that was important, I still think I was right. But I really thought that the impulse to de-platform people or even to use the word platform as a verb, which it's not, it's a noun, don't steal my nouns. De-platform and denounce. Why haven't you denounced somebody else the whole red-guard, cultural revolution thing that we so hated and feared on the left, that we did everything we could to usher in a new time where you could have an actual debate. I mean, this kind of was the whole point of Charlie Kirk's public life. And I think that he died for it. I really believe that. And I know a lot about it because the last several months of Charlie's life were devoted, in part, to arguing about this event, in fact, this speech. In fact, my speech here, which he asked me to do earlier this year this summer and was immediately put under just immense pressure from people who give money to turning point. I would assume good people, but who wanted him to take me off the roster. And this has all become public. And the whole thing is so sad that I never talk about it except to say, Charlie stood firm in his often stated and deeply held belief that people should be able to debate. And that if you have something valid to say, if you're telling the truth, you ought to be able to explain it calmly. And in detail, to people who don't agree with you, and that you shouldn't immediately resort to shut up racist, you shouldn't immediately go to motive. By the way, shut up racist is the number one reason I voted for Donald Trump. And because it just sick of it, I mean, first of all, if I was a racist, if I was a bigot, I would just say so. It's America. You're allowed to be whatever kind of person you want. I'm not. I'm sincerely opposed to have always been and will always be. But the style of debate where you prevent the other side from talking or being heard because you immediately go to motive, well, I wonder why you're asking that question. I wonder why you're asking that question. I detect in the question a certain evil in your soul. And everyone listening should know that listening to you implicates them and that they someday may be asked to denounce you and that friendship is not a reason to defend someone. Love is no defense. I kind of thought we'd reached the end of that. And as far as I'm concerned, we have. And I'm not going to play both those rules. I'm not going to engage in that. If someone doesn't like what I think, fine with me, as long as I get too expressed it, that's my view. But since we're on the topic, I think I should take the opportunity to explain why Charlie was under all this pressure. And I think Erica, who I just saw backstage, and whom I love, and who I can tell you, was totally committed to continuing the core principle of Charlie's public life, which is the right of every person to express what he believes that is rooted in Christian faith. We believe people should be able to say what they think because they have souls. They're human beings created by God. They are not slaves. They are not animals. They are not objects. You cannot tell another human being to shut up, even shut up racist, because you don't own him. He is an independent, autonomous person created by God as an individual. OK, so that's where that belief comes from. That's where free speech comes from. And there's no accident. This is the only country in the world that protects it, because our founding documents were informed, as you just heard so nicely expressed by Michael Nolz, my friend, by people who self-consciously incorporated Christian precepts into their structure of government. So Charlie was committed to that. But the people around him were like, you can't, because it's not that Carlson's wrong. My only point was, I don't want to land war with Iran. I got to love over my skis and said, I didn't want another regime change war with Iran. Rather than explain why we should have a regime change war with Iran, which I'd be happy to listen to, he's an anti-Semite. He's an anti-Semite. Which I said, well, obviously that sounds true, and tries that I know. And then it just didn't stop. So I continued to say, I'm not an anti-Semite. We don't care what you say. You're lying. You are. So let me just affirm one final time. Not only am I not an anti-Semite, and would say so if I was, I'm not an anti-Semite for a very specific reason. Not because it's unpopular, or my donors don't like it. I don't have any donors. I'm not an anti-Semite because anti-Semitism is immoral. In my religion, it is immoral to hate people for how they were born. Period. But that is not a limited principle. That is a universal principle. It applies to every human being on planet Earth. You may not. You are prohibited by my religion, which is Christianity, from hating people for how they were born, because God created them with His spark in His image. Because they have souls. You can disagree with them. You can hate their ideas. You may even find yourself, and I do. I'll confess it, hating them for a moment. But you can't hate everyone who's like them. You can't punish people for crimes they didn't commit. That's the basis of our justice system. That's the basis of Christian ethics. That's why we have what are called human rights. They apply to every human, not just your group, not just my group, but every group, every human. Because we don't consider people in terms of the groups to which they belong. We consider them as individuals the way that God created them. So anti-Semitism is not just naughty. It's immoral. And it is precisely as immoral as hating any other group. And that would include other groups in the United States that are hated and have been under attack for decades. And that would include white men who did nothing to become white men. They were born that way. And just because you have a beef with a white man, let's just say Donald Trump, doesn't mean you get to punish all the rest of the white men in the country. And yet, our leaders, not just of our Congress, the executive branch under Biden, but of every major US corporation, of every college in the country, probably except Hillsdale and two others, every single one for more than 10 years has engaged in a systematic effort to hurt white men because they are white men. That is racism that is precisely as bad as anti-Semitism, but it is much more widespread and has been so far, much more damaging. And my point is, if you said nothing about that, or if you encouraged it by say cheering on BLM, which was an anti-white hate group and said so, then you have no moral standing to lecture me about bias. Period. Because all bias is the same. You are not allowed to hate people based on their bloodline. We do not believe in blood guilt. We reject a blood guilt. That's why our justice system is just. That's why our religion is just. Every person has the possibility of transformation. Paul is wandering around. So all of Tarsus is wandering around murdering Christians. Then he decides, well, I'll walk to Syria, and he's been on the road by Jesus, who changes him. And in one day, he becomes the most energetic church planter and apostle of Christianity. In one day, he went from enemy to leader in one day. And that possibility exists for every human being, every human being. That's what our Christian faith tells us. That's also what our eyes tell us. There are no permanent enemies. There could not be. And I would extend this to even people who attacked me from this stage. They'll say, if we agree on something, I'm happy to be friends with you. You may have been mean to be one day. I was mean to you too. That's all right. There is always the possibility that we can recognize we have more in common than divides us and come back together. There are no permanent enemies. There is no such thing as blood guilt and collective punishment in this country, in the Middle East, anywhere on the planet is totally immoral. And if you want to know what makes America exceptional, it's that idea. And it's our job to defend it. Well, this Christmas give the gift of sleep with eight sleep. Everybody needs good rest for most of their days, but few know how to actually get it. Eight sleeps pod five is the answer to that. Pod five is a smart mattress that automatically regulates your body temperature throughout the night. It's proven to deliver up to an extra hour of good sound sleep every single night. That will change your life. If you get it, plenty of people on our staff use the pod five and they are very psyched. That's why they're so focused and well rested. I can see them humming around right now. The full body feeling of comfort. That's what keeps you in the sack and fully crashed out. We recommend it strongly. So we are all in an eight sleep as we've told you they extended their biggest sale of the year. Use the code Tucker at this address eightsleep.com eight sleep.com slash Tucker for 400 bucks off the pod five ultra. There's a reason eight sleep is one of the men's health sleep board the coveted sleep award because it's awesome. Eightsleep.com slash Tucker. So I guess I would just say to the many organizations now and particularly the supplies to the anti-defamation league which has cheered on anti white hatred for decades has attacked anyone who said anything about it which has been one of the most aggressive cheerleaders for hate against white men in the United States. Now trying to lecture the rest of us about hate I would say it's enough to put out the irony of that. And it comes to our side which is the side of humanity and oppose all hate against all people. Say out loud, paid against whites is every bit as bad as hate against Jews. It's a universal principle or it's not a principle. It's just a preference. If it's not a universal principle it's not a principle. It's just a preference. It's just identity politics. And we've had enough of that and that's the one thing that will destroy this country certainly. The only thing that will save it is the understanding that principles upon which America was found to apply to every single human being always. So let's say that. By way of saying that I'm not just situationally opposed to anti-Semitism, I'm actually opposed to anti-Semitism. And I hope that the ADL will join me. I'll send the money, by the way, if they come out against hate aimed at anyone and everyone. I hope they will. But let me just say something more broadly about where the conservative movement, whatever that is, the people of whatever Trump, the Trump coalition, and the supposed civil war going on within that group. I don't think it's real. I think it's fake. I think it's totally fake. I don't think, and I've had cause to think a lot about this because I've been unwittingly involved in the proxy war. There are two things going on here. I'm not guessing. One is jockeying for position post-Trump. So Trump created this amazing coalition, bringing in people who had never voted Republican before, but were very enthusiastic about him. And that coalition took over the most powerful government in the history of the world. So there's a lot of stake here. And so the question becomes who gets to run it after, who gets the machinery when the president exits the scene? And there are a lot of people in Washington, maybe even in this room, who aren't quite sure what they want, but they know they don't want JD Vance. And so the attack, and you heard it from the stage tonight, there's someone here who's a very bad man and he's friends with JD Vance. Could be me. I am sad about being used in a proxy war over politics in which I'm not involved in any level. I'm not advisor to anybody. But I just think I should say that out loud, okay? There are people who are mad at JD Vance and they're stirring up a lot of this in order to make sure he doesn't get the nominations. That, this is true. So this raises the obvious question, which is why are they mad at JD Vance? Such a nice guy, which is. They're mad at JD Vance because he is the one person and things could change, of course, but right now, who really kind of buys the core idea of the Trump coalition. Now what is that idea? Ladies and gentlemen, anyone know? Anyone know? America first. It's America first. It's really simple. Which I notice, some people are pretty anxious to retire that phrase. Remember when they told us, that's a bigoted phrase. Really? It is. And then they just decided to ignore it in favor of MAGA. Make America great again, which I'm obviously for. But how do you make America great again by putting America first? Now what does that mean? I'll be more precise. It's not a couple of you that can't be concept. It's a really simple concept. The US government, the largest organization in human history with the most well funded military in history, ought to, in all the decisions it makes, put the interests of American citizens first. That's it. Oh, that's creepy. Sounds kind of fascist. You know what made Poland now? Now, just the opposite. In fact, the original America first years were kind of against wars and the current ones are too. Actually, it just means what it sounds like. The government ought to serve the people who pay for it, who elected them in whose name the business of government is conducted. That's all it means. Now there are two things to know about this idea. The first is almost everyone's for that. Like what percentage if you pulled that idea in the supposedly fractious Trump coalition that's in the middle of a civil war, what percentage of people would disagree with that? Well, a few. People whose names, you know? Well, that sounds like America only. It's not just America first, simple. But like probably 95% of Trump voters are before that. And I bet you like probably 70% of people who didn't vote for Trump would be for that. And if you calm down and explain it to them probably like 90%, why? Because it's self-evident, like most true things. And moreover, and think this through for a second, there is no other legitimate rationale for running our governments. We have self-government. This is a democratic republic. It exists for our benefit. The documents were written that way. The point of the American Revolution was to make that point. And so if you're not operating the federal government on behalf of US citizens, you're illegitimate. You actually have no right to rule. Period. And if you disagree, tell me what the other legitimate justification is. Oh, because my friends or people I agree with or in my interest group or I mean, no, the government must, must. This is non-negotiable. Operate on behalf of American citizens. So once you realize that that's the statement at the center of the debate, it all becomes pretty clear. Really clear, actually. It's not an ideological debate. There's an ideological about that. I've got all kinds of cookie ideological views. I love Knowles as less of all the views. I've probably had most of them in my long and varied life. I have fewer now. I just kind of want to see a good faith effort to improve the country. That's it. And I'm ever aware that I'm not exactly sure the right way a lot of times. Or terrorists, the best way to help the country? I don't know. I hope so. Not an expert. All I really care about is that the people in charge care, that they love the people they lead. That is the first and most important requirement of leadership. A father who loves his children may make mistakes, probably will, inevitably will. I did. But if he loves his kids, he'll do a pretty good job. And they'll be fine. An officer who loves his men, you know, you can't control the battle. But they'll do better than the officer who doesn't. The president who truly loves his people will over time tend to make wiser decisions on their behalf. But the leaders who don't care at all they'll destroy your country. And that is absolutely what we've had. That's, by the way, not noted as an effort to black pill you or an effort to discourage you or convince you you have no agency or control. You have a lot of control. You just change the government. Good. But if you want to know what the debate is going forward and what your job is going forward, it's holding your leaders to that very simple standard. Not on tariffs or any of these specific policy questions necessarily, but on their motive. Can you look me in the face and explain to me why the thing that you were doing, the money you're appropriating, can you tell me why that helps our country and our people? Tell me how. And if you're doing the whole shut up racist thing, then I have a right to question your motives, actually. Why can't you answer the question? Why can't you answer that question? What do you have to imply that some college kid is like some kind of kid more right or something because he's asking about an event? Like what? By the way, it is okay to ask questions. And I thought that was like the whole reason we were against the left. They're not going to force you to get up there and make ritual denunciations because this isn't my religion. It's politics. By the way, your politics do not trump my love for other people. Well, this country's 250th birthday is right around the corner. And our friends at Black Rifle Coffee are celebrating the right way with bold roasts made by veterans who love this country and live its values every day of the year. Black rifle makes coffee if people get up early and work until late. We drink it late, by the way. Best at night. It tastes great, especially after their atomic llama formula. During this time of year, cinnamon and brown sugar. It's awesome for winter. Whether you're hosting family, out in the woods, filling stockings for Christmas, this is the coffee that stands for something real, essential, and American. In 2025, Black Rifle supported groups like Folta Bonner, Team Red, White and Blue. And organizations that serve veterans and their families that in 2026 are going even bigger. We support them. We know them. We've taken a lot of unfair criticism, but they are great and sincere guys. We can vouch for that. Visit blackriflecoffee.com slash chucker and use the code tucker for 30% off your purchase or your first coffee club order. Or grab black rifle at Walmart or local grocery store. It's everywhere because it's awesome. Black rifle coffee, veteran founded American roasted. This is America's coffee. I remember my brother once said, I have one brother who's my best friend and he once had something lunatic as brothers do. And I remember all these reporters one from the Washington Post, which used to be a newspaper in Washington. Calling me and being like, we who denounce your brother. I said, son, if my brother went on a drug-related murder spree, I would not denounce him. What? Are you for drug-related murder spree? He said, no, I'm from my brother. And nothing will ever make me not for my brother. Not probably tell him no more drug-related murder spree for you. I'm not for that. Not for a lot of things, actually. But I will never, ever denounce people I love to satisfy the mob, right? I mean, it's crazy. So as you think through, like what should this movement be and where's what side should you take on the conservative Civil War? You already know the answer. You're on the side of America first. And if they can't tell you why it's America first, you just won the argument, because they don't have one. Shut up, Nazi is no different from shut up racist. It's a little more annoying, actually. And I would just say this too, because the passion is real, the anger is real, I feel it sometimes. I try not to get involved, but somehow I keep involving myself. And I try not to read the internet because I don't feel like it's good for my soul, but more addictive than cigarettes, I quit cigarettes, not Twitter. I think I'm going back to cigarettes and giving up Twitter, whatever. I don't want to burden you. Not kidding, actually. But anyway, the point is, you need to remember if you're a Christian and I think there are a lot of them in this room, that Jesus makes demands on you and holds standards for you that are very different from those, as my friend, close friend, Russell Brand, so beautifully explained. They're very different from those of the world, which really is controlled by saying it. It's hard even to say that, because it's so dark, but it's also so true. So don't be surprised. When Jesus sends out the disciples, my favorite passages in the Holy Testament, Jesus in Matthew 10 sends the disciples out, he's just picked them like 10 minutes before. He's like, all right, I want you guys road trip, no money, no clothes, no staff, and by the way, you're gonna get flogged, you're gonna be beaten with whips and arrested. I'm sure they're all thinking like, what, I thought we were the winners here. And when that happened, don't worry about what you're gonna say, the Holy Spirit will speak for you. And I'm like, I just can't get over the blase way in which he just tells them, the world is gonna try and kill you. Which by the way it did, I think all of them end up getting killed. And that's just the baseline. We're promised that it's a fact. You get up and give a speech about Jesus, you talk about Jesus, you try to live out his commands, you're gonna get attacked. Okay, we know that, don't whine. Here's the pitfall, here's the trap, is becoming hateful yourself. And I sincerely believe that this is a spiritual battle. And I'm not saying everyone disagrees with me is on the side of evil, I don't think that. I think I'm often wrong, I know that I am. But I do think that fundamentally, this is light versus darkness, I do. And darkness is characterized by rage and division and chaos and confusion. And light is God is characterized by the opposite of those things. And I've noticed this, there are attempts to make people hateful. One of the reasons people scream insults in your face is to provoke a reaction from you and make you hate them. They want you to hate them. They want you to become what they call you. Why? Because evil feeds on hate, that's why. So don't participate in that. And the way that I try to keep myself from becoming what they say I am, is by remembering that I am on the most basic level no better than my persecutors. I am no better than my persecutors. And that's why I'm commanded to pray for them because we have all fallen short of Jesus, period. And I'm reminded that every day in the structure of the Lord's prayer, where we first are told by Jesus to ask for forgiveness for our sins before we start diagnosing the plank in our neighbors or in the speck in our neighbors' eye. The whole thing begins with, I'm a pompous douchebag, I'll admit it. That's essential. It's essential. We are called to be righteous, but not self-righteous. And we're also called, and I have to say this before opening it up to your hostile questions, we should also be very un-guard against people who try to leverage the Word of God, the words of Jesus, for political ends. That is one, that is a dangerous thing to do. I don't wanna do that. And I attempt every time this is all sort of new to me. I'm so obviously not a great Christian that it's not like a lot of people are gonna be like, oh, I wanna be like him. But there are people, particularly Christian ministers, I have noticed, who are preaching a political message and pretending that it's the gospel. So let me just say, and I think my theology is right, I'm hardly a theologian, God is not on any country's side. Certain countries can decide to be on God's side. And that is true for people too. Okay? God doesn't have a partisan affiliation, he doesn't have a nationality. And if someone is telling you otherwise, that is just not true. It is not true. And I would also call your attention to the very obvious prohibitions in the New Testament against killing the innocent. We are not as Christians allowed to kill the innocent. Period. We are not. And you see elaborate arguments on behalf of doing so or ignoring it. Oh, that always happens in war. Well, you're right, one of the reasons I'm not that into wars. But when it does happen, unavoidably, we have to say that's wrong. We have to say that. We have to acknowledge that was wrong. And I'm sorry for the extent to which I participated in it. Forgive me because killing people who committed no crime is immoral. It will always be immoral. And people who do it will be punished for it. And nations that endorse it will be punished for it. That's a fact. And you are seeing now, you are seeing now a very intense effort to convince you otherwise. Oh, it's fine. They deserved it. Really, do their children deserve it? If a man commits a crime, do we kill his kids? I don't care if it's in Minneapolis or Gaza City. No, we don't. And if we do accidentally, we say, I am so sorry that we murdered someone who did nothing wrong because it is murder. God's a city, no we don't. And if we do accidentally we say, I am so sorry that we murdered someone who did nothing wrong because it is murder. And to see Christian pastors make excuses for that is one of the most, and that's not a partisan question. That is not a political question. That is the only question that matters. Do we have the right to murder people? And the resounding answer that Christianity provides us is, no. I don't get into the whole debate. I don't even, I don't even hear the terms, dispensationalist, you know, or whatever, replacement, I'm in a Piscopalian, okay, I don't enter these debates, or was. My theology is super simple. I like to be attitudes. Read them yesterday. I actually think it was at Michael reading some of them here. I think any person, any honest person, say it's the essence of the Christian faith. And killing tens of thousands of children and then making excuses for it on behalf of a foreign government is not in there. It's antithetical to that. Sorry, it doesn't make me a hater. It makes me the opponent of hate. It's not I've alienated most in the crowd with my staunch position against violence and power worship and money worship, which are also prohibited. And we should also keep that in mind. And in all of us is the desire to suck up to power and accumulate money we don't need. I'm not allowed to. Sorry. Anyway, not I made everyone mad. Are there any questions that I can answer? Yes. Shout it, baby. I'll hear it. We've got questions over there. Hold on one sec. I just call this lady up front. So the question was, what do you do if you're a conservative Republican and I assume other Republicans don't want you because you're an avowed Christian? Well, first you sit back and you think, how rotten is this whole thing become? If you can't say you're a Christian in a conservative group, if you can't say I'm uncomfortable with dudes marrying each other or whatever, abortion, the things that are prohibited by our religion, if you can't say that in a conservative group, it's not a conservative group. It's something else. My name is Madison and I'm 12 years old. When I'm older, I want to be a politician. I'm a Christian. And I was just wondering what are the steps I should take to... I'm so sorry. I can't hear a word you're saying. I hear two of you at least. My name is Madison and I'm 12 years old. I want to be a politician. And I was wondering what are the steps I should take to pursue that career? Thank you so much. I heard that you're 12 years old. And so thank you for asking that question. I think you said I want to be a politician. What steps should I take? Perfect. Well, prayer would be the first one. Just got to really want that for you. You seem so nice. Sorry. Just kidding. You know, I do think that we are entering into obviously a volatile period. Like there's a lot going on. I can't even keep track of it and that's my job. But I also feel like people who are telling the truth or trying, and it's kind of the best you can do is try. I said something yesterday in public that was totally wrong. Completely wrong. And I hate doing that, but it was sincere. I thought it was right. I said, you know, whatever. I'm sorry. I feel like people who try to tell the truth are rewarded for it because there have been too many lies. So my bottom line advice, I could give you other dumb advice, but my only real advice is just tell the truth always. And if you lose, that's okay. Okay. I can ask you. Did you don't touch me? Hi, Mr. Carlson. I am Bo. And my name is Annabelle. And we were wondering what you and your wife... You were wondering what I do where? What you and your wife do to strengthen your faith. Oh, what I do to strengthen my faith. I'm always embarrassed to talk about my faith because it's so not impressive, but honestly, the main thing I do is I read the Bible every day. It's a really enjoyable. And I read a version of it called the NLT. And I'm not fluent in Aramaic or Greek. Hebrews, so I can't tell you that it's the best, but it has the clearest English. And as a writer and editor, I just love clear English. And I just think it's amazing. And it's just opened up all this stuff that I thought was opaque. And I wake up every morning really early, and I drink coffee with my dogs, and I read it by myself. And then my wife comes down and we talk about it. That's kind of it. But I love it. Yeah, and we do. So is the American Israel Public Affairs Committee commonly known as APAC? Is there being an America and not registered with FAIRA, like all other lobbying groups in America? Is that America first? Is it America first for senators, Congress, and even our president to take money from APAC? Is it America first to take money from a foreign lobby, so you'll send taxpayer dollars to that country? Even the question kind of answers itself. Obviously it isn't. And that's not an attack on Israel. It's certainly not anti-Semitism, despite the efforts of many to claim that it is. It's just an obvious statement. And the fact that people are attacked for asking the question, this is something that I talk to Charlie a lot about in his final months, because he was being attacked as an anti-Semite for asking that question. And we've memory hold that, but I was there, so I saw it. That's not the right way. Don't attack people's motives. I have a lot to attack people's motives. I'm trying to remember, so don't do that. And respond to what they're saying. And so no, of course it's not. And it's totally fine to ask about why a foreign government tried to sync one of our ships in 1967. That doesn't make you an anti-Semite, sorry. Those are Americans who died. And by the way, yeah, whatever. But the point is, no, of course not. And that's why they won't have the conversation. And my point is, you know, I'm 56. My kids are grown. I'm just not afraid of you at all. I don't hate you or anyone else. I love this country. I'm going to be here until I die. I have an absolute God-given right to ask these questions. And I'm going to keep doing that. Period. And you can shoot me or put me in jail. But the questions won't go away. So no, of course it's not. And that's why they respond with like rage and shame. Because you caught them doing something they can't defend. Duh? Hey, Tucker. How are you doing? Thanks for taking questions. My name is Michael Lasher. And I've come here from Munich, Germany, to introduce you and others to my book, The Same Bow, A Guide to Heal the Divide. And it addresses the Cold Civil War that's got us so split. And in the goal of it is actually to shift the symmetrical the symmetry of the bell curve distribution of the political spectrum from what we had at the end of the 2024 election, 52% Trump, 48% Kamala Harris. When everybody in this room thinks it should have been at least 75, 25. So we have a Cold Civil War going on. And I want to ask you what you think we should be doing to try to solve it. I created this communications to help bridge the divide to our case for those with whom we can no longer have rational, political discussion. It's a variation of what I said before, but I couldn't mean it more fervently. Orient the Republican Party around the single most popular and true message ever articulated by an American politician, which is put your own country first. That's why Trump got elected. In 2016, it's why he's president now. America first. And don't think of everything in narrow partisan terms. That's a trap. Most people agree with that. Most Americans have more in common with each other than they disagree on. And almost everybody agrees on that. And almost everybody is willing to tolerate a good faith argument about how to get there, except a few. And they're the ones running around calling everyone an anti semi. But everyone else is like, yeah, of course, that should be the debate. And they'll vote for you. They want that because they know they haven't had that. That's the fact. And what you're watching now, attacking people on the attacking millions of Americans because they're Muslims, it's disgusting. And I'm a Christian. I'm not a Muslim. I know there's a lot of effort to claim I'm a secret to you. I'm not. You should not attack people on those grounds. And you're seeing it from a Republican. What the hell are you doing? What you're doing is trying to divide the country. And I've lived through 50 years of this crap. All these fake race wars that they're always promoting. Oh, go hate each other while we loot the treasury. That's exactly what's going on. And most people are totally sick of that. So yes, there is a possibility for a huge coalition of decent people once they free their minds from the trap set for them by others and realize, wait a second, we all want to make this country better. And the 15% or 30% who don't, okay. Good luck in Maryland or wherever you wind up. But the rest of us would like to fix it. Soccer. Soccer. My name is Harrison Tinsley. I'm a single dad in California. Didn't get to be into this 15 months old just because I'm conservative. One half custody is mom tribe that trans him. Long story short. I have full custody now. And it's a dream come true. Thank you. But it's a miracle and praise God because I know so many dads that all have zero custody because of this. So Marjorie Taylor Green's bill protects children in a sense act just past the house. Can we pass it in the Senate and finally end this gender insanity mutilating, hurting kids? And will you better leave it? Well, that's part. Pull your face back for the microphones. I can hear you. And will you interview me? Am I going to interview D transition to people? Is that the question? No, no, me as a dad. And can we finally stop the mutilation of children with Marjorie Taylor Green's bill? Okay. I'm just going to say when I was a child, we did a lot of bird hunting. And my father would always say, my brother and me, it's a pop, you know, everyone wears earplugs and he would just say, pull the filter off your marble and stick it in your opposite ear. And that's actually at 56 made it really hard for me to hear microphone questions. So you asked, and I'll just answer this and stop, you asked about Marjorie Taylor Green's bill to ban the mutilation of children, which for some reason seems to have a lot of trouble getting through the House of Representatives, which is controlled by Republicans. And if there's ever a clearer example of who's side they're on, I can't think of it. Because at least on some of the foreign policy stuff, they can tell you no, no, we have to be at war with Russia because Putin's bad. He's just bad. He's bad. Okay, got it. We have to kill all the kids in Gaza because otherwise the gazins will come here and kill us. Okay. What's the potential excuse for allowing the sexual mutilation of children? At that point, I'm like, you know, I don't want to question people's motives, but I'm starting to wonder. And I do think it just gets back to you have to demand more from your members of Congress, from your leaders more broadly. You're not allowed to sell us out again because if you keep doing that, people get radical and hateful. And then they get desperate because they realize their vote doesn't matter. And that's when things start to go sideways in a way that nobody wants. So yeah, if you can't even ban the castration of children, I hope there is a list and I've been traveling today, but I hope on the Internet there's a list of everyone who voted against that effort and I hope that they are punished for it. I mean, they will be ultimately, but I hope they're punished in this life. Anyway, thank you very much. Well, some Americans have become cut off from the things that once kept us grounded are land, the skills that tied our families to nature. Those years get his next spot. And for minus, we made a new six-part series, American Game Tales from the Wild. We follow the sports when we're keeping these ancient traditions alive. We follow a permanent Navy seal into the mountains of Texas, Donald Trump, Jr. across the ridges of land. I, that's what we call from going from zero to hero. And wander with me through the quiet woods of Maine. I have just three dog commands. And then as I direct the dogs, find the bird. Find the bird. And then Denberg, obviously. I don't use as much as I'd like to. We cast for steelhead on the D'Souza River in Oregon. The first one I've gone a while. Track mule deer in the Utah High Country. Spearfish in the waters off Montauk, chasing striped bass and roof in tune of sea on the other side. It's called the American Game Tales from the Wild outdoor series. Watch it at tuckofurlson.com.