Do you think that Christian persecution is on the rise? Oh, I know it is. It's It's documented. 20th century was the worst century for Christian martyrs of Christian history all the previous centuries combined. It's the most persecuted religion. If two friends like each other, that's fine. But Aristotle says, "That won't last that relationship." What makes it last is when the two friends together fall in love with a transcendent third. And now together we look to that, now we really find a bond. When the bride and groom together look to Christ, now they'll stay married. If they're just looking to each other, it'll founder. The Catholic Church got super liberal and then all of a sudden everywhere you look, people you know are converting to Catholicism with a pretty kind of traditionally Christian orientation. This how I would characterize ecclesial liberalism. A tendency to reduce the supernatural to the natural. That was going on for a long time. Yes. In very recent years, there's been a keener interest in the supernatural dimension of the faith. I don't think I've ever received more texts about any guest than I did about you. Um from Catholics I know, from non-Catholics I know, but Catholics all wanted to hear details on, you know, factions within the church and I'm not going to ask you any questions about that cuz I don't understand any of it. I want to start as broad as I possibly can, which is it seems like a lot of people in the West are unhappy and it's measurable. Suicide rates are Yep. um at record highs and um birth rates are at record lows and those are not signs of confidence in the future, those are signs of despair. W- Why are people unhappy? Well, they've lost a sense of God. I mean, God is the supreme good and when you lose that sense of God and you collapse back in on yourself, that's St. Augustine you said to find sin as curvatus in se. I'm caved in around myself. When you do that, you are by definition unhappy. When you lose a sense of objective value grounded in the supreme value of God, almost again by definition you become unhappy. What does it mean to cave in on yourself? It means that you've lost a sense of connection to the values that should be calling you out of yourself in an act of love and you've you've now come to reverence your own freedom, your own autonomy. So, what gives my life meaning is the fact that I've chosen something. I have determined my life. If the Bible has one message, it's that that when you live your life that way, you get lost. Uh when you deify your own psyche, your own ego, you get lost. The The joy of life comes from forgetting in this great ecstatic act. You forget about yourself and you lose yourself in some great value. Now that could be sports, that could be politics, whatever it is. But then the supreme value in which all the other ones participate, we call God. God is the highest good, the summum bonum. That's why you love the Lord your God. That's the first commandment, right? But when the culture's lost that, which ours is in danger of, um you by definition become unhappy. You get caved in around yourself. And then you fuss around in this kind of addictive way. Um that's how I would diagnose the thing spiritually. When you are in love with the idea of choices, I thought the whole point of the West was choices. Well, but you have to know what your choice is for. When you When you deify choice itself, when you say autonomy, that's my that's my God. No, choice is for some good and the idea is to is to order freedom, right? Freedom is not an end in itself. Freedom is ordered towards some good. When it's disordered, it tends to collapse in upon itself. That's what we got. The whole point of America I thought was choice and freedom for its own sake. Well, and I would argue it's not for its own sake and if that happens to us, something's gone wrong. The founding fathers, you know, they weren't in the full sense of the term. They wouldn't have the full Catholic imagination as I would like it, but they certainly had a sense of the objective good. And that the purpose of life is to find that good and be ordered toward it. An ordered freedom is what they're interested in, not freedom for its own sake. What does ordered mean? Ordered freedom? Ordered toward the good and that's why it has to be educated. Your freedom has to be disciplined and directed. It's like a kid with all kinds of athletic ability, but if a coach never directs that ability toward the achievement of some good that he can become a great tennis player or a great golfer, then the freedom it begins to just kind of stew on itself. No, direct freedom, direct talent, direct energy. And our culture see it's like I think of this If you have banks to a river, the river has energy, it's going somewhere. You knock down the banks, you say, "Oh, I don't want to be limited. Don't Don't set limits to my freedom." It just floods the fields. What It just opens up in this big lazy lake and everyone's just sort of lying on their air mattresses, right? Now I'll tolerate you, you tolerate me, I won't bother you, but then we're not getting anywhere. The point of the banks is not to restrict me, it's to direct me, see, toward some good. Well, religion has played that role for much of our history and and in the measure that religion gets marginalized and in the measure that we deify our autonomy, welcome to the unhappy world that many of the young people are living in sadly. Deify our autonomy. So, you're um speaking as if autonomy and choice are the same thing or closely related. auto See, the goal for the Bible is not autonomy, it's theonomy. Uh God, theos, becomes the nomos. God becomes the law of my life. And see, here's the trick. When God becomes the norm of my life, I become more myself. I I find who I really am. If I jettison God and I say, "No, autonomy. It's I'm the leader of my own life." I get lost, right? What's Jesus say? The one who uh loses himself, you know, will find it. The one who's who's trying to hang on to himself is going to lose it. Um lose your freedom in God's greater freedom and you become now authentically free. That's every spiritual master in the West teaches that lesson. But we lose it in the measure that we say, "No, it's all about my autonomy. That's all that matters." Don't tell me what to do. Throw off the rules. Right. Knock down the banks and the river becomes a lazy lake and we tolerate each other blandly, but we don't have a common purpose. That's another problem. See, if if you reject objective value, so you got your values, I got my values, your freedom, my freedom. Well, what connects us? In fact, we're antagonistic to each other, right? We tend to grow into hostility and my freedom's against your freedom. But if together we find a common good, a common goal, now we can join forces, right? So, it's it's falling in love, that's Aristotle, with the transcendent third. So, like if if two friends like each other, that's fine. But Aristotle says, "That won't last that relationship." What makes it last is when the two friends together fall in love with a transcendent third, the country or their or philosophy or some great value. And now together we look to that, now we really find a bond. Go back now to the 1950s and Fulton Sheen, the great Catholic preacher, writes a book called Three to Get Married, made the same argument, right? The three are the bride, the groom, and Christ. When the bride and groom together look to Christ, now they'll stay married. If they're just looking to each other, it'll founder. What are the banks that we've demolished? Well, I would say objective value. Uh you know, the the life of the mind, the the moral good, religious good, aesthetics. Think of the good, the true, and the beautiful. If we subjectivize those and just relativize them. You got yours, I got mine. What you think is right, I I think is wrong. When that's lost, the banks are knocked down. But when together we can together reverence the beautiful, we can together reverence the moral good, we can together reverence the epistemological good, the the intellectual good, um then together we move someplace. And see, our whole system educationally was set up classically to do just that, was to train people in what these objectivities are. Uh but when you subjectivize those or you see it simply as part of an oppressive or patriarchal system, you know, why do we Why read Shakespeare? He's just an old patriarch. See, but that's a very dangerous game to play. Now we've lost a common mooring and then we devolve into this sort of self-regarding um autonomy. So, I mean, Christianity is probably not the I don't think it's the only religion to make this point, but self is the trap. Yeah. Yeah, it See, you think of the self here, the ego is like a black hole, a black hole that will draw everything into itself. Sucks all of life and light and energy into itself. Nothing can escape. The curvatus in se ego, right, becomes a black hole. And I've known people like that, I'm sure you have too. You're with them, they'll draw everything into themselves. The best people are those who breathe life into a room and that happens because they're not preoccupied with the ego, they're they're captivated by some objective good Yes. and they want to show it to you. Think of some like great coaches I had as a kid that wanted to show me the various games I learned to play, baseball. We had a coach when I was a little guy, 7 8 years old and he said, "All guys, I want you to get down on your hands and knees on the field. I want you to feel the infield. And I want you to to smell the grass, you know? And it was a it was such a good move. He was trying to get us in Look at this great game we're playing here. He also practically, if you're playing shortstop, you can't be afraid of the ground. You got to get down on the ground. You got Exactly. So, all right, boys, get down there, you know? Well, he was someone in love with baseball and then was communicating to us the same love. So, together we'd fall in love with the transcendent third, which is baseball. That's going to bring a team together, right? Uh that's what great teachers and coaches and mentors and spiritual directors do. They they help people fall in love with the same values they fall in love with. And fall in love with something bigger than themselves, you know, other people, nature, God. And look at even that word fall in love, right? You you you're not in control. You've let go of your own ego drama. I love that language from uh Hans Urs von Balthasar, one of my favorite theologians from the last century. John Paul loved him and Benedict loved him. Um he talked about the ego drama, which is the drama that I'm starring in, I'm producing it, I'm directing it, right? And you're all actors in my play. Yes, you're all actors in my play and I'm going to take it on the road eventually somewhere else. Well, that's that's a very boring uh thing. What's exciting, he said, was the theo drama, which is you know, God's writing a drama, God's producing a drama. He's got a role for you and he's trying to draw you into into playing that role. And it might not be the role at all that you envisioned for yourself. So, what? But he's calling you into it. That's going to be an exciting life, a theo dramatic life, a theonomous life, not an autonomous life. Oh, that's Well, that's vivid. So, what's the daily practice for someone to move beyond themself, to get out of Lake Me? Fall in love with objective value. Uh find mentors that can really help you enter that world. Like I've In my own life, I've loved that. You know, I'm no great uh I I play the guitar poorly. But I I love classical music and I had mentors early on that Let me play you, you know, Beethoven's 7th Symphony. Let me just play it for you and and then talk about it. Um I remember the the the Queen of the Night Aria, the famous Mozart aria with the woman singing these impossibly high notes. I remember teachers I Listen, listen to this. Uh some of that would draw me into that world, like my coach is drawing me into baseball. Now, put it in religious context, prayer. People that taught me how to pray when I was a young guy. We Okay, say my prayers. No, but prayer is a conscious exercise in overcoming autonomy. It's a conscious exercise to say, "I want to get out of my preoccupations. I'm placing myself in the presence of God. I'm using language of the Psalms and so on. I'm using song, I'm using silence, I'm using the rosary, whatever it is. All of this is designed to get me up out of myself and into the space of God. So, prayer is a way, you know, to overcome pray? You said you were taught to pray. I was, indeed. Um very early on, when I was about in my early 20s, before I was a priest, but I got into the what we call the liturgy of the hours in the Catholic Church, which is this daily prayer at certain points during the day, imitating, by the way, the seven times you pray in the Bible, you know, seven times a day you stop to pray. So, the hours um Psalms, canticles, biblical Yeah, the Old Testament has that that in the passage about seven times I I stopped to pray. And so, the early church imitated that in the rhythm of the monastic life. Uh and the liturgy of the hours would be kind of a monastic life for non-monks, people like, you know, you and me. Um but you use the Psalms, the canticles, the readings, the church fathers. And I was taught that prayer early on and at times, you know, I found it tiresome or difficult to do. Now, it's like um it's like water in the desert. Uh when I was a young guy, we didn't pray the rosary. The rosary was seen as kind of something your grandmother did. My generation didn't spontaneously pray it, but then I learned it later in life and that too is like a lifeline to me. What is the rosary? Well, it's this collection I have it on me. It's a collection of Hail Marys, Our Fathers, Glory Be's in a in a, you know, in a rope and you count your way through the beads and uh it's a takes about 20 or 25 minutes. It's a meditative prayer. As you're praying the Hail Marys, you're meditating upon the mysteries of Jesus' life and Mary's life. Um it doesn't get you anywhere. You start here and you end up exactly where you started. So, it doesn't it's not it's not effective in that way. It's a meditative prayer. I prayed I remember I was giving a retreat to the priests of Dublin many years ago. These were mostly older men, been through the wars, you know, most of them. And uh they invited me to come. They said, "We're going to pray the rosary tonight." All these Irish guys and I was Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women. Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women. full of I thought, "What is going on?" But what became clear to me was Well, it's like a mantra. They they were they were producing this kind of meditative mantra. They finished it in about 7 minutes, you know, it takes usually 25. Uh but that's They don't pronounce all the sounds though in that way. No, they're kind of See, think of it the the Buddhists talk about the the calming of the monkey mind. That's the mind that's always leaping from branch to branch. It's the it's the mind that gets you through the day. I got to do this, got to do that. But to really pray, you have to calm that mind down. You have to Come on, come on. I I I can't be preoccupied with that. So, the church has often used these means to do that, to calm that mind, to open up to a deeper consciousness or a deeper awareness. And prayer is that, it seems to me. Uh Thomas Merton said uh prayer is finding the place in you where you are here and now being created by God. Which I think is a great definition of prayer. So, right now, you and I are being created by God. But we're rarely aware of that. We go through our day, you know, with the monkey mind and we're doing this and that. But at certain points, you say, "Okay, now I'm going to calm the monkey mind. I'm going to open up a deeper uh door, you know, and I'm going to commune with the God who's here and now creating me. Uh that's prayer." And then there's all kinds of disciplines around that. So, the people trying to wreck our civilization want you to be passive. They want you weak so they can control you. Weakness is their goal. No, thanks. Our friends at Beam, a proud American company, understand that our country can only be great if its people are strong. And that's why they've created a new creatine product to help listeners like you stay mentally sharp and physically fit. People like to mock creatine. CNN doesn't like creatine at all. But people buy it cuz it works. Beam's creatine can help you improve your strength, your brain health, your longevity. It's completely free of sugar and synthetic garbage that's in almost everything else that you eat. Of course, you don't hear about it too much because again, a population that is strong, clear-minded, and physically capable is a threat to tyrants. That's why they want you playing video games. To celebrate American strength, actual American strength, Beam is offering up to 30% off their best-selling creatine for the next 48 hours. Go to shopbeam.com/tucker, use the code Tucker at checkout. That's shopbeam, b e a m, dot com slash Tucker, use the code Tucker for up to 30% off. It's built on core values, integrity, results, no BS. Beam. We strongly recommend it. I think many people think of prayer as a list of requests. And and that's okay. I mean, petitionary prayer is is good. Uh John Paul II toward the end of his life, you know, he said, "I know different types of prayer, but I found the longer I live that all prayer is basically a petition." And there's something really right about that, that no matter how, you know, kind of high end and elevated your prayer is, at bottom, you're saying, you know, Lord Jesus Christ, have pity on me. Yes. Or or Lord, help me. I I find it as as I pray, that's the phrase, help me. Help me, Lord. That's fine. I have no problem with that. That's a very deep and powerful prayer. How do you keep your mind from wandering during prayer? Yeah, and read the the masters. They've recognized that forever. The desert fathers knew all about that distraction in prayer. And of course, the devil loves that, too. He loves to distract us in prayer. Um I I the best advice someone like John of the Cross, our greatest spiritual master, would be acknowledge the distraction. Don't try to fight it. Acknowledge it. And then go back. And it comes again, acknowledge it. I see you. And go back. Uh don't try to fight it or to try techniques to avoid it completely. A distraction comes, see it, and then return. Let go of it. I've noticed in the in the past few years, uh people I know who are secular or have always been, suddenly talking about the existence of evil in the world. I think it's very clear to non-religious people even that there's some kind of supernatural force of darkness like a foot in the world. I don't think you really need to make that case anymore that that's real. How do you see God in the world? Because if you spend your life, you know, Yeah. staring at evil, probably not productive. No. Well, the world is charged with the grandeur of God. That's Gerard Manley Hopkins' great poem and I think that's right. It's if you have the eyes to see and prayer disciplines that. Prayer makes that possible. The world is charged with the grandeur of God, meaning everything that exists, because being and good are convertible terms. That's something from Thomas Aquinas that I think you can Being and good are convertible are convertible terms. In other words, to be is to be good. Period. Whatever is is good. Evil is Aquinas would call it a provatio, a privation of the good. Evil is a is a a cavity, it's a lack, right? But whatever is is good. So, for example, take the devil as an example. Is the devil good? Sure, of course. In the measure the devil exists, has a mind, has a will, all that is good. What's evil about the devil is the corruption of mind and will and power, right? Um that's why like Satan in Dante of this is highest of angels, full of goodness. God doesn't make anything that's not good. But it's become corrupt, see? So, the trick there is always to focus on on the good cuz being and good are convertible terms. Whatever is is good. Think of the the mystics who talk about if you see like a little bug crawling across this table, that's an avenue toward God. Cuz if you look at this little tiny bug, let's say, but the more you look at I mean incredible complexity and richness and density of its being and uh of course it speaks to you of the creator of all things. That whose very nature is to be, right? So, all being reflects God. And if you have the eyes to see, that's what the great saints have. They just they see that all the time. We sinners tend to focus a lot on the lack, right? We focus on the cavity, not the tooth. The idea is look at the tooth. Uh always acknowledging the cavities cuz there plenty of them. But but the focus should be on being. Being good are convertible terms. I may be too shallow for Catholic theology, but I love what you're saying. Yeah, I mean that's as old as Being and good are convertible terms. they talk about the transcendental properties of being, which means wherever there is So, here's glass. It's um good, it's true, and it's beautiful. Now, why is it good? Well, because it corresponds to the will in some ways. There's you know, yeah, this glass I want to study this glass. It's interesting and and look at the the beauty of it, you know? It's true cuz it corresponds in its intelligibility to an inquiring mind. The mind wants to understand that thing. What is that thing? It's beautiful because it's radiant, you know? It uh go back to like James Joyce, the famous scene, you know, in the in the portrait of the artist when he sees the woman he eventually would would marry, Nora Barnacle, and he sees her out on the strand and he has this rapturous description of her, remember? And at the end of it, he says, "Oh, heavenly God." And and that's the way it works. It's the beautiful this particular this particular girl he sees out in the surf. But she speaks to him of God. Um so, that's why whatever is is good, it's true, and it's beautiful. Uh those are all convertible terms. It seems like the threat maybe the satanic threat is distraction. Yeah. No, I think that's absolutely right. That we focus so much on the lack. It's like you're sucking on an aching tooth, you know, you just you're focused on the on the lack. Um but see, you know, as St. Paul says, "Where sin abounds, grace abounds the more." And that's not just a a nice like Hallmark card sentiment. That's a metaphysical truth. Wherever there's sin, sure, sin everywhere. But grace is always greater. It has to be cuz sin is a is a cavity. You know what? It's in Tolkien, remember when they what are they the Nazgûl's are these these flying demons that are threatening the battlefield and all this. But then when they finally conquer them, what do they discover? They're nothing. They're a cloak that covers nothing. And it's cuz evil is a type of non-being. And so, it it puts on a big show. It puts this big cloak over itself. But what it is is just a lack, it's a cavity. Uh that's why if sin is abounding, sure, sin abounds in our world. But grace abounds the more. You know, that's the gates of hell will not prevail against her. They can't in a way. They can't. And we should have that confidence. Christians should never be cowed by evil. Like, "Oh my We acknowledge it, but the the great saints aren't cowed by evil cuz evil is a is a lack, it's a cavity, it's a Nazgûl, it's a non-being, right? Where do you see grace? Um Bob Dylan is one of my great heroes, you know? Um look around this old world and all that I'm finding is the saving grace that's over me. That's Bob Dylan after he became a Christian. Uh You know, grace is is being. Grace is what's real. Grace tout est grâce. That's a a line from Bernanos, the great French Catholic novelist. Tout est grâce, everything's grace. Everything's grace. Because of that principle, whatever is Yes. is good. Whatever is is true and beautiful. Whatever is reflects the one whose name is to be, right? When Moses asked God, "What's your name?" and God says, "I am who I am." Right? Well, our tradition reads that as I'm I'm not contingent even as in being. I'm the one who's very nature is to be. So, therefore, whatever is is reflective of of God. That's where you find grace, I think. So, if you could distract people sufficient that they never had the time or the inclination to notice things that are real, you would trap them in a kind of hell. Yeah. Yes, but see, but that's exactly what happens, isn't it? Do now psychodynamically is when we focus on all this kind of lack and anxiety and frustration within us, it is a kind of preoccupation with what's not real. That's true. Now, I'm not denying the psychological reality of suffering. But but metaphysically speaking, evil is a type of non-being. And if I'm focused on that, then I'm going to get myself in in knots. I was thinking more of the iPhone, which when I use it cuts me off completely from other people and from the world around me, from nature, from myself. Yes. No, and I believe me, I mean, we're all addicted to it. Those machines were designed to be addictive. They worked. Uh during Lent, this past Lent, I did a a resolution for the first time that one day a week I put the phone away. And I did it and it was a little bit of a struggle, but not terrible and I thought that's that's a good thing. When we bring our guys now into priesthood studies, we have what's called the propaedeutic year, this year of kind of preparation before the formal study begins. And the thing that all the guys say they like best about it is they take their cell phones away for the entire year. I think once a week you can check it for emergencies or something or someone's got access to it in case of emergency. But they take the phones away from the guys. Great move. And what happens to them? What happens? They they all feel liberated. They all come back saying it was the best year of my life and I read books again and I talked to people. Um I I cultivated friendship. I played games. I played sports, you know? I mean, and it's exactly this principle. I wasn't Look at that's almost a a illustration of Augustine's curvatus in se that I'm caved in over my iPhone, right? That's what it looks like. Do you think that that's driving some of the disassociation and agony that we see around us? Yeah, it's not helping at all. I Um Jean Twenge is a psychologist from San Diego that I read a lot and she has a book called iGen about the generation that came of age totally with the iPhones and iPads and stuff. And she said there's a direct correlation between screen time and depression, which I find perfectly Uh Leonard Sax, you know, the great psychologist, also a physician dealing with young people now for decades, same thing. He says the the correlation between screen time. And look how unhealthy it's making our our young kids. Uh when I was a little kid, we were all skinny. We all were, all my friends uh and I cuz we were outside from 8:00 in the morning till 8:00 at night in the summertime. Playing games, running around, shooting hoops, on a bike, you know? And way too many kids now are hunched over their iPhones and uh and then it invites you into such a world of uh of meanness and competition and uh look at my picture's better than yours and those people that seem so much happier than I am and No, I think taking those things out of the hands of our kids would be a great idea, at least to some degree. How do you force yourself to notice things beyond yourself? Like, what is your actual discipline? Like, you wake up, how do you keep God ever present in mind and yourself at bay? Well, my first move is the holy hour. So, I learned that from Fulton Sheen. Taught now a couple generations to do every day an hour of uninterrupted prayer in the presence of the Blessed Sacrament. So, as a Catholic, I I have the Blessed Sacrament in my house. So, first thing I do in the morning, I get a cup of coffee and I go up to my chapel. And I will sit in front of the Blessed Sacrament for an hour. And I'll pray my office as part of it. Often pray the rosary or other things. Pardon again my ignorance. What's your office? You pray your office? It's the liturgy of the hours. Yeah, what I was describing earlier. So, that that uh psalms and canticles and readings that that apply read them as you pray them? Yeah, so I have the book and I'll I'll read the psalm and usually then spend some time meditating um and then do the next one, you know? And then I might let's say between the office of readings, which has to do with the church fathers, I read something from the church fathers and usually from the Bible. Maybe between that and morning prayer I'll do the rosary. Um or then I might do another form of prayer between morning prayer and midday prayer. So, I'll I'll work my way through the office, the liturgy of the hours. But my main task is to sit in the presence of the Blessed Sacrament. And one of the great lines, this goes back to And what time is this in the morning? I wake up about 5:30. So, like between 5:30 and 6:30. Do you text like 11 people first before you do this? No, no, no, no. And I leave I leave the phone in my bedroom. So, I always leave the phone while I'm praying. I don't have that. Cuz that's immediate distraction and that's the last thing you want when you're trying to pray in a consecrated way. Yes. And then, you know, some of that too is petitionary prayer. Um yeah, I'm a bishop, so people are always, you know, "Hey, Bishop, would you pray for me? Uh my son's having a hard time." And so, I try to conjure as best I can the memory of these various people that asked me to pray for them. Uh I'll pray for my, you know, parents and family members who've died and, you know, so it's just giving yourself the leisure. You have a full hour where you can bring all this before the Lord. When you pray for someone who's died, what do you pray? I pray they might find peace and rest. Um, I pray the Lord might be might be kind and good to them, you know. Um, I pray all the time for people who've died because it you know, you're just you're aware of it when you're in pastoral ministry. Yes. You know. Um, some people who've died, you know, they're not formally canonized by the church, but I kind of in an informal way I think of them as being already in the presence of God and I'll pray for their intercession. Um, Cardinal George of Chicago was a great mentor to me and I I'm often linked to him in prayer. Meaning you prayed for him? Pray for him, but also you know, I pray to him. And not with the complete confidence I would pray to a saint canonized by the church, but with a a kind of you know, practical confidence and I I knew him very well and I asked for his help. When you pray, do you hear back? Not in in the you know, physical sense, but yeah, you get I'd say a sense. You have a sense of connection. I'll put it that way. Um, sometimes in prayer you get a very intense feeling. The Irish talk about thin places, you know, where the veil between this world and next becomes very thin. There I find there are kind of thin moments like that where there's a a moment when you feel the other world impinging on yours. What kind of feeling is that? Uh, peace I would say, you know. Um, harmony. That the the disharmony, the difficulty of this life kind of resolve into a higher harmony, something like that. Um, see I you know, what's interesting to me Tucker is uh, the world that we're in. Look around at this you know, interesting beautiful place right now and uh, good in the world of nature. Driving up here seeing the nature around me. Beautiful. Beautiful. Feel like is that it? Is that it? To me it seems so unlikely that the world that the sensorium of these advanced apes can take in is all there is to reality. What my little eyes can see, you know, they see a narrow range of the color spectrum and that's it? I think that's so wildly unlikely. Just the the fecundity and and and variety of being that we experience through through our senses. I think beyond our senses there there's a world of even more extraordinary fecundity and richness and I think there are times when we sense it. We get in touch with it. Um, look, Plato knew that. Plato knew he talked about stepping out of the cave, right? And the first step out of the cave, the cave is where you flickering shadows on the wall. It means the world of our ordinary experience. I'm here with you right now and in a few hours I'll be gone somewhere else and other images will be flickering past my sensorium. Okay, that's this what this life is like. But Plato thought the first step out of the cave was mathematics. It's a very interesting cuz when you you understand 2 + 3 = 5, that's you've stepped out of this world in a very real way. I can see a whole here two things, but when you grasp the the principle 2 + 3 = 5, you're not in the world of ordinary experience anymore. You're in a world now of eternity, of immateriality, a world that doesn't change, that can't change even in principle. Well, there's nothing like that in this world. Well, Plato knew that. When you grasp the quadratic equation or something, you're not dealing with a physical reality that has color or shape or size or nothing that's that's even essent or mutable. You've reached a higher plane of existence. Even mathematics does that to us. A fortiori now philosophy and then even more so religion are opening you to higher and higher expressions of reality. Here's a fact of life you may not learn till you're older, but I'm going to tell you now. It's very hard to have a good time if you're wearing bad boots. In fact, it may be impossible and that's why you need Tecovas. As a matter of fact, you don't just need them, you owe them to yourself. Tecovas makes western boots for everybody. Ranchers, real ranchers, life long cowboys, first time boot buyers and anyone in between. Every Tecovas boot is handcrafted, made by hand with over 200 meticulous steps for a broken in feel right out of the box. You don't have to compromise between looks and quality. You can have them both. Whether it's a long day or a big night, Tecovas are built to last and impressed. You wouldn't believe the compliments people here get when they wear them out, which they do. Right now get 10% off at tecovas.com/tucker when you sign up for email and text alerts. That's 10% off at Tecovas, t e c o v a s dot com slash tucker. I don't think you're fully on board with Darwinism. I'm getting that sense. Uh, well, there are a couple ways to look at that. I mean, there's a big debate going on right now in in the world of evolutionary biologists about Darwin and neo-Darwinism and questions raised about it. Uh, I mean, in a way I'm happy to leave that debate to them. I mean, because that's talking about how do life forms develop over time and given genetic variation and and natural selection. Okay, fine. I'll let the experts debate that. Yes. Um, that in itself is not really a theologically relevant concern. I'll leave that to them. I agree. But see, here's the thing. Creation in the theological sense has little to do with that. That's all about development of biological forms. Okay. Creation is something much more dramatic. Creation names the relationship that obtains between unconditioned being and conditioned being. Or to put that in more regular language, between God and the world. So I mean, like right now here you and I are sitting here at this table in this room is entirely conditioned form of existence. By which I mean it is, but it doesn't have to be. I could have just the right up here today. You could have gotten sick. This thing could have fallen on the table. It could be a thousand degrees and we'd be incinerated. It could be a thousand degrees below zero and we'd be frozen. Like there there are a million things that make this set of affairs real. But it doesn't have to be. It doesn't have to be the case. So how do you explain that? Well, you can't appeal endlessly to other contingent things. You have to come finally to some reality whose very nature is to be. That's not contingent, not finite, not even essent, not dependent, but whose very nature is to be. I am. Like right, then go back to Moses. What's your name? See, Moses was asking a very sensible question for this worldly perspective. So, hey, what kind of glass is that, you know? How tall is that glass? What kind of table is this? That's a nice table. What kind of table is it? So you're a God obviously, you know, you seem to know a lot about me and and you're So which one are you? You're the God of the mountain, you're the God of the plains, are you the God of these people? Who are you? Which one are you? What's your name? And so when God says uh, I am who I am. He's saying dumb question. That is not the right question to ask here cuz I'm not a conditioned state of affairs. I'm not a being among many. My name is I am. I am who I am. Right? My nature is to be. Now we're talking about the creator. See, the creator is the one who is here and now undergirding all the finite reality. Who's right now, this is a great line from Herbert McCabe the theologian. He's singing the world into being the way an opera singer sustains a song. God, the ground of being, is singing this finite world into being. That's creation, see? So now within creation, I can talk all day about the Darwinists and how this the life form developed into that life form and I'll let them debate that. But the religious question remains no matter what you say about that. The religious question is about why is there something rather than nothing? Right, exactly. Why should there be a finite conditioned world at all? You can't explain it by appealing endlessly to other forms of conditioned existence. You can't. That's the mistake of materialism. That's it. questions end at a certain point and there's an answer. So the question is, well, who created the creator? And the answer is nobody. The creator is Right. Right. And if you ask that question, it means you haven't grasped the solution. If you say, "Who created the creator?" Well, then you haven't grasped. No, the argument leads toward something that doesn't need to be created, that can't be created, whose very nature is to be and who therefore is eternal, we'd say, outside of time, immaterial, outside of space, right? So all the finite things that or the characteristics of finite reality can't apply to that that reality. That's why we say God's eternal or why he is immaterial and so on, immutable. That means nothing that characterizes finite things should characterize him. What do you think of the new atheists? I don't like them. No, look, I I my ministry of Word on Fire emerged around that time. So right around the year 2000. The new atheists emerged after September 11th, which is not surprising because September 11th um, stirred to life again this old kind of enlightenment um, idea. Religion is irrational, therefore it's violent. Because they can't settle things through argument, they have to settle them through bombs and guns and war, right? So that's an old argument goes back to the 17th century. It was revived massively after September 11th. The new atheists I think rode that wave in a big way. Now, they were gifted rhetoricians, especially Hitchens, right? I admire Hitchens. I read Hitchens always with great pleasure. Uh, Dawkins less so. Sam Harris I think has you know, rhetorical gifts. But their arguments there's nothing new about them. They were old hat. They're borrowed from Marx and from Freud and from Feuerbach especially. Um so nothing new at the intellectual level. They were new in their nastiness. So like the classical atheist, think Feuerbach, Marx, Freud, you got the sense they knew they were dealing with a formidable opponent when they were fighting religion. The new atheist, it was like they were dealing with an idiot child, you know. And so that's what was so annoying about them, I thought. And their arguments were pretty bad. And they were, you know, so aggressive toward religion. Um they did a great service though. I'll say this. They awakened the Christian churches in many ways. The the apologetic weapons that we threw away 40 years ago, we were compelled to pick up again. So a lot of us got into the game to kind of battle the new atheist and to draw upon the very rich intellectual tradition, especially of Catholicism. So in that way they did a service to us, you know. And um also I wrote a paper on this one. I called it the Thomas Aquinas and why the new atheist are right. Because the new atheist, they make this mistake we were just talking about. They they will construe God as some kind of big being. And um okay, is there this big being or not? Some say there is, some say there isn't. So it's like Bigfoot, you know, some say there is a Bigfoot, others say there isn't a Bigfoot. Let's go look around for evidence and find out. Well, you'll never find I think God that way. God isn't a being. God isn't isn't a thing in the world, right? He's the reason why there's a world at all. Therefore you're not going to find him in the world. Therefore you can't say things like, oh there's no there's no evidence for God as though he's like a he's a chemical reaction or something. Yeah. Right, he's not like that. Uh you have to ask a whole different set of questions. And that's what the new atheist did. And and Like like what? What were the questions? Like why is there something rather than nothing? Like why should contingent being exist at all? Uh how do you explain the two be of something whose nature is not to be, namely you and me and everything around us. I am for sure, but my nature is not to be. I could think myself out of being in a second. There's nothing necessary about me. Well, how do you explain that? How do you explain that? Then you say, oh it's all matter and energy. It will never work. Why? Cuz matter is always matter under these conditions, matter in this size, matter at this energy, matter at this speed, matter at this color. How did it get there? Why is it this rather than that? See? See you you can't answer that question, the really cool interesting question, by appealing to something within the contingent world. You have to go outside the contingent world. And again, don't think of that spatially. So the minute you go, oh yeah, God must be that up out there someplace. No, you've made him a big being. You have to go outside in the metaphysical sense to a reality which indeed contains all of that but is in no way contained by it. Now we're talking. And that to me is is the really interesting question. Would also suggest that that God's like right here, right now, and always. he is. And here's the interesting thing, and all the mystics and theologians are onto this. So is God in this room? No, absolutely not, because this room is just full of contingent things like you and me and the shelves and the books and No, no, God God's nothing in this I can't point to, oh there he is. God's in this room. God's nowhere in this room. Is God in this room? Yes, he's everywhere in this room, because this room wouldn't exist unless God were singing it into being. And so God is at the same time as transcendent as you can imagine, not a thing in the world, and as imminent as you can imagine. It was the great Augustine who said, God is at the same time superior summo meo et interior intimo meo, which means he's higher than anything I could imagine, and he's closer to me than I am to myself. Now figure that one out. Now now you understand the God whose nature is to be. He's transcendent, I can't grasp him, and he's so imminent I can't hide from him. See? And that's the space opened up by the Bible, I think. Uh so what's the solution, you might ask? The solution is fall in love with God. Falling in love is not grasping, it's not hiding from. And can we read the Bible as God trying to draw his people into that space? I I want you to fall in love with me. I don't want you grasping at me, that's idolatry. I don't want you hiding from me, that's secularism. I want you falling in love with me. And that's the right reaction to the God You're defining secularism as hiding from God? Yeah, as an ideology. If you were to say, all that there is is the secular world, right? As a materialism or imminentism or scientism in the political sense, secularism, meaning all that there is is the world that I can see and measure and so on. Uh that's hiding from God. That's saying, bye, I'm not going to worry about God. God doesn't impinge upon me. Um that's the buffered self. Charles Taylor, the philosopher, calls it that. I'm I'm buffered from any contact with the transcendent. That's an attempt to hide from God. Doesn't work. And see, what I think Tucker is really interesting is the fact that religion is experiencing a revival even as we speak. You you feel that? Oh yeah, I can I can measure it. I mean it's been measured statistically. Um because you can't hide from God all day. And and you can't grasp him. That's idolatry. Idolatry is something to manipulate God. And the Bible knows all about that from page one. Page one, the Bible knows about manipulating God. Uh that's What's the Tell me what you mean by that, manipulate? That's the original sin. It's to say, um I'm not going to obey God's law. I'm going to make I'm my own law. I'm going to grasp the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Is is I'm going to make my my own freedom, as we were saying a few minutes ago, my own freedom becomes my God. That's a type of idolatry. Uh or I turn pleasure, money, sex, power into my supreme good. That's idolatry. Um to me the great biblical story there is the um Elijah and the priests of Baal. Remember in the first book of Kings. So Elijah is the one left. I only one priest of Yahweh, but there's all these priests of Baal. By the way, so it always goes, right? There's always a lot of avatars of the false gods. They're all over the place. They're thick on the ground. They're all over. And now let's you erect altars to your God, I'll I'll erect one to mine, and let's see who responds, right? So the priests of Baal erect the altars and then they start begging and they cajoling and pleading and and they're they're frustrated cuz God's not answering. Their gods aren't sending fire. And Elijah mocks them, which I think is a great part of that story. He publicly mocks them, you know. Oh no, maybe your gods are napping or maybe they're in the bathroom. I don't know where they are, right? And then they finally end up it's a beautiful detail. They end up slashing themselves with knives. They're trying to they're trying to get the gods to respond. It's beautiful image of what happens to us in idolatry. We end up harming ourselves, right? In a frenzied attempt to get gods to answer who can never in principle answer. Now think of someone addicted to power, sex, money, uh pleasure, whatever it is. And I'm begging, begging, begging, you you will satisfy me. They it won't cuz it can't. And I'll end up harming myself. Then Elijah calls upon the true God. The fire comes, destroys, you know, takes the sacrifice. Uh it's not just a jingoistic story. It's a very powerful story that the true God is the only one that can satisfy the longing of the heart, right? And so idolatry will always lead us down this self-destructive path. And the worship of the true God is what's going to lead us to uh the fire falling on us. A lot of the news you read doesn't really have a lot of inherent meaning, but this does. Starting May 19th, the Hallow app is leading a consecration to Jesus through St. Joseph. You might be asking, why St. Joseph? Why now? Well, consider this. Joseph was the man God himself trusted with his own son. He wasn't a king or a warrior, he was a carpenter. He was a quiet and steady man of unshakable faith. In an age that mocks humility, can you imagine the basis of wisdom and relationship with God? It's time we looked to someone who embodied humility, not for applause, but for God. The series is not just about St. Joseph, it's about what happens when you follow his example, when you trade noise for silence, when you stop chasing relevance, and start seeking holiness. And all of that begins with humility, which is really just perspective. You are not God. It's important to remind yourself of that. We do every day. So every week on Hallow, you'll hear reflections grounded in the Gospels, pray powerful prayers like the Litany of St. Joseph, and hear glory stories from throughout church history. Not myths, not legends, actual intersections and power from a saint who's been quietly helping people for thousands of years. Hallow is the world's number one prayer app, and experiences like this are why my family and I cannot get enough of it. It is a constant dinner table conversation. So get 3 months right now at hallow.com/tucker for free. You'll be glad you did. hallow.com/tucker. What Why does the does God require sacrifice? He doesn't require it. And that's a that's a super important point. Um the Bible and the great tradition make it over and over again. How could the one who made the entire universe from nothing possibly need anything from it? Right? It it's just a logical contradiction to say like the the ancient gods of Greece, sure they need all kinds of stuff. Remember that scene? It's in um uh the Odyssey, I think, you know, where um as the sacrifices are being made and the gods are like desperately lapping up the blood of the sacrifice cuz they they need our, you know, our loyalty and so on. The Bible, In um 50. You think I need Do you think I drink the blood of goats? Are you joking? All the animals of the field, they all belong to me. So, but that's a very important point because it's not that we're playing some game of of like codependency with God. God needs nothing. That's the best news ever. God needs nothing from us. What he wants is the openness of heart signaled by the sacrifice because he wants us to be alive. And And when we say, "Lord, I'm I'm opening my heart to you. I'm ordering my life to you in this great sacrifice of praise." God delights because now we're going to find the joy he wants us to have. That That's St. Irenaeus, my great intellectual hero. The glory of God is a human being fully alive. See, the glory of God is not putting us down and boy, they finally got around to honoring me sufficiently. So, that's old paganism. But it it haunts the Christian mind still. It haunts our minds. But the Bible is always trying to to dismiss that demon. God wants our sacrifice because it's good for us. God gets nothing out of it. Think of it like it bounces off of the rock of the divine self-sufficiency and comes back to our benefit. So, when I when I pray to God or I offer the sacrifice of the mass to God, I'm not giving God anything he needs. God needs nothing. But it bounces off of that self-sufficiency to me. It redounds to my benefit. So, you know, go to into the Catholic mass. We offer the sacrifice of Jesus to the Father. We represent the sacrifice of the cross to the Father. Oh, cuz the Father needs it? The Father needs nothing. But it bounces off of the Father's self-sufficiency and comes back as food for us. So, now we eat we eat the body and drink the blood of Jesus. We We consume the sacrifice. It's for our benefit, not for God's. But your question is really a good one cuz it leads us into that very important spiritual space. One of the reasons I think Christianity is true is because so many people hate it. Yeah. And Jesus is really the great dividing the great divider. Yeah. And like why would you be mad at Jesus or Christianity when it's like a nonviolent religion that teaches people to love each other? If you're mad at that, it says something about how real it is, I think. I agree. Both Billy Graham and Fulton Sheen, I mean, argued with the two greatest evangelists of the 20th century, said the same thing, which was the objection to God is rarely truly intellectual. It's a moral objection. Totally. So, we the moral demand of God becomes too great. See, Jesus if he's one spiritual figure among many, he's a great teacher, you know, like the Buddha, he's like Muhammad, he's like Confucius. Well, then I could kind of handle him. You know, I can put him in a corner and say, "Okay, that's interesting. I'll abide by some of that and I also like what the Sufi mystics say and I also like what Moses says here." But see, Jesus, C.S. Lewis saw so perfectly, you know, is qualitatively different than that and that's why he's a problem because if he is who he says he is, not just one teacher that I can listen to, but he's God from God, light from light, true God from true God, begotten, not made, consubstantial with the Father. As we say every week in the creed, all things were made. Yeah. If that's who he is, Well, that's game's over. But why does it make people mad? I mean, one of the late life revelations in my life has been that the these great spasms of violence, these revolutions that we study, French Revolution, Spanish Civil War, Bolshevik Revolution 1917, huge parts of World War II, were anti-Christian. Absolutely. But it's not recorded that way. Yeah, but that's that's true. Yeah, but see, Jesus, he's a problem because of who he says he is, but also we're sinners. And so, sinners don't want to get out of their sinful patterns. It They're We're way too comfortable. It's like the Israelites that want to go back to Egypt, right? They're They're on their way to liberation, but oh boy, did we love the you know, the the flesh pots of Egypt. At least we had cucumbers and right? That's my favorite part. Right. But that See, that's the story of every sinner is Every sin is a type of addiction. You're addicted to you know, that's the piece of bowel. And so, as I'm trying to move toward conversion, I'm I'm moving across the painful desert, right? On the way to the promised land, I'm always hankering for Egypt. And so, Jesus is a constant reproach, a constant challenge, a constant no, no, you know? So, of course I'm I'm going to I'm going to resist him. Look at You know, the very fact I think this is very interesting. Um Muhammad dies in his in his bed full of years. The Buddha dies in his bed full of years surrounded by his disciples. Confucius, the same thing. Moses dies at the age of 120 or something, you know? And then there's Jesus who dies 30 years old, naked, pinned to a desperate instrument of torture. His His disciples having abandoned him, his enemies mocking him. That's how he dies. Now, what does it tell you? It tells you there's something about him Well, who would write that? By the way, if I'm I'm trying to create a new religion, he's not the hero I'm creating No. No, but it's a sign He's a sign of contradiction. He He's the one that that That's the way the world is going to react to him. Now, what's the good news? The good news is having endured all of that, he returns. And I always think this, you know, if if we were Hollywood telling the story, you never You never heard that Jesus right but where is this guy with this horrible thing and these people betrayed him and denied him and they crucified him and now he's back. He'd be back with a machine gun. I'm back for vengeance. He's back with shalom, a word of peace. As the way I put it in Christianity is this, we killed God and God returned in forgiving love. And that's why as Paul said, right? I'm certain neither death nor life nor angels nor principalities nor height nor depth nor anything else could ever separate us from the love of God. How does Paul know that? Because because we killed God and God returned in forgiving love. That's salvation. That's That's the word of grace, if you want. That's the good news. That's what they went careering around the world to their deaths proclaiming was that. You know, Paul, I preach one thing, Christ and him crucified. Because that's the message is we killed him, God raised him up and he returned in forgiving love, you know? That's the That's the good news. Do you think that Christian persecution is on the rise? Oh, I know it is. It's It's documented. 20th century was the worst century for Christian martyrs of all the of Christian history, all the previous centuries combined. There were more martyrs in the 20th century than any other time. We think of all the early church, they were all being persecuted. Far greater in the 20th century. Now, around the world, we are by far the most persecuted religion, absolutely. And it's a It's a crime. It's an outrage. And we talk about in a kind of demure way about religious liberty in our country, which is indeed under threat. But you want the real threat to religious liberty? It's in different parts of the world. People are being killed for their Christian faith. So, why is that fact suppressed? That is intentionally suppressed. Again, I was like 45 before I realized the Bolshevik Revolution was aimed at Christians. I don't know why I didn't get that, but I didn't. Yeah, I I have to ask the uh you know, the keepers of the flame culturally, but it it's simply the case today. I mean, it's it's the most persecuted religion. Um You know, I We look at things from different angles, I suppose. One tragedy, let's say of the 20th century, if you have World War I and World War II, yes, there's there there anti-Christian elements, to be sure. I mean, Hitler's deeply anti-Christian. But you also had French Christians killing German Christians killing Canadian Christians killing American Christians killing Russian Christians. It said it was this massive Christian slaughter bench. And my pet theory is when you go to Europe today, especially parts of Europe, and you see a a kind of spiritual wasteland, um I think that's a big part of that is We're just recovering from this this horrific outbreak of Christian on Christian violence. Um the gospel? Did that get into anybody's mind and heart in the 20th century that allowed this orgy of violence to take place? What Where do you What do you think that was? Why the 20th century? Well, you could do a So much darker than anything that happened in the Dark Ages. You could do the Leo the 13th, you know, who gave us the St. Michael prayer and who supposedly had a intuition or a sense that the 20th century would belong to the devil. And to my mind, it's kind of hard to argue with that. If you believe in the devil, as I do, and you see what happened in the 20th century, it's kind of hard to imagine it wasn't to some degree. Well, nuclear weapons are proof as far as I can Yeah, I know. I mean, the the mass destruction, mass death of the 20th century. It's hard to blame that simply on political reality, you know? Totally. Wait, I'm sorry. I interrupted you. I'm so No, no, but you said Leo Pope Leo the 13th? Yeah. Had of Can you explain what you mean he had the sense? a mystical experience of the devil would would have a unique control over the 20th century. And so, he formulates the famous St. Michael prayer that we still pray in many churches asking for the protection of Michael the Archangel. When When did he have this experience? Toward the end of his life. So, I want to He died 1903. So, it would have been like around 1900, I would say, or late 19th century. And many would say, "Well, it was borne out by the 20th century." I would Like, you know, for me in my own lifetime, it See, when I was a young guy going through school, we were still very much formed by more liberal Catholic Catholic view. The devil, literary device, literally a symbol, you know, for evil. Don't take it literally. It's not You were taught that? Yeah. It was sort of a standard view. But you know what really convinced me powerfully of the devil's reality was the sex abuse scandal. Cuz you look at the sex abuse scandal, which has haunted almost the whole of my priesthood. It broke in Chicago in the early '90s. I was ordained in 1986. So, most of my priesthood has been under the shadow. The sex abuse clergy sex abuse scandal has adversely affected the church in every possible way. And you look at it and you say could that have just been a an accident or just human folly and sin? It seemed to have been so designed by a wicked mind that wanted to undermine the church. But then now look at the whole 20th century and the level of destruction and degradation. It's hard for me to imagine it's just because of political forces or cultural more. I've come to this conclusion recently, but I think you're exactly right. So, what's the St. Michael's prayer that was St. Michael the Archangel defend us in battle. I won't get it exactly right, but it's it's an invocation of St. Michael to defend us in battle against the devil who sends his minions for the destruction of souls. So, it's a very conscious awareness of the presence of evil in the world and we're asked And Pope Leo said, the 13th said, I think this century is going to be will belong to the devil. And he formulated that prayer to be prayed in Catholic church. What did people say when he said that? I think most of them followed him. I think most said, you know, we start saying the Cuz I mean, 1903 was a period of great hope in the West. Yes, which is fascinating to me. You know, there's a a magazine called The Christian Century. It's a it's a Christian theological journal. And it was born at that time. And that's those ideas. Is this is the Christian Century? Yes. That, you know, progress and economic progress dominating the world. And the social gospel and this is our century. And then it didn't exactly work out that way. Leo intuited or had a mystical experience to the effect that it would belong not to Christian churches but to the devil. So, you know, we got a battle on our hands, but we mustn't forget what we were saying earlier. You know, where sin abounds, grace abounds the more. The gates of hell will not prevail against the church. You know, that image, too. I don't know why, but for most of my life I am Okay, the gates of hell will not prevail against it, which means somehow hell is going to come against us, but we're going to win the battle. But that's not what it means. The gates would be the weakest point of a city wall. And so, when you're attacking a city, you go after the gates. So, what the Lord is saying is no, no, you're not defensive here. You're on the march. You're on the offensive and the gates of hell will not prevail against you. You're going to win. You're you're invading hell and it's not going to prevail against you. So, it's like not a cowering like, oh, we'll put up a good defense and I guess we're going to or move as far away from hell as we can. We are on the march. Move to the suburbs. No, but see, one of the problems is when Christians forget that and they hand the world over to um pure secularism or whatever, well, of course we're not going to do well in the battle. But when Christians know, no, our job is to be fully engaged in this great struggle and we're going after you, hell. We're coming after hatred, violence, stupidity, superstition, scapegoating. We're we're going after you. You know, we're on the march. I I When I was coming of age, we didn't have that language. Why? It was an attempt and I I know cuz the people that taught me were good people and they were they were positively motivated. I know that for sure. They felt the church needed to be relevant to the modern world and um that the modern world should set the agenda for the church. That was a big part of the mentality. That we had been in a fortress too long. We've been in a defensive crouch. We had demonized the world and so now we need to go out to the world in a confident spirit. And that's definitely the Catholicism I got as a young man. But see, here's something I've always found kind of puzzling. So, I I come of age right after the Second Vatican Council, which ended 1965. I went to first grade 1966, right? So, that's the the church that I inherited very much. Vatican II was written by people who had experienced the the worst of the 20th century. Yes. Mostly European intellectuals, French, German, a lot of them. Americans, Swiss, Italians, Swiss, right? Are the people that wrote Vatican II. And they experienced some of the worst horrors in human history. So, Vatican II was a direct response to the Second World War. No, I wouldn't say that. Vatican II Look, I'm I'm Let me talk about it positively. Vatican II was a missionary council. I think the best people at Vatican II felt the church has been crouching behind walls for too long and it should go out not to conform to the modern world, but to go out to convert the modern world. It's how do we get the church to engage modernity in a confident spirit? I think that people like De Lubac and Von Balthasar and and Wojtyla and Ratzinger, these people, that's what they had in mind, you know. Now, what the church became after the council, that's a different story. What developed after the council, that's the church that I came of age in. And I think that was a too apologetic church. That was a church that in fact lost a missionary edge. It was more of the, you know, conformity to the world. The world sets the agenda for us. That was a distortion of Vatican II. But that's the church that formed a lot of people in my generation. Do you think that the sex abuse the sex abuse was a result Vatican II? Not Vatican II per se. I would say more the result of the sexual revolution and of a loosening of moral strictures. There was I I I sensed this even as a young man. There was a sense of, you know, we've repressed stuff too long and we really need to be more expressive and there's too much of this obsession with, you know, sexual sin. And So, and then the whole culture was, you know, going through a sexual revolution and, you know, stop repressing and, you know, be yourself and express what you're feeling. And I think a lot of um priests, frankly, got caught up in that cultural movement. And because we can measure it. The sex abuse the clergy sex abuse spiked by the '70s into the very early '80s and then it began going down. And then after 2002, when the church put in all kinds of important restrictions, the so-called Dallas Accords being a first among them, it's fallen off the table. The statistics have gone completely down. So, we can measure a spiking of it right at the height of the sexual revolution. I think that's responsible for a lot of it. What were the changes wrought by Vatican II? There was famously, you know, the change in language of the mass from Latin to colloquial. But I learned recently that there were what seemed like theological changes to church doctrine. Is that fair? not really. I would say there was development of doctrine. I'm using John Henry Newman's language there. Newman says that doctrine is not just handed on like a football, you know, from one generation to the other. It it unfolds more like a like a river expanding or like a a tree growing. Like so, doctrine doesn't turn back on itself, but it can grow and express itself in fresh ways. For example, the the ecclesiology of Vatican II, the understanding of the church and its nature, underwent a real development at Vatican II. Um moving away from a, let's say, highly juridical to a more organic sense of the church. The church not crouching defensively, but the church going out in a confident missionary spirit. The church as the people of God, not just the hierarchy. All of that stuff would be emphasis within Vatican II. They represent not a repudiation of the previous ecclesiology, but a development of it. Um the role of the laity in the world. That's a role from the beginning of the church, but it'd been muted. Prior to the council, laity were, you know, come to mass on Sunday, yes, and say your prayers and and donate to the church and all that. Where Vatican II said, no, your job is to christify the world. You're meant to go out into business, finance, entertainment, sports, education, everything and christify the world. Well, that's a real development. I say a healthy development of doctrine. At Vatican II. So, that's how I read it. And again, do Vatican II, but then the post-conciliar period, which was often not all that faithful to Vatican II. It would be more faithful to the spirit of the world. Were there any changes to the way the gospel story was told? Well, no, except, you know, the vernacular of the mass makes the the whole liturgy more accessible to people. I think I don't even know cuz this is before my time that the gospel was still read, I think, in in the vernacular before the council. We got greater um exposure to the Bible after Vatican II. They opened up more of the Bible to us. But I don't think the way the gospel story was told, I don't think that changed. Um the church seems to be readjusting in a new direction now. Is that fair? With Pope Leo, you mean? Well, that just happened. No, but I mean, well, I'll just be totally blunt. So, the Catholic Church got in American political terms, which are pretty limited way to describe it, but got super liberal. The Jesuits, the Maryknolls, pretty liberal is my non-Catholic perspective. And then all of a sudden, everywhere you look, people you know are converting to Catholicism with a pretty kind of traditionally Christian orientation. Is that real, do you think? Yeah, I think that's going on today. You know, we have to go back, let's say to when I was a kid, there was that liberalization, for sure. And what I was describing is, you know, the church or the the world setting the agenda for the church, that's kind of a liberal move. A tendency, and this how I would characterize ecclesial liberalism, a tendency to reduce the supernatural to the natural. So, instead of emphasizing the supernatural dimension, God, Trinity, grace, salvation, Jesus, cross, resurrection, eternal life, right? A tendency to say, what the church is really all about is, you know, social justice and and racial justice and economic justice and so on. Where indeed those are implications from our doctrine. And indeed the church is interested in transforming the world, true. But the liberal tendency is to reduce the supernatural to the natural. That was going on for a long time, yes. And the change commenced really with like a John Paul the Second, it's been happening now for many decades. In very recent years, to your point, I think, yes, there's been a keener interest in the supernatural dimension of of the faith. Why would you go to church if it's not a supernatural? Which is a darn good question. But again, the instinct, I get it, all my teachers felt this way when I was a kid. It well, we don't want to be irrelevant, you know, the church is always about the world and and we're engaged and we're not just, you know, running off to heaven or pie in the sky when you die. They they tended to think of it in a very dualistic way. Um Why why? What That's such an interesting It's kind of the last impulse you would think in someone who's devoted his life to you know, being a member of the clergy. Yeah, I I I kind of share your puzzlement in a way with it, but it was the church that I took in as a as a kid. But it was not just the Catholics who did this. No, right. No, right. Totally eliminated mainstream Protestantism with these ideas. Yes, and and we keep, you know, analyzing the thing too, is is the supernatural during the modern period and then into the post-modern period uh subject to a a withering criticism, you know, on the part of secularists, rationalists, Yes. the scientific mentality, a materialistic mentality. So, if if you accept that criticism, like well, all this supernatural, you know, mumbo jumbo, so what's left is, well, it's you know, moral commitment. We're good people. The other thing, if you want to do it philosophically, the influence of Immanuel Kant and am I boring your audience with this, but Immanuel Kant, late 18th century, the most influential of the modern writes a book called Religion within the limits of reason alone. Extremely important text. Hilarious title. Yes, it actually it is. As if you could have a religion within the limits of reason. Right, but that's So funny. Yes, he's an enlightenment figure. Think think Thomas Jefferson, cutting all the supernatural parts out of the Bible, right? Same instinct. But Kant said, religion is finally all about being an ethically upright person. And so, worship and liturgy and doctrine and miracles and all that, fine, fine, fine, if it leads you to moral, you know, rectitude. Well, see, I think we drank deeply from the wells of Kantianism, a lot of Christians did. And they said, well, all right, you know, when push comes to shove, what it's really all about is am I a dedicated person? And that now, because of the critique of sexual morality, took the form of social justice morality. So, the the way you prove that you're a religious person is not do I believe in the Trinity so much, it's am I committed to social justice? I think it's a sort of popular Kantianism that was imbibed by the Christian churches, very much including my own. Interesting. And again, it completely destroyed American Protestantism, meaning the mainline Protestantism. no, quite right. I I completely agree with that. And it and we see the it's it's heartbreaking, really. We see the ruins of Christian churches because of that Kantian move. Literally the ru- I mean, it's some of it's the physical ruins, like the the roof has fallen in, no one's going. Yes, because again, to your point, why would they bother? If if you're, you know, you're a dedicated political person and your political party is focused on these things too, why would you need to go to church to talk about Uh no, it it's was a disaster of the last about 50 years in our in the Christian churches. And do you feel like that's changing in the Catholic church? Yes, no, I I do. I do. See, the supernatural has a way of reasserting itself that that Being supernatural, right? Yes, its death has been predicted so many times and so many different circles, Enlightenment most famously, but look, the Enlightenment was a long time ago and religion's still around. Uh I have an internet ministry and I, you know, I I used to do it more, I go on the comment sections and I respond to people, but you still hear it, people say, you know, religion, it's it's days are numbered. I think, oh, buddy, they've been saying that for like hundreds of years and it's not worked out, you know. But it's still this this prejudice that, you know, somehow science and, you know, we're going to knock religion out. Religion keeps reasserting itself for all the reasons we were saying in the first part of our conversation. Because all those spiritual and metaphysical truths, they don't go away. We can we can hope they go away or pretend they go away, but they don't go away. They reassert themselves. And the deepest reason is we're made in the image and likeness of God. So, there's a hunger in us for God. Um and so, that's why it's reasserting itself even now. You you often hear, and it's accepted uncritically or was when I was a kid anyway, that religion Christianity leads to violence. Right. You know, and that that was really the driver. I mean, Hitchens, who I knew well, that that was his main argument. People get, you know, inflexible when they believe in the supernatural and they have to kill anyone who disagrees. But does the historical record support that claim? No. And of course, that's a great myth. There was a book done some years ago, I forget the title of it now, but a guy that did a very careful study of all the great wars, going back, you know, like a couple thousand years. And the conclusion was something like 8% could be traced to a religious cause. But that's part of Enlightenment historiography. It's a it's one of the myths of Enlightenment historiography that religion is the problem. And see, it's the it's the origin myth of modernity. Modernity emerged out of the mist of a superstitious religion and out of a primitive pre-science, let's say. And so, we have to regularly bring out these sort of boogeymen to to knock down again, like yeah, religion, bad. Uh superstition, bad. And look at now, this Enlightenment reason, Enlightenment. Um but no, that that's all simplistic, you know, um And and and it betrays a deep lack of appreciation for the intellectual tradition within the religious sphere. Uh but that's part of the the way they've told the story. And of course, may I say too about violence, I I always I have to smile when people oh, religion is a source of violence. Give me a break. Look at the 20th century. I mean, the corpses piled up in the 20th century and it was not religion that did it. It was deeply anti-religious ideologies. Was murdering religious people. I mean, I'll take lectures on violence from many people, but not from from the avatars of modern secularism, you know. Uh and sure, there's distortions of religion and bad religious people that did things in its name, but you can't talk about the risen Jesus still bearing his wounds and with the word of shalom on his lips and say that's a religion of violence. It's a religion that shows God absorbing the violence of the world. Yes. You know, when Jordan Peterson, I think, made a very important observation about the cross, when he said, there's no other story. In fact, you couldn't imagine a story that shows more of human degradation than the cross of Jesus. That's right. Physical suffering, psychological suffering, death itself, the abandonment by your friends, betrayal, denial, institutional injustice, it's all there. As I said earlier, this 30-year-old man dying naked on this instrument of torture. But there it is, you know, there's the the totality of of human dysfunction. And God's response to that is not to to more violence, it's to respond with forgiving love. That's Christianity. Now, distortions of it are everywhere, but that's Christianity. It's not a religion of violence. It's so non-obvious, it's so preposterous and crazy that the fact that that became the world's most popular religion tells you it's true. Yes. I mean, like, who could make that up? Yes. It's so unappealing, like, your God got tortured to death and didn't fight back? Absolutely. It's the weird It's I wrote a little book years ago called The Strangest Way. The Strangest Way, and it's a book about Christianity. Cuz that's the argument I made was this is the weirdest religion ever ever. Because again, when I was coming of age, it was very much all religions, you know, they're kind of the same and we all climb the holy mountain by different paths. No, I completely repudiate that now. Completely repudiate that. I'm with Tom Holland, you know, not Spider-Man, but the the popular historian, Tom Holland. Do you know his book called Dominion? Wonderful. Oh, I I read Dominion. Yeah, yeah. But that's his argument is things that we just think are oh, that's just part of the way things are. No, they're not. It's it's Christianity. That's a great book. It's a great book. Yes. Uh Christianity bequeathed to the West these deeply weird ideas like we're all equal, we're all subjects of dignity, that you should care for the the poor and the marginalized and they didn't just come up out of Enlightenment rationalism, they came up out of Christianity. That weakness is something we should celebrate? I mean, that a talk about counterintuitive. say, okay, God, give me an image of your God. Mighty, you know, kings and there's our image of God. Is that 30-year-old rabbi on the cross. Whose whose closest friends didn't really believe in him. Right, close friends ran away. You know, it's like the most pathetic story you can imagine. And we say that's the manifestation of God. it up, you would hide all that. Of course. of course. No, it's the the last story in the world you'd dream of making up. It's the opposite of the story you'd make up. The Gospels are all like that. They're they're strange and weird and wonderful. So it does seem like you were saying that Kant was the root of the ideas that led to the French Revolution and Auschwitz and like, you know, every and I agree with you. But the Kant sort of began writing at the beginning of the of a technological revolution. Yeah. And as technology advanced first incrementally then exponentially and now we're on the verge of like singularity with AI those ideas became stronger and more dominant. So there's a connection between technology and the belief that man is God and all the suffering that results. Oh, they became very dangerous. So technology is not bad in itself, but when you couple technology with a sheer celebration of autonomy or a bracketing of God. I don't want to blame poor Kant for that, but Kant had a very vivid sense of God as a moral guide, but you do indeed with someone like Nietzsche, you know, you get to a sense of Ubermensch and it's just it's human autonomy expressing itself. That's a very dangerous combination and you bring high technology into that and you don't um anchor it in something of spiritual moral Welcome to the 20th century. But the 21st century sees a continuation of those trends like in a way that you couldn't even imagine 15 years ago or 25 years ago at the end of the last century. So like where are we going exactly? I don't know. That's the whole AI thing which, you know, I kind of half understand but it always makes me nervous when I think about it and I see, you know, instances of it chat GPT and all that and it's kind of amazing like most technology it breaks through and I go, "Oh my gosh, that guy can actually compose a a novel in, you know, a minute or whatever it is." But it's it's frightening cuz it's got to be grounded in a moral vision. It has to be or it will become a Frankenstein's monster. I mean she saw that by the way. That's very interesting about Mary Shelley. I mean she saw that coming. She saw exactly what will happen when we become God. We decide to uh dictate terms to reality. It'll turn on us and wreck us. I mean that's a very prescient uh novel. Yeah, it feels Tower of Babel-y a little bit. Yeah, absolutely. Although like the Bible knew all about it. Yes. So where how does how does the the individual respond to this? Well Yeah, I mean I would say that keep the awakening of the moral sensibility and and a grounding of your life in God. You're not uh the center of the universe. The decentering of the ego. I mean all those spiritual practices would be essential to a rightly ordered world. But yeah, we have a dangerous weapon in front of us. Um and that's what you the churches can't cede the ground. I mean c e d e the ground. We we can't withdraw to the sidelines. The churches have got to be front and center in shaping the consciousness of of the our people. See in the measure that we become just a faint echo of the culture, that's very dangerous because the very weirdness of Christianity that we were talking about, that's got to be front and center. It's got to be front and center. See when I was coming of age the churches were made to look like they're just blending into the suburban environment. Um that's a that's the emblematic of the time. Uh make the church just so you barely see it. And the medieval cathedrals looked like Tibetan temples. They they were wildly colored and rising up like monsters from the but that that's cuz they were speaking of another world and you you go through the door not like you're entering a bank which is the way a lot of our churches feel now, but like you're entering another world. Yeah. That to me is emblematic of what the churches should be like today on the scene. We we've got to be a very strong presence. But the stronger the presence of Christianity the the more vehement the the persecution. Yes, right. Yes and see they they know at some level I say they, I mean the the enemies of the church. They know in some way we are the enemy that matters. Yes, I totally We're the enemy that matters and that's why they go after us with such venom. they convinced me it was real. I mean cuz I I spent my whole life watching what the enemies of civilization do. That's like my job. And the thing that triggers them most of all is Jesus. Like there's nothing that comes close and I think the whole point of the trans thing was just to like figure out who believes in Jesus and who doesn't. That's my personal view, but but whatever. No, we're we're the enemy and that's true and they know it. They they intuit that. But see the gates of hell will not prevail against us. So we we should go forth with um panache and with confidence. Panache. You know what I mean? You're the only person in America who's used that word today and I love it. A forgotten word. Um but how does the individual believer respond to persecution? Well, it depends where you are. I mean there are some I know these believers in Nigeria who are under, you know, very direct persecution and they've responded I think beautifully by 94% of them coming to mass every Sunday. That's an act of of resistance. Persecution if you could just put a finer point on it by which you mean like denial of federal contracts No, I mean I mean threat to your life and limb. Like beheading, yeah. Yeah, there are people being killed all over the world for their Christianity today. In our country of course it takes a subtler form and you know, we're being persecuted institutionally in different ways and and they're trying to get us off the stage. I was a bishop for 6 years in California, auxiliary of LA and there's no question the government wanted us out of health care. They want us out of education. They want us off the public stage and you know, in using all kinds of different strategies. Uh and we you know, we resisted it successfully in some cases, not so much in others, but they definitely want us off the stage cuz we are the principal enemy. So they didn't want you healing the sick or educating the kids for free. They don't want free? No, because there's a as you just were suggesting there's an ideology in place that they want all the kids to subscribe to and and we stand athwart that. We have a different anthropology. Um and they want hospitals where, you know, abortion and euthanasia and all that and where gender surgery is being done and and the church has to stand against that and What's wrong with euthanasia? Um whether you live or you die, you're the Lord's. My life doesn't belong to me and it's not a matter of my autonomy deciding, "Oh now it's time for me to get off the stage." Uh that belongs to God, you know. So it's another expression of the deification of the autonomous will is I determine, you know, how I live, how long I live and all that. And the church says, "No, no, you you belong to God." Um that's going to be a battle that you know, we're all going to be fighting or witness to soon, right? We fought in California and it's in so many states, you know, euthanasia. I think it's a very demonic manifestation. And so is the transgender surgery stuff. My home state now in Minnesota it's a sanctuary state. So kids can without their parents' permission can be brought to Minnesota to have gender reassignment surgery. I I think that's as as um perverse as it gets. Um so as believers say like what you just said, they're going to be well, they're already being punished in the state of Minnesota and in the state of California. How do they respond to that punishment? Well I guess it depends on the person. And you know, the church at its leadership level has tried to affect an organized response. I mean so on a regular basis I'm chair right now of our bishops' committee on lay the youth and family life. And we've issued, you know, strong statements. We meet as bishops with the leadership of Minnesota once a year. So we met with the governor, met with most of the top leadership. We lay out, you know, our our positions on things. Um in California What does the governor say? Not not much that's helpful. California there was a law now one like it just passed in Washington state, but in California to compel priests to break the seal of confession in in the case of child sex abuse. And we fought that and we we roused the people and the people inundated Sacramento with so many petitions that they dropped it. So we figured that was a a victory. But these battles are just ongoing. That's why religious liberty is a serious issue in our country. I mean Christians should be prepared to suffer, correct? They should be, yeah. Yeah. Do you think they are? Well, I I think at their best and and some of the best would be, but I think we've been out of practice in a way that we've so internalized practices of accommodation that it's probably hard to imagine you know, that we would be standing uh athwart, let's say, a government or standing athwart a law. I think for a lot of Catholics that would still would be still kind of a a new idea. But maybe that's the challenge of our time. You keep hearing reports of people imputing like supernatural power to AI. Hm. And you hear very credible reports that in fact are true that um it acts autonomously, that it lies to the people who created it for example. That's real. Do you see a spiritual component to that? Like what is that? I wish I knew more about it. I've been involved in a couple conferences about AI and when people start talking about it, I always go back to Thomas Aquinas and those people that that no matter what this thing is, which I would say is mimicking consciousness, it's not conscious. Consciousness has to involve something immaterial. As I was saying earlier, if you you're entertaining a pure mathematical idea or pure abstraction, that's a sign that your mind is not simply ordered to the material. And the brain might explain uh, imagination, but it can't explain pure conceptualization. I don't think a machine is is in principle capable of real uh, conceptualization and real intellection and will. So, whatever's going on with AI is a simulacrum of consciousness, not the real thing. Now, having said all that, it doesn't take away the fact you just said, might they develop in a way that's really repugnant to our own interests? And I think yes, the answer to that is yes. And yeah, I worry about that. The Vatican, I know, is very interested. They've had several conferences on AI. One of the first things the Pope said, our new Pope, was about AI. So, it's on their mind for sure that it's talk about your Frankenstein's monster, right? This thing that we've created that might turn on us. So, I I see all that. The new Pope's American. Yeah. From the Midwest. Yeah. Yeah. Do you know him? A little bit. Um, we grew up about a 25-minute drive from each other. So, I I grew up in Western Springs, he grew up in Dolton, which is just off the south side of the city. I was in the southwest suburbs. We're He's about 4 years older than I am. So, we're around the same age. He would have come of age as an Augustinian, which meant he was in the order side of things. I came of age as a diocesan priest. So, we didn't really share an educational background. I came to know him a little bit at the last two synods. So, the last two Octobers under Pope Francis, we had these synods, a gathering of about 400 people, 300 bishops, about 100 lay people, to talk about um, a lot of important issues. So, for two Octobers, uh, the current Pope and I were both at the synod. So, in that capacity, I saw him. I talked to him a couple of times. He's a very quiet man, um, very kind of reserved. Uh, we talked a little bit about Chicago, a shared background there. I was never at a table with him at the synod, but I I know someone who was, and he said he was by far the quietest guy at the table. Which I thought was interesting. Good sign. Yeah. He intervened We all had a chance, I think, once or twice to speak to the plenary session. And he spoke, I remember, in Spanish. I frankly don't recall what he said, but uh, so I had a little contact with him, but I don't know I don't know him that well. What changes do you think he'll make? I don't know is my honest answer. Uh, so far, he's made some interesting gestures, I think. Uh, the fact that he appeared on the loggia with the what we call the mozzetta and the elaborate stole, uh, traditional garb for the newly elected Pope. Uh, Francis eschewed that famously. So, this Pope, you know, brought it back. Uh, he's used Latin a lot more, which is kind of interesting. Um, I don't know. And they say What does that mean that he used What significance would you ascribe to that? I think it was a gesture toward more traditional Catholics. Uh, you know, Francis would have seen it as a gesture toward, you know, poverty and simplicity, and I think this current Pope would see it as what he did, a gesture toward the more traditionally minded Catholics that like, you know, the the liturgy and so on. Uh, the use of Latin and all that. Those are little indicators. They say he's going to move back in the apostolic palace. Francis famously moved into the guest house, which is I stayed there one time during a conference, and it's uh, you know, it's like a three-star hotel. Uh, so he lived, you know, uh, pretty simply. They say that it was harder to protect him there, which I get. The palace, it's easier to protect the Pope. Uh, but this current Pope, they say he's going to move back in. So, they're all little gestures, perhaps, but I don't think we know. The one thing we know would be the name, Leo the 14th. Uh, the name is always a a giveaway, and he said it was indeed in tribute to Leo the 13th, who was one of the most consequential Popes. We mentioned already the St. Michael's prayer. Uh, did he have a vision the 20th century would be controlled by Satan? to the devil. Uh, but he's also the father of the modern Catholic social teaching uh, tradition, beginning with his famous letter called Rerum Novarum, which means about the new things. And um, that's a very interesting letter, Rerum Novarum. What does he say? Well, among many others, uh, fierce opposition to socialism, fierce defense of private property, zero truck with Marxism. That's very clear. And by that time, you know, Marxism was kind of a coming thing by the late 19th century. So, very clear on that. On the other hand, uh, it's the first great ecclesial gesture toward unions that labor unions were good. Um, but it also invoked a principle that goes back to Aquinas, but behind Aquinas, it goes back to the church fathers and the Bible, which is called the universal destination of goods. And what that means is, since the whole world belongs to God, ultimately, right? God makes the whole world from nothing. It belongs to God. Doesn't belong to us. We are stewards of it, to use biblical language, right? So, Leo said, everyone has a right to private ownership, private property. I I own this house or whatever. But, when it comes to the use of what we own, he said, uh, once the the um, requirements of necessity and propriety have been met in your own life, everything else you own belongs to the poor. That's Leo the 13th. That's pretty strong statement. So, private property, yep, you got a right to it, but is your life basically okay and necessity, propriety, you know? Yeah, I'm doing all right. Well, then everything else you have belongs to the poor. That the common good should be your primary preoccupation. Um, it was Ambrose of Milan who said, um, if you've got two shirts in your closet, one belongs to you, the other belongs to the man who has no shirt. So, that's the tradition, and that goes back to the Hebrew prophets, right? It goes back to Amos and Isaiah, those people. So, that's what that letter is about, and that's echoed by all the Popes coming up through the 20th century, including up to Francis. The idea of the universal destination of goods. So, it's not It's certainly it's against socialism, against Marxism. We like the market economy. That's a basic principle of Catholic social teaching. We like the market economy. But, we're not laissez-faire, anything goes, make as much money as you want, sort of capitalist. Opposed to accumulation of wealth for its own sake? Well, you know, what what the Catholic social teaching, I'll put it positively, what it likes is a wide distribution of wealth and power throughout a society. It doesn't like hyper-concentrations of wealth and power. Uh, Communist. No, you see, that's the thing is is it's fiercely anti-communistic. Because the communist system always winds up with a hyper-concentration of wealth and power. Right. And and the church would never recommend that the government should be the agent of that distribution. It would encourage, you know, mediating um, institutions and all that sort of thing. Read someone like Tolkien or um, or um, Lewis in the 20th century, and you'll find echoes of that sort of sensibility. Look at in the Lord of the Rings, you know, where where when power gets concentrated, it's always something bad. Yes. And Tolkien likes the Shire. He likes the small businesses and small homes and all that. That's reflective of Catholic social teaching. So, I think it's intriguing that this man took the name Leo the 14th, clearly in homage Where was Leo the 13th on loaning money to interest, which is the basis of the modern economy in the West? Um, The church has been against it for time immemorial. Now, the the transition that took place was once we kind of understand the dynamics of of a market economy better. Uh, what it it tends to mean now is, you know, loaning at exorbitant interest or loaning in a way that's deeply abusive toward others. It doesn't mean that in itself, it's intrinsically evil, cuz then the capitalist So, how would the church feel about like a credit card that charges 25% interest? Yeah, I it would be wary of It would be wary of it. It would want some kind of uh, regulation and some kind of oversight of those things. It Prison. John Paul II would say the economy needs to be regulated morally and legally. So, there should be a moral regulation. And see, that comes from the churches. It comes from a clear teaching about the moral life and care for the poor and so on. But, also a legal regulation to some degree. The best statement of it, I think, is John Paul II. It's called Centesimus Annus, written in 1991 on the Centesimus Annus, the 100th year of Rerum Novarum. That's the clearest expression, I think, of the balance of Catholic social teaching. I think this man is signaling that he likes that tradition. And what did he say about usury? He He didn't talk about usury specifically, but he has a paragraph where he says, do we support the market economy? If by that you mean one that it encourages entrepreneurship, that it is based upon private property, that allows even for a profit motive, and he goes through various things, the answer is yes. If by that you mean one that is completely unregulated legally or morally, one that exploits the poor, one that excludes most people from participation in it, then the answer is no. And so, he kind of sets the parameters for how we think about the economy. Is that um, that feels I mean, I'm so grateful to the Catholic Church for standing up for life, for opposing killing. Yeah. Uh, truly grateful. And for emphasizing the the poor. I think someone needs to. Grateful that the Catholic Church has never stopped doing that. But, I don't hear any conversation ever from normal Catholic clerics about, hey, maybe you shouldn't, you know, exploit people in business. Yeah, we should, though. That's part of our social teaching. And and that's part of where the instruction should come from is the pulpit. Uh, you know, has that broken down generally in our society? Uh, probably. Uh, you know, so, but that that's part of the church's job is to is to preach that clearly. And that's where, you know, that's people like a Dorothy Day, the founders of the Catholic Worker Movement would come in, these sort of more radical voices. But, you know, sometimes you have to shout to get people's attention. And I think Dorothy Day is a good example of someone that she referenced the Catholic social teaching tradition, but she felt that in certain ways it had been so ignored that it she needed to shout. Last question, if someone's made it to the end of this conversation and is wondering like, how do I learn more about this religion called Christianity? What's a good place to start? At at the risk of being uh self-serving with our Word on Fire materials, but uh you know, the the Bible is always the best place to start. It's the best place to start. Uh but, you know, I know for a lot of people the Bible can be very difficult and just trying to plow through it. I I mentioned that my ministry Word on Fire, we have the an edition of the Bible that I think is beautiful. It's full of great artwork, but also it's got the biblical text, but then surrounded by literally surrounded on the page by commentary from the church fathers and the great saints and the popes and so on. So, that as you read the Bible, wait, I'm I'm lost. I don't know what's going on. Okay, read this commentary. That might be a good way for someone to get into it. Um it Word on Fire. Word on Fire, yeah. Go back to mass, too, I say to Catholics. The fact that in our country now 18 or 19% of Catholics go to mass on Sunday, that's a rotten shame. Uh Vatican II, at that time 60, 70% of Catholics went to mass every Sunday, like in 1960. Now it's 19. Uh it's pathetic. Go back to mass. The sex abuse thing played a big role in that, didn't it? It did, but I I wouldn't put so much onus on that cuz those numbers were really bad even before the sex abuse scandal. Uh we were down like 20% in the 1980s. Uh but that has had a deleterious effect on our whole culture, I think. People absenting themselves from church. When I was a little kid, um it was 97% of Americans would have identified as religious, right? Well, you saw this. Sunday was different. When I was a kid, Sunday was an entirely different day of the week. It felt different. I agree. People went to church. Um they've stopped going to church and that that is not good for the society. Bishop Barron, thank you very much for that conversation. You're welcome. Loved it. Me, too. So, it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising, that's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics, with the wars on the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could whine about it, that's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So, we hope that you'll do that.