Hello, you dirty freak bitches. Welcome to the new world. Welcome to the future. Welcome to the Joe Rogan Experience podcast. This episode is brought to you by stamps.com. If you go to stamps.com, and... Wow, we've got a long to take sweat away. You guys are living in the past. It's a long time. You guys are living in the past. People are saying, yeah, you should already have it. If you go, what? stamps.com is a service that allows you to measure stuff at home with your own scale. And then... Does it? Yeah. That's what it is. Send shit to the internet, man. You guys are high. This is rude. You way things. You measure things. You measure the weight. Is that rude to say measure the weight? That's what it is. You measure the weight. You fucks. First of all, how dare you all of you. I was thinking something. I was thinking something. For some reason, when I'm typing in JRE, it's not sending me to that. How are you getting there? Joe. What are you typing in? Type JRE, right? No, I just do stamps.com. stamps.com. stamps.com. No. No? No, that's not it. No. How did you get stamps.com? You enter in the code where JRE, right? Yeah. If you buy any of the kitty cat t-shirts at Brian Red-Bansells, that's how he makes them. He sends them rather through stamp.com. If you have a small business and you're trying to go to the post office and wait in line and get your shit weighed and put different labels on boxes, you're going to go crazy. It's not healthy. This way you do it all on your home computer. Super sample. They give you a free weight. They give you a scale. They give you it's a $110 value if you enter in the code where JRE. There's no risk trial plus $110 bonus offer including the digital scale and up to $55 of free postage. Wow. So they give you a sweet deal. And if you're selling shit, it's a really easy way to deal with things. It's supposed to like hiring someone to handle it. You can actually handle it yourself. And if you're not selling shit, what do you want to work for somebody forever? Just go make some macrame and sell it. No, no. So, purse is on the phone. So, you can do it. You can do it. You can do it. You can do it. You can do it. You can do it. You can do it for me and sell it. So, purse is online. It's the future. Also you can get cancer from licking stamps. Oh yeah. You want to wet a sponge, your fox. Don't be licking shit. Remember when you have to lick stamps. Yeah, I remember that. I tell you, it's a bad time, man. Time for a bad time. Stamps.com. Maths are sticking together. Code word JRE. We're also brought to you by hover. Hover is a internet domain named company that is owned by the people that own. Is it hover.com. Four slash chat. Rogan is that what it is? Or hover.com. Four slash Rogan. Hover. Sorry. Can't wait. Four slash. I think it's nice to see. You've got to get all these people to make the same one. No, it is. It is. It's all make the same one. They get that together. They can code it no time. Because they don't want to pretend that each other exists. They're like, if you're a single guy, you've got a bunch of girlfriends. They don't want to know that they have a other girlfriends. Nobody wants to think that we change our shit to JRE. Just because ScraisedBased.com uses that. I mean, the fuck, man. Hover is the domain company that I use, actually. And if you're like a techno idiot, like myself, I do not know how to do anything correctly, other than really easy, simple and intuitive shit, like Facebook or Twitter, so I'm like, I don't know how to. If I can register a website super easy, and it has things that you normally have to pay for, like who is domain name privacy, which is, that's- Sorry, ScraisedBasedBased.com. That's key. If you order Rishafir's legs, and then you put that shit online, you don't want people to know. You just steady beaten off to Rishafir's legs. You feel me, people? I mean, they're sexy. Or it could be Dick Party in my mouth.com, which we own. Good to Rishafir. You're calling the phone. Why does it? They're partying your mouth.com. Because we were trying to make the point, we don't want to make the point that you could hide this. Because it would be embarrassing if people knew that you had Dick Party in your mouth.com. Hover.com forward slash Rogan is the sweet spot. If you go there, you will save 10% off your domain name registrations. And like I said, it's the same company that owns Ting, very ethical company, very reasonable rates. And I use them too. So go, they support the podcast. We support them and blah, blah, blah, blah. Anyway, on a dot com last sponsor, O-N-N-I-T, use a code name Rogan, save 10% off any supplements. That's it. Fuck it. It's not saying anything more. I talked too much. Boom. We got Jason Silver. Boom. We got Rishafir. Boom. We got Duncan Tressel. This is the Uber podcast. It launches now. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast my night. All day. Praise Oden, Duncan Tressel. Praise Oden. Praise Oden, Jason Silver. Praise Oden. Praise Oden, Rishafir. We're finally together again. This is a fucking super podcast. This is really great. This is the sexiest it gets for me. I'm very happy to be here, man. Thank you for having me back. It was so cool running into you with the global future 2045 conference, man. That was badass. Dude, that was awesome. That is your world, dude. That's where you're there, dude. Yeah. Well, I was actually talking about this a little while ago. What was your guys' impression? Because that's kind of like the mecca of the Singularity. You guys visited Mecca. Yeah. Singularity. And because we visited for the show, we got to talk to some really cool people that probably would never sit down and talk to us. You know, like Aubrey DeGray, I got to talk to Aubrey DeGray, which we'll have that on the show. And you guys got to talk to us. What was the gentleman's name with the robot? Harris, he wrote his, he said, girl. Hiroshi Ishigura. This is a girl. Crazy robot, man. Yeah. Really, we were. Did you talk to the one that didn't have limbs? No. They're one of the little baby one that he talked to you. You're like, somewhat limbs. Well, that one brings me out. Because that one responds to you in conversation. It understands what you say and responds to you. So you're like, hey, how you doing? And it goes, good, how are you? And then it's like, and it's like, good, man. Where are you from? He's like, I'm from Tokyo. And I'm like, oh, cool. Did you like to travel here? Yeah, it was fun. But here's the thing. It's this like humanoid baby with no limbs, which feels like the beginning of like a creepy sci-fi movie that starts out with showing like the first AI, but it's limbless. So it's this like weird thing. Like, so we're going to build them, but they're going to be like a little circus freak. Yeah. It just felt really honking. Would it be weirder if it was limbless or if it had limbs it couldn't move? It was paralyzed. It could move. It's like, it's like, it's like, you're with his nubs. Right. It was just nubs. That's fun. Because it responds to you like a human. And it's cute. You immediately enter, permorifies it. And you start to respond to it. Like, it's alive. And at some point, it'll be so good at responding that by all measures that we know about when it comes to knowing if you're you have a subjective experience or if you have a subjective, we'll just believe that they're conscious. And at that point, are they just going to be these living thinking things that we keep like limbless behind like, you know, behind a rope so people can like throw money and look at it. I mean, it was just freaked me out the presentation of it. I don't think they're going to, I think one thing that people haven't thought of with robots yet is that they think that they're going to be confined to one form. I think the reality is going to be that they're going to be able to disassemble into individual droplets if they want to. They're going to be these self-assembling things that can kind of. Like the term, like the term, that can become that's what it's going to be. It's going to be like, but think about that in a way, it's kind of like time-lapsing reality. Because what are atoms if not self-assembling with other atoms that become cells and then those cells like self-assembled into tissues and organisms. I mean, the whole story of the universe, the whole, the opposite of entropy is extra-pea, right? The things that move towards greater complexity and self-assemble. So we will talk about robots or nanotechnology. It's like an acceleration of it so that it becomes discernible to us from this scale. And this is funny because it already exists. When McKinnon talks about his DMT experience, he calls himself transforming machine elves. So it's almost as if he's come in contact with a future version of what these androids are going to be. So just stop if you think if you accelerated life. I mean, time is all. It's all our perspective. Because if you accelerated our life, human life, the experience of humanity, but accelerated times a billion. And you got to see the first single cell become multicellular and on and on and on. Cities rise, people fly and then the earth crash again. You would get to see it all. And like some sort of a psychedelic trip that only takes three minutes. And you would see the earth form out of the cosmos. I mean, that's psychedelic. That might as well be a mushroom trip. A hundred percent. I mean, if you could literally just a perspective thing, it's a time thing. All perspective. Like even when you see time lapse of trees growing, I mean, if you can see the tree and aims towards the sun, it just lands like ants towards the sun. That's a very cool answer. I mean, it's kind of crazy. It's almost like agency itself, which is that what they call the life force that there's agency. Even plants seem to have it through time lapse. Like you see agency intent. Like it wants to go towards the world. What does that say? Kevin Kelly, okay. The trippy, co-founder of Wired and his book, What Technology Wands. He calls technology the technium. He says it's the seventh kingdom of life. And then it also has wants and needs. And he says that if we were able to zoom out and remove ourselves from the being the co-participants and creating technology, it would actually look like the technology itself is self-assembling and has a direction like the time-lapsing of plants, which is crazy. And then when McKenna was tripping out and he starts talking about singularities. Hello, here in the echo with Kurzweil and McKenna. The tennis tripping on DMT and talking about singularities. He's talking about universes that engender novelty universes that allow the sprouting of new possibility. It's the same thing that Kevin Kelly's writing about in his technology book. So you see like the respected technologists writing these books about what's happening. You know, even Eric Schmidt, the age of augmented humanity and Google, Google represents the literalization of the psychedelic dream. You know, the literalization of the idea that we are expanding our minds with these technologies, whether they be chemical technologies or whether they be these external technologies. And what you're saying, this is why it's hilarious when you hear people start railing against, it's unnatural. Completely. We shouldn't do it because what you're saying is like, no, actually there appears to be some form of transcendent, invisible architecture that all things grow upon in a similar way. 100% of the plants, technology, humans. It just stretches on this invisible framework and reveals what's hidden in underneath all things, which seems to be this ever-perfecting, ever-complexifying harmonious expression. That's right. And Pierre de Chardin, who was a famous Jesuit writer called it the Omega Point. He called it the Omega Point. He got pushed out of the church because he basically sort of divinized the idea of the singularity and he was using the language of God. But he was talking about this move towards complexity and the phenomenon of man. And man was the point in which evolution became self-aware and started directing its own evolution. Doesn't that echo what we were talking about in the future's conference? So you see these echoes, you see these patterns that connect, you know? The whole idea of cyber-delegates, right? Because it's cybernetics and computers and then psychedelics and the chemical technologies and they collide in what's known as cyber-delegates. That all started in the 60s and 70s in Silicon Valley when the computer scientists are tripping on LSD and we're looking at the un-creative problems. Yeah. Xerox Park, augmenting human intelligence. There's a book by John Markoff called What the Doorhouse says, which talks about that, where that came from. I mean, you have to think that these people were out of their minds when they were conceiving of a world in which these computers could be wirelessly sending our thoughts across time and space at the speed of light and that we're all gonna be connected and see our faces on these like machines. Like, I mean, you have to be, you know, way psychologically or metaphorically tripping to even think so far outside the box. So it's not like Da Vinci was so fascinating. Yeah, I got that. And a lot of the stuff that he came up with really didn't come to fruition in that form. But you could see that he was like thinking these concepts like way ahead of everybody else. Yeah. He's just really like what a fascinating, fascinating guy that must have been. Completely. And envision the future known that he's just stuck with these fucking eight. Do you think he's had any regular conversation with anybody? I doubt. You're thinking you walk along pretend that you cared about what happened to the Colcie last night. Did you hear about the potatoes or tinted? No. The potatoes are no good. We're going to riot. We can fly. He's drawing a fucking helicopter in his backyard. Yeah. That's so far ahead of the curve. But it stands to reason that some people are born with bigger dicks and other people have larger ears. Some of you would just have a part of the brain or the ability to tune in to creativity. Who's Da Vinci's teacher? Well, it sounds like, I mean, was he a wealthy guy? Like did he come from a background where he had much time for a job? Do you know? I did not know any of the history of energy. I didn't make any money at these things. Well, he doesn't think so. I was reading an article today that said, even though human beings evolved about 200,000 years ago, the first art, the first signs of religion or contemplative thinking, didn't appear until the cave paintings that are 70,000 years old. So if we had the same brains for 200,000 years ago, you didn't see the beginning of humanness or imagination until about 70,000 years ago, why did it take so long? Yeah, same phrase. Well, the idea is that we is like Maslow's hierarchy of needs. Those first 100,000 years, we didn't even have enough food. We didn't have like some very kind of organized society. It was only when we could afford the leisure time that all this other stuff started. It's like paying back alone, you mostly pay interest at first and then one cent on the path on the. Two large. And then eventually you're paying like only two, two, three, two, three. You're right. Yeah, two, get it all. So like they had 99% of their time just dealing with staying alive. We were one percent to get to wherever they were going. Maslow's hierarchy of needs. And it's like as a collective human society, at some point we were able to, we had enough hunters and we had enough organization maybe that we could feed ourselves in the beginning of free time. The beginning of eating psychedelic chemicals and making cave paintings and shamanic dances and all that. Every time, every time it's my god. Think about countries today. Civilizations today that are living like that. Have you heard about these people in India? There's an island, an uncontacted island of India. And recently these within the last few years, these fishermen inadvertently got drunk on their boat and drifted into the shore and these people killed them. They killed them and then the authorities were trying to figure out how to get to the bodies without getting shot at by these people who wouldn't have them to kill them. Because there's not that many left. There's maybe like 40 or 50. And they have no contact with other human beings. They're barbarians. They're total 100% complete savages that are living off the land, fishing with homemade nets. How do you put them under? They're just like, they're controlling themselves. Who are you to like put them under your thumb? Yeah, well it's not only that. They won't even go in there to retaliate against murder, which is fascinating to me. It's like the anthropologists are so concerned with keeping this intact and studying the civilization in some sort of a way to try to, you can see it. I mean, this is really good. They're not that many left. They're almost like their own country and they were attacked. Well, no, no. Some folks were forced to watch the board and they just killed the guys. They didn't even talk to him first. You know, I mean, he might have been a respected member of the community within six months. They didn't even give a chance. How can you hook me up? My rudder seems broken. And there's tales of cannibalism, but it's harder to substantiate, but it's not outside the realm of possibility. So you might be dealing with cannibals that we allow to kill people because they're so primitive that we don't want to fuck up what they've got. Because there's only like 40 of them. Why do we want to preserve that? Isn't that interesting? Because there is a sentimental instinct in humanity that wants to preserve everything in everything. The hamburger place goes under our own prize. Yeah, it's like an instinct that people want to do that. And a lot of people say that's like, you know, that's part of our humanity is keeping intact cultures and religions and keeping intact all these ideas because you can see that with this thing that's emerging, this thing that's emerging is so far it's so much bigger than some old desert religion. And the bigger it gets and the more this thing emerges, the more it's light begins to shine so brightly that all these silly little superstitious ideas begin to seem increasingly ridiculous. Yeah, I mean, our consciousness is becoming so expanded that it's almost like, you know, we're able to like all of a sudden turn around and see ourselves. And that sounds almost like it's impossible to shape. But like the first time that we can actually do that and we can see ourselves sort of at a context. Just like in 1969 when astronauts first took a picture of the Earth from the vantage point of space, I mean, that's literally like the human mind was folding in on itself because how is it possible for a human brain that emerged from the Earth to then see the Earth not from the Earth? You know what I mean? It's like Earth looking at itself. Like that's what was happening because we are like a seed of the planet. And then we left the planet and turned around and took a picture. How about the mind fox of the shots from the Voyager from orbit? Oh yeah. We see Earth as like a little pale blue dot. A little dark. A little dark. Have you seen it? Oh my god. Yes. Yeah, yeah. It's amazing. They sent something out there and it's still taking pictures of us. And it's so fucking far away that we're like a little tiny dot. And then you get a sense of what this thing really is. Yeah. It's like it's like it's insanity. It's insanity. What do you think about the average person? How do you accommodate yourself? To the idea that everything you know, the vast expanse, the repository of experience of your entire life is a blink of a blink of a blink on a grain of a grain of a grain of a grain. Well, instead of turning this down. You have a way. You have a thing. You don't matter at all. Why not just enjoy yourself? Well, you do matter though. That's not true. But you want it to mean something. It's not that it does. It does. No, it does. It does mean something. It means something to you right now. It's tangible. It's real. It means something to people that you're in contact with. There's nothing unreal or unnatural about it. Because it's temporary. But do you have attachments or you don't have attachment? Well, you do. It's natural. But there's this connection that you have to this greater gigantic thing. It doesn't negate the small moments in your life. It doesn't negate the video games that you enjoy. It doesn't negate finding the perfect porn to jerk off to. It doesn't negate as much time as you enjoy. Yes. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Give yourself happiness to your gone and real. But it does. But I don't agree that it doesn't matter. Because it does matter. It matters to you right now. And although that seems ridiculous, so does life itself. So does every breath you take. Well, hold your breath stupid. You don't think the breathing is important. Hold your breath. Of course, it's important. Don't be silly. You're like the existential ideas can overwhelm the reality of the situation. The reality of the situation is you would like to stay alive. And for the most part, it's fun. And if it's not fun, you've managed your life incorrectly. But you know what's interesting about what you just said is that you've eloquently stated something that's actually very difficult for most people to experience. Most people either have to have like they have to be half a sleep, which means ignore the overwhelming universe and just be barely present. And then other people are awake to this overwhelming universe. No, Brian is going to hear you. And hear you. You know, you talking about him like he's done here. That's right. He's jabinet of red band. No, we're not. We're just bringing him in to the conversation. No, but it's like, you know, Albert Camu, the existentialist said life should be lived to the point of tears, right? And everything has been figured out except how to live. And this is what you do is in the onions and hot sauce. It was just a free-clicked time. Oh, yeah. Camu? Yeah, it was a big misunderstanding. You know how he ends in hot sauce, a fishy nano. And everybody's like, oh, he's just like really deep. You know how he died? He had a train ticket that he was going to take a train to get to his destination. His friends are like, no, let us drive you. And they got an accident. Yeah. It's like a bad, terrible decision. But go on with your Camu, because I love it. I'm not going to die yesterday. Wait a minute, before I can't remember. It's like, all right. My mother died yesterday or I might have been the day before I can't remember. Camu, oh, yeah. I'll bring mine to the stranger. Yeah. Just disconnected completely. Like reading it. I found it really depressing. Well, I guess my whole question is OK. So in the face of an infinite universe, with our minds, we can ponder something close to the infinite. Yet the irony is that we're housed in these heart-pumping breath gasping decaying bodies. You know, Ernest Becker wrote the denial of death. It says, we are gods with anuses. Think of how brilliant that is. So the idea that we are these transcendent beings, but every single day we are reminded that we have met at metabolism. It's funny, the backer thinks that God doesn't have an anus. How does he know? When I asked all this so presumptuous. But still, how do you reconsider? It's the only species that can really like loose sleep over the fact that we are mortal beings. We can barely sustain the here and now, because we know that one day we might be dead. And so what do we do? Do we just lose ourselves in diversions and sex and drugs? Well, here's my problem with this whole line of thinking. We're going to repeat. Here's my problem with this whole line of thinking. What does the average person do? What's the average person do? How about you turn the question inward and say, what do you do and tell everybody what you do? Because that's how we figure it out through you telling me how you're managing it. I tell you, but when you start going, what does the average person do? Well, the reality is we're all the average person. Yeah. We're all the average person. The average person varies. In our understanding. It definitely gets especially. Yeah. Yes. Absolutely in our significance, we are all the average to that. I stand up to that. 100%. Yeah. When someone says it all meant a created equal, not really, but yes, not really in this experience. But yes, there's Einstein's just even Hawking's. There's fucking loofy-rigg knows. There's a lot of weird people in this world. But I think there's a responsibility as a technology emerges and science begins to show us the truth of reality. These are responsibilities begin to emerge that create ethical dilemmas for societies, which is when you have large swaths of the human population being controlled by tyrannical fundamentalist religious people who are basing everything they do on a fantasma being that clearly doesn't exist in outdated rituals that are just rotting. They got a layo apologizing. Yes. What do you do? Because in those situations at some point, it's like, well, you do have a right. You obviously, there's freedom of religion. You want to give people freedom of religion. But simultaneously, it's like, well, but why are you cutting girls clitoris is off? Like, you know what I mean? Like, it's almost like, it's almost like, we need an upgrade. Like religion was a technology that at least informed people with the illusion of meaning so that they could, as I say, you can live for a week without food three days without water, but not a minute without hope. So that gave us hope. And Ernest Becker says that was the first solution. I should leave you in a minute. Yeah. That was the first solution. Whoever said that never ate a pop brownie. Because this is fucking hours with no hope. And you get to get to that shape. You get to get through it. And you learn that you learn when you hit the other side. You learn when you hit the other side. Well, that's interesting. Well, we talked about Ayahuasca and DMT, which, as Eric Davis says, baseline reality dissolves, there is a complete ego death and a new reality emerges. Or it just fucks with your visual cortex, and you add it all with your ego and your psyche and your creativity. And you just have the ability to generate images inside the mind's eye with your creativity. And you just create a fucking world of geometric patterns. Because that's how your eyeball works once. Overflooded with too much DMT. That's how your visual cortex response happens. When there's 10 times the normal dose in, maybe that too. Just like when you have a cut it, clots. Yeah. But you know. It's a hell of a response to that. This is what I always say when people say that how do you know whether or not a DMT trip is real. Like, you know, you're pretending that that really happened. You really did speak with intelligent beings from the planet. The reality is whether or not you really did go to another dimension and speak with these super intelligent beings who are made out of love or whether it didn't happen at all, either way, you experience the same thing. Right. Sure. You get to hear the message. You get to see the exact same thing as if it was real. Yes. Like literally. You know where that was explored brilliantly. You guys remember the movie contact? Yeah. She's in the cross. So she is a secular scientist. She doesn't want to hang out with like Matthew McConaughey who's a priest. She doesn't believe in God. In fact, at first they try not to let her go. Oh, she, but see that's how they run into the Matthew McConaughey cock. Because even though she didn't want to hang that, he still fucked her. Yeah, he did. Son. That's right. She was trying to see. When it happened at the end of the movie, she went right through the wormhole and went to these saw these aliens civilizations had an experience that sounded like a religious experience except it was, you know, a shingyone. Yeah. Well, from the perspective of Earth, through the wormhole, it just looked like the ship just ran right through. So nobody believed her, but she had the experience. So all of a sudden she was sounding like the religious people or like the people that were tripping that said they saw the elves. And all of a sudden she as the scientist was had to cast out on her own experience because she saw what evidence was happening. Like when you tried DMT, you know where the idea is. It didn't just hit you. What the fuck and your mind just explodes. You know you're taking something. So you can make reason of it. I could totally say like, well, what was it? That must be God. And let me tell other people about this. Well, you know, that's really the way it starts. I could totally see that as a way. There's scholars in Jerusalem legitimate scholars now that believe that that's what Moses saw when he saw the burning bush. What? That he saw the Akeshitri. The Akeshitri, which is rich in DMT, and it's really common to that area. That makes it interesting. The idea is that this bush or the extraction of this bush was burning, and that's how we had this religious experience. That's so God. It's real good. It's right at DMT trip. This is like, this is not the last. They caught a puff of this tree like on fire. That's one of the theories. Wow. But that's just a theory. But the primary focus of achieving this theory is that Moses most likely had a psychedelic experience. Because we know that these substances are not new. And plus, he said he got the tablets that God gave him, but he smashed him before he got on the hill. He was mad because they made the golden county. Smash somebody ever saw the fucking tablets. Yeah, he was tripping. And that researcher does a lot of motion. You know? Yeah. He could have been like, yeah. So no, I smashed it all the well. Destroy the evidence. Yeah. Only a bit of a strong evidence. No, I'm not. Yeah. Talk about it. But that's very similar to when Terrence McKenna thought about this stone-aipothe. This is obviously. But there's a guy called Rich Doyle, who wrote a book called Darwin's Pharmacy. And it's about sex, plants, and the evolution of the newest fear. And he talks about psychedelic substances as information technologies that manipulate our ability to capture and manage attention. So they create what he calls infinite resonance with set and setting. So another word. So another word. Infinite resonance with set and setting. That's why when people talk about psychedelics, experiences are like, make sure you're in a good headspace, make sure you're in a sense. Yeah. Because if you have infinite resonance with set and set with the resonance, resonance, like you become completely poorest or whatever. Always like this motherfuckers talk to mumbo. No, I'm here. But I want to tell you. Don't have, you no longer have you been with it. It's like turning up the volume on existence. Turning up the volume so loud that if you're in a magnificent place looking at a tree, you might think you're looking at God. If you're in an uncomfortable situation, you're going to go down to the pit house. It means you know that thing when a microphone gets too loud and you get feedback. If you're in a shitty place tripping, you get a feedback. Infinite feedback just keeps going. Or you could have been a beautiful place that, you know, it elicits feelings of calm and serene this. And then you can feel like you're like infinite or by God. Yeah. Happy shrimp fest. That's going to be the real happy shrimp fest. This is going to be the real problem when people are able to decide what state of consciousness, the experience at that moment, not even hurt by being so scared that you take mushrooms. Because every time I'm taking mushrooms, I've been scared. You should be. You're about to go through some change. Yeah. I just scared you. I need a podcast control. When I eat the last crown of a pod cookie, I'm like, oh shit. Yeah. You're going to have that moment. You're tapping my feet. How bad you're going to get. What I do. Yeah. Yeah. It's true. Is that why? Is that because it's like, if you think of the metaphor of skydiving as the moment we've already jumped? I honestly think that there's an accelerating process of self-development that we all go through. Yeah. And that if we are not improving as a human being, we feel shitty. Yeah. We don't feel good. I don't feel good unless I'm getting my shit together. That's just a fact. I'm I try to be a better person today than I was yesterday for real. And sounds stupid, but it's because everybody says it and very few people legitimately, totally practice it. They fall in and out. But I feel like that's also one of the reasons why people aren't that happy. I feel like if you're not like improving yourself and getting rid of your bullshit and life, it's very difficult to feel good. It's very difficult to be enjoying it. If you have all these issues that you're not dealing with, like about you as a person or you with your job or you, you know, more people talking about it when they say like, and I know I've been bad at that and I'm actually trying to get trying to make a note to not be like that anymore. It might be telling truth. I mean, it's not a process where you know, you either get it right or you don't get it right. Like some people fall back and forth. I mean, how many people that we know that used to drink and then drink again and stop drinking for a long time. And then, you know, it's like a little battle sometimes with people to try to improve their shit. Ron Doss compares it to floating in the ocean and your heads bobbing up and down. Sometimes you see the shore and sometimes you don't. That's what it's like. It's like sometimes you're there and you see it's something you can't beat yourself up when you go down. You have to have faith that you'll remember. I'll regret that. But what you're saying is dead on man because if I'm feeling like shit, what you're saying is it's not some broad big thing you've got to do. If I'm feeling like shit nine times out of 10, it's just because I've got dishes in the sink or I didn't go jogging or I didn't like sweep my kitchen. It's not like big. But that would be like an example of set and setting right there. You know, other people say that, you know, 99% of your problems will go away if you get a good night's sleep like in time. A lot of them usually. Yeah. Even when you're sleeping, you're thinking about things and you put them into perspective. Yeah. 10% of your problems will go away if you get a good night's sleep. Like in terms of... A lot of them, too. Yeah. Because sometimes, you know, even when you're sleeping, you're thinking about things and you put them into perspective. Yeah. I mean, how many times you've been really upset when you go to bed and by the time the night is over you're like, yeah, whatever. All right, you let it go. Sleep on us. Sleep on us. Like regulating your emotions. You get lost or something that happened. Like, I'm sure you have to go to bed before you get the phone call to work. Talk to you about this because you've had a few instances where, um, like, the amazing racist stuff. Yeah. I mean, lost you gigs. Yeah. I've always had to get a thing cancelled and, and, and London Ontario. That's right. Yeah. Somebody, yeah. Well, yeah, that's got to be frustrating. It's frustrating. How do you let go of that? Like when you, when you're dealing with something like that, hey, how do you let go of that? Well, sometimes you say, I, I stop myself. I go, stop, hold on. Can griping about this, change it in any way? No. All right. Move on. So it's a little moment of dialogue with yourself in a decision. Yeah. If I'm, if I'm in a, a long line at the, uh, the, uh, airport, I'm going to miss my flight. I'm, like, oh, come on. I keep looking up ahead. I'm like, are you going to go to the front and ask say I'm about to miss my flight? Or are you not? If you're not, stop crying. Then just let it wash over you. Interesting. I have a friend who was starting a company who wants to create a watch that regulates emotion because we've talked about like creating, if you, we talk about the age of the quantified self, where we're going to have all these devices that are going to be. What emotions? That measures emotion. Oh, really? You know, you know, if you're annoyed, well, it's not going to tell other people, it'll tell you. So we'll set the code. measure your bio feedback rhythms and it'll give you feedback. Yeah. To tell you how you're feeling so that then you can change your behavior. If that's what needs to be done, feedback loop seems to be the best way to reprogram reflex responses. Like they're saying that the best way to stop people from doing speeding is not from like actually pulling them over, but it's from those sensors that say your speed. All right. Tell you that is your passing by. Yeah. So receiving feedback is the best way to change behavior. Yeah. In terms of like moving towards experience design and the age of the quantified self is if you know you're eating something unhealthy, maybe you won't eat it. If you're constantly reminded about how you're feeling, what you're doing, you can really kind of improve yourself. And that's why the thing of like technologically enhanced mindfulness is what that is. Because it's like how often are you wandering around in a state of absolute terror, pretending everything's fine. Yeah. And I'm totally fine. Yeah. Having a great day. Yeah. But inside you're like, Oh, fuck, man, I don't make enough money. I'm not going to make great. Yeah. So if you have a watch that's flashing, you're terrified. Your 10 right now, you are talking about it. Deal with one of the most important things that anybody could ever understand in this life is what happens and what it feels like when you're out of debt. You know, how many of us, how many of us, whether time were 20, whatever the fuck we are, we have so much money that we can't pay off credit cards. I just last week paid off my college loans. Oh, congratulations. 39. Isn't that great? What a crazy society we have that like everybody by the time they're 30 years old is in some kind of debt labor. Super rich. Slap a lot of a lot of education debt, right? A lot of education debt. But that's gonna change. That's gonna change with that. That's gonna be school debt is insane. Not medical debt. That's those are those are those are those are two systems that definitely need an upgrade. I mean, that's the thing. And this is what we can actually connect that to the ideas that Rick Kurz was talking about. He's saying that health care is about to undergo the same transformation, that information, like knowledge you went through. So that means that the whole idea of how people cure themselves or fix diseases, this is all gonna become like something that's a part of our smart phone and part of our day to day life. So it's gonna change that broken system of health care. And education education education through the internet free education people around the world coming online. It's a global conversation getting free education. It's a hard word professor who's offering all classes online. Yeah, exactly. Take it. Yeah, it's only the beginning of that and you have the power of decentralized peer networks that can be leveraged to solve all these problems. You know, what does that mean? Decentralized peer now. It's the same thing that we talk about self organization and emergence when like cells link up together and become organism. So you have electronic self organization happening like with social media like when spontaneous when there's leaderless protests that just spontaneously self organize and these technologies are allow these decentralized peer networks that don't have leaders and don't have a anonymous cut off potentially something like that. But Stephen Johnson's book Future Perfect talks about how those can be leveraged to like solve problems. Like your diseases like leverage. How what does decentralized peer. Yeah, I love that term because I think one of the big fucking problems is the need that people have the claim responsibility for innovation. And this is this is one of the horrors of our age is that that thing which makes people get rich is what motivates people. People aren't motivated like when people are trying to cure cancer, you like to believe that the reason they're trying to cure cancer is out of some kind of altruistic desire until you see them going to the Supreme Court to try to patent genes because they want a profit off of their research. That's pretty weird right. It seems like the idea should be that the dreamy and that's why Pfizer is giving the researchers the money to research is so that eventually they'll be able to show return on that investment. Right. It's just a strange. It's strange. When you know what the real problem with all of it is that it's not psychedelic. That's the real problem is that you can make money and create things but you have to have a psychedelic mindset in order for society to move forward emotionally. That's where they put it up behind. Friendship wise like if it's not doing that then it's going to get caught up in the ones and zeros collecting the numbers. It can be prosperous and still be ethical. It's just it's not. And the reason why it's not is because when you have a corporation like you get that diffusional responsibility thing going on which is the opposite of what's psychedelic. Yes, absolutely. Exactly, man. It's where the individual has no responsibility for the mass of individuals. Whereas the psychedelic experience. That's it. The massive individuals is connected entirely. Yes. Yeah. I'm going to Joshua Treit on Sunday. Don't tell me what you're going to do this on. Let me guess. I think you're probably going to do your taxes. I'm not going to do my taxes. I'm going to do mushrooms under the super moon. Get your freak off. Is there a super moon on Sunday? Sunday night. Middle of Shumpers. I'm telling you some sun when you do mushrooms. It's over super moon. Yeah. No, non super moon. When you do mushrooms and you realize that there is a fucking planet, one quarter of the size of ours and it's literally floating above our heads. Are you going to hold a little low? You drink tent hotel around? No tent. Tent out in Joshua. Yeah. I've never been there to be cool. Duncan, what are you getting buddy? Getting beer for you and me. Yeah. All right. I'm talking. All right. Everyone. Beer. Delicious. Delicious. I tried drinking with it 23 year old recently. Those people are straight out of college. They're in training. Damn. They bring shots around like it's nothing. I'm barfing in the street and they're still going. They don't go full. God, I can't. Yeah, you live results on. Yeah. It's almost over. Have you ever had Eric Davis on the show? Eric Davis is. He wrote a book called Technosis. I think you guys would love. He kind of writes about the mystical undertones of technology. So again, like the whole psychedelic cybernetics thing. And I just, I don't know, I wondered if you guys ever had because he never heard me. No, I know. I know. This book is boom. Sounds good. Sounds like perfect stuff. Wait at my own. Yeah. There's so many people like that now. That's the beautiful thing about this time. It's like, you know, every day, there's some new guy who's got a new video or a new song or a new fuck. There's so many fucking pieces of something that are being created with it. Yeah. Jokes, the more comedians now, the never. I mean, access to all of it. Yeah. But there's also an infinite amount of content. How do you decide what the pay attention to? That's one of the things. That's really hard. Well, that's one of the things. Well, that's the beauty of something like a desk wad, where like, you know, which was the stupid nickname that we all call ourselves. Like you know that if already tells you someone's funny, he's not going to be lying about it. Right. You know, so you don't tell us. He's not going to tell us. He's not going to tell us. He's not going to tell us. He's not going to tell us. So you guys will read about that art funny. No. Yeah. But that's good. You guys tell us me to watch some guy. I know he's really funny. Like a bunch of people that have a like-minded. Yeah. You tune in. And we're all different. Like there's a lot of all people that would hate our humor. All right. And the last thing they want to do is be hanging around with us. And they're not wrong. Yeah. They're just not into it. They have a different thing. You know what I mean? But you find your thing. Whatever it is. You know what it's Johnny Cash or Taylor Swift? Yeah. You fucking follow it. And then, you know, whatever's connected to that. What's the best of that? Yeah. I mean, those people are going to find it for you. Yeah. I think that's how you do it in today's day and age. It's like, and that's the beauty of us being able to introduce people like Burcryshire or anybody else that we brought on to our podcast that all sudden, other people go, oh, that guy's really funny. Like, oh, and he's friends with this guy. Oh, that guy's really funny too. And then it just, yeah. Yeah. How many people discovered you? Well, this was one of the biggest thing I ever did. We said the podcast, dude. It's amazing. It's been a year later. And I still got people saying, like, to come back and hang out with you guys and have a man job, which has been amazing. Well, it's a two-way street, though. Because the whole reason why the podcast is interesting is because people like you are interested in coming on. You know, it's so right. If you only had just me talking after a while, I'll be repeating stories like a motherfucker. I just be spouting nonsense. Yeah. But you know what's interesting about what you're saying. You know, there's a book that talks about the importance of an information diet, you know, because we live in a world now where there is like an afternoon amount of content out there. More than 10,000 hours of video uploaded to YouTube every hour or some crazy number like that. The most difficult thing, I think, becomes deciding who are going to be your information diet filters. Like in this case, the debt squad, the peer networks that you are connected to, the people you've powerful brine reader. Hey, a lot of people trust on B.C. By the way, why don't you just let it be one in one in T-shirt. You're really sure coming out. Well, what's your real life of everything? Leaving us, everybody. So he's got to go do an ice house show. When is your new shirt coming out? Pre-order should be up next week. So next two weeks or so. My favorite of all time. It's a head and shoulders. It's awesome. And the other one is awesome too. But this new one is on another level. It's dope. I want it. I want to pair it underwear. I want to pair it underwear with that on. Jesus Christ. I'll give a fuck, dude. I work cloth over my dick. I'm not on that podcast show. Oh, you're strong. Jason, what kind of card you dropped? Oh, that was the first one. I don't have a card anymore. You're one of those motherfuckers. I'm in New York. Nice. I used to have one here. You don't drive cars? I mean, when I lived here, I had a card. I wanted to ask you about that Tesla. Oh, I don't think it. Oh my God. Is that the coolest thing of all time? Yeah, it's kind of incredible. And they're only going to get better. I think they're about to release like the third or fourth generation now. I don't know. Martin Rothblatt had one. And when I interviewed her and I got to meet her robot, being a 48. Yeah. You ever seen that or she? No. Her spouse is a robot. My teen Rothblatt, fastening story. Wasn't man. Wasn't man. Founded serious satellite radio. Got a sex change. became a woman and then created a robot that is a direct copy, a duplicate of her spouse. And it could be how good it was. Where's the spouse? Well there. She's there too. OK. She's there as well. She loves her. So she made a robot for. That's so sweet. Yeah, it's interesting. I was like, Liberace, making that guy changes face to him. Whoa. Yeah, did you really do that? Yeah, you got, he got, made him a plastic surgery. He did really do that. He did really do that. He's a little more like Liberace. That's hilarious. He's out in that HBO thing. Yeah. I always wondered why Matt Damon and Michael Douglas were willing to do that. And like they have pictures of those two blowing each other. It's the same thing that makes sense. They agreed to do a live. Like if they came up to you and you were Matt Damon and they said, hey, listen, man, I know there's a born or down in movies. They were really big. You're going to play Liberace's butt buddy. I'm best of all. Made for TV. Yeah. Made for TV. No, it's on HBO. Liberace's long time love. Oh, I see not in the movies. But it's very offensive, by the way, to my gay friends and I apologize for that. But you guys are so immature. It's not me. If you said that, the girl was your vagina pal, that be rude. But you're in a pal, no, it just be embarrassed. That was great. It's interesting that a girl can call a guy a dick. And there's no repercussions at all. They're out of my heart. And she can even say, I'm here to get some good Jason Silva dick. And you wouldn't have any problem with that. You'd be like, yep, I'm dishing it out, honey. Yeah. But if a guy says, oh, I'm here to get some sweet Mary pussy. She'd be like, what the fuck? It's because I'm the only keepers. That's who I am. I'm sweet Mary pussy. You don't think that's gross. And you're like, oh my God, you're not really my friend. Can't even juggle around with you. Jason, what do you think is going to happen with these sex androids? What do you see as the future? Well, I think I think that the sex technology will probably be the pioneer. I mean, just like with Poland, the porn industry pioneer DVDs. When DVDs refers to things, who do you think was doing the most advanced multi angle interactive DVDs versus was the point of this year? I mean, it was worth it. We really said phones wasn't going to go with that old style of video. All the porn was like, cool. We'll update. Yeah, exactly. The iPhone has never did. The rest of them, yeah. Totally. I mean, we're always going to be driven by sort of our sexual desires. Curls well says we'll be able to tap into each other's nervous systems and become each other when we have sex with our own. Well, that's girl binding with someone. Imagine actually merges. Well, but no, but some people say, you know, the Kamasutra talks about we've been wanting to merge with our lovers. It's a good time. We want to become one. Two thousand women. We can actually scramble our nervous systems together. We're a man. Imagine the demolition man device or whatever. That could be a real mind, fuck though. If you just find out that you are like the worst in bed ever, you do what it's like to be fucked by you. Shit. You're like, that is very awkward. Look at me. I'm this. Oh, why am I doing that? That's going to be for 16 year 25 years. It's broken. It's bigger than us. It would be like, take it. Even better. Take it. So you don't like it. Take it. Yeah, you're coming. You're eyes are popping over. like, why am I choking myself? I want you to let me breathe me. Or even worse, what if you get into her mind? Like you can access your girlfriend's needs and desires. Right. And you go, I want to know what you want. And you get into her mind. It's just a river of black cock. Black cock. Sleepy river of disembodied black cock. It's just shooting, shooting sperm. Like a psychedelic dream. You're right. A river of dark black cock. It's not black cock. It's slippery. It's a river of pit bull cock. Yeah. Well, yeah. I think that's a good way to allow for a lot of creativity in sort of our sexual consciousness. Yeah. I'm sorry. I'm just going to have to put a multiplicity of dimensions and we can't even imagine. It's the, you know, and black cock. It's like a delicization of the such values. It's an amazing thought that we, that every that drives most, a lot of our technology lately. But we still have to repress it. Societally sex. Well, I think that's not it. It still has to be like looked on in his embarrassing. A reproductive force. It's the drive. It's the wind and the sails of humanity. It drives every thing. And people like, oh, what's that wind? Yeah, you guys know this. There's actually like a book about this. It's called the mating mind. It was written by Jeffrey Miller. And he says that the brain's extraordinary capacity is for creativity, for discourse, for everything we do, even build airplanes and iPhones is ultimately our glorified version of the peacock feather. It's our version of the bird song. It's just us charming to capture and manage the attention of those potential mates. It's a way of saying I'm poetic. I built that skyscraper. I wrote you the soul. So every joke and we comedians ever told everything. Everything. Just to try the way to do that. The thing is that just side effect of this sexual creativity is also responsible for everything wonderful we've created. So it talks about something about sexuality ultimately as a creative act. It is. Because it's about reproduction. But ultimately on a cultural level and on an idea-sex level, like the whole fucking thing about reproduction seems to be like, right, we used to think we're getting lured by nature and the making babies. But now we see we're being lured by nature and the making spaceship. So that's what the pill change so much is excited to. That's why the singularity is a cosmic orgasm is the best way to describe what the singularity is. It's the universe waking up. It's up and it's us preginating the universe. That's a great Marshall McLuhan quote. You know that quote? Human beings are the sex organs of the machine world. Wow. Brilliant. That's brilliant. Marshall McLuhan nailed that shit in the six of the machine world like the machine's a controlling your computers. Yeah. He figured that out before computers. It was an actual genius. He also said to me build the tools then they build us. Right. Think about it. It's happening. That's true. Of course it's happening. It's going through much like Da Vinci. What a mind fuck it must have been to be operating like that. Back in the field. You know what Da Vinci also did? He figured out how to draw curves, how to draw rounded edges and art. You know how to make it. So you can't just, it's like to go around and like loses frame. You know how like a path ago until nothing. No one knew how to do that. He was the one who I don't know if I remember from high school. That's an amazing way. That's an amazing way. Whatever. Let's attribute it to him. That's a lot of those lines. He was a good guy. He deserved it. And then his eye was, I love that stuff though because it's like, well, what aren't we doing now? Oh, yeah. They will have like for grand, we'll take for granted in 100 years. What? What do you mean? They didn't walk through. I didn't make. Yeah. Everything went around every time. Yeah. What a strange world. It must have been back then, man. When you could just die if you got sick. No, yeah. People just died. They thought if you got a penalty ran with children. We got a penalty ran with children. And there's a lot of people though today that think that the things are getting worse in the world, which is another one of those mistakes that people make. We're living longer than ever. We're living longer than ever. And there's a guy called Hans Rosling who has these amazing videos on the internet that show every nation in the world by every measurable indicator of quality of life has been measurable. In the last 100 years. Uh-huh. But it just shows that, you know, contrary to what the media in which it bleeds, it leads, feeds us because we have these overactive, fear-based, amygdala that only pay attention to what's wrong, we fail to see everything that's going right. Yeah. It's a confusing shit. Really hot, newscasters telling you horrible things. I'm not going to be as easy as it can at all. She's got big tits and I'm scared out of my mind. My dick is hard and I'm ready to run. Everything is together. So rude. You know, show me these. It's on an ugly, it's for bad news. You're going to tell me some bad news. Like get my high school teachers. And then switch them in when they go. And this is just a puppy found alive and healthy. Uh-huh. And then the big tits come out of a way to party. Yeah. But you could tell a lot about Bill O'Reilly. Like, I promise you, the bill O'Reilly loves getting tired of it. I can't say that for sure. No, it's not for sure. That's the guess, whatever legal stuff is, I guess. But I would imagine Bill O'Reilly, because he's always like, on his show, it's always these beautiful, yet dominating, hot girls that surround him. Like he likes to be around these types of girls. Yeah. Yeah. He loves it. He never see the women around him on that show as being like submissive to him. They're always kind of tough. Yeah. Guaranteed, they scrub him down. When you came about this, you massive it. You're up and down. No one's already thinking about Bill O'Reilly. Oh, the time. Do you imagine ever that you were some really fucking stupid guy, like Bill O'Reilly, a smart stupid guy? Like, he's a Harvard graduate dummy. You know, he's one of those guys. I'm going to go with Jesus. What does he say is then about Jesus? Yeah. He's like, I'm going to go with Jesus. I'm going to go with the Jesus. Why is the time come in? Why is it go out? Oh, that Dawkins interview on Dawkins, the smile on Dawkins' face is the smile of the Lord of the Rings. Necromancer. He's crushing just like a little imp or something. It was just like the look on his face because he's like, Oh, from my taste gets a little too upset. What's that? For my super genius atheist reasonable people talking to Kuku had my my atheist to be a little bit more relaxed. Completely like I think it was a great reaction. What did he say to him? Dawkins is got a little on the country. I am. A man, but it deserves a call. Oh, for sure. Don't get me wrong. But I think that Dawkins at his age is such a statesman, such a well-respected person. Probably showing off too. I may be perhaps and maybe also he feels it's his duty to maybe merciful, you know, to mercenary go after those guys because he is the intellectual voice for the atheist, you know, right? He's super important in that way. I just wish you would chill. You know, one of the things that I found out about him is no psychedelic drugs in his back. Wow. And he talked about how he maybe would be interested in taking LSD under a very clinical setting to explore the merits of the drug. You know what that says to me? That's where the whole is. That's where the whole is in his game. That's why he comes off. Well, it's interesting because another one of our atheists is waiting for me. Yeah, wait. It's the same herest. He has done psychedelics. In fact, he wrote an essay called psychedelics in the meaning of life, which was actually a very brilliant piece. And for, you know, he's an interesting guy because he's an atheist, but he has some radical insights about like, you know, spiritual subjective experience and where he's like, glumpton with his lomaphobes, you know, really. Yeah. I don't find that his writing comes across that with a lot of people argue that it does. He's a brilliant man and a friend. I really like that guy very much. And I really enjoy talking to him because it's got such a fucking stupid, smart mind. His brain is just like firing like a million Hertz. But the thing about the label of a slumaphobes is like the reality is all ideologies that force people into doing violent things are crazy. And to try to pretend they're not to make some people who aren't violent happy. Yeah. Seems like intellectually dishonest. And that's where the guy has a ideology. He has courage. It's not really has a slumaphobes. Not at all. He says slum was Buddhism. Okay. Think about Buddhism. By the way, this is a radical new sect of Buddhism apparently that's like involved in like ethnic cleansing and some kind of stuff. I don't know. I know what you're talking about. Oh, they're fucking out Buddhism. Like it's the last safe place after being a Mormon, you know, go to who has a secret called. Yeah. But I mean, apparently, Malaysia. He wins us. Humans are imperfect. Man, I think it's something like that. I don't really remember where it was. But humans are so imperfect. You know? The idea that there's anything wrong with saying that ancient ideologies that involve killing people, if they don't believe we're fucking bad. I mean, is there something that would say that somewhere? Yeah, we've got people. You can't be tolerant of intolerance. I mean, there's the problem with moral relativism and which is this fear of like passing in kind of judgment. Because it's a different religion. So what if they beat each other to death? Yeah, but it's like maybe like whatever you want, but don't let someone do something against someone's will to it. 100%. You can't tolerate intolerance. I mean, if you're like that, obviously, it's intolerance. That's where the buck stops. Bill Maher has spoken about the letters. No one's weird though. Here's what's weird. Bill Maher said, Bill Maher, Bill Maher gets labeled as an Islamaphobe which I find fascinating because progressives, for some reason, it's almost like they're bullied. So they want to make friends with the bullying. Yeah. So there's this weird progressive thing where you don't criticize Islam. And if you do, you become an Islamaphobe. Or if someone's criticizing other religions, that's the first thing that they say, oh, you know what I'm saying. You never criticized Islam. I can never say shit about Islam. So it becomes this weird sort of polo because they're so gangster. You know, they'll kill you if you draw pictures of Muhammad. They take shit to the next level. So the natural inclination of the biggest pussies on earth, which are the liberals for the most part. Let them do it. They not only let them do it, but support them. Here is Lama phobic. Bill Martin is a Lama pho. Guess what? You should be an, you believe a phobe. Whether it's UFOs or big- Yeah. Or a chupacabros or Islam or a chocil- Yeah, you don't know. You're not a chu- You're not a chu- You're a chu- You're a chu- Because you're against them raping little boys. If you believe anything that you haven't seen yourself or watched on TV, you're an idiot. Well this is a thing, Joe. This is a thing, this is a thing you were talking about earlier when it comes to the DMT experience or the psychedelic experience. The question is, does it matter if this is real or not? And I think it matters more than anything if it's real. Yeah. We must understand reality from subjective reality. We must understand if we can, we should try to understand it. For example, who was it? I can't remember it was only when it affects someone else. But I would argue that. I'm saying it doesn't matter because it's the same experience. The experience is not a tangible rock-solid, carbon-based touch-of-table experience. The experience is this spiritual, which I fucking hate to use, but there's no other way to use a disembodied consciousness. It's a disembodied consciousness experience. Why would that be the same as an experience that's real that where you can touch paper? Here's why. If you take, let's take, I can't, where is it people go to get healed, Lord's, I think is what it's called, the water where you go, you go to the, yeah. I can't remember who wrote this. I think it might have been Sagan. I know, it might have been Feynman. I can't remember which one talking about how it's important to understand if this phenomena is real or subjective because if it's real, then that means that we should understand what are the properties of these waters? Is it something in the land? Is it something in the air? Right. And if we can understand that, then we can help the whole planet with us. And the same way, if the DMT or the psychedelic experience is taking us into a state that is non-subjective, that is external, is actually introducing us to entities or intelligences that somehow exist outside of our own being. It's extracted. Incredibly important to begin to communicate with them in a real way. But it is, but doing research on the side of the book. What is real? That's where it becomes. When you're talking about an outside of the body experience, an experience that transcends the physical flesh, it could still be real, but not be measurable. It could still be real, but you can't put it in a bucket thrown on a scale. It's not measurable. It doesn't mean it's not real. I think it's not the mechanical gateway. Yeah, it could be something we don't have an instrument to measure. Yes. You don't have a conceptual framework understanding. Like, still real, if it happens, that's what my point is. The idea of the imagination you imagine something, the imagination is responsible for every fucking thing that a human has ever made. I'm sure. Close this microphone that I'm talking to, this computer that I'm on, this close that I'm wearing, the car that drove me here. It's all manifested out of the imagination. And the imagination is fucking really shit. 100% and shit. And before you created those things, when you just imagined them, you were conjuring up something that didn't exist. The fact that we then brought it into existence proves well, and at least existed as a potentiality. It was allowed by the laws of physics. So then it makes you wonder, what are you tapping into when you're having that kind of vision and that disembodied, you know, a re conceptualization of reality. When you live in a world where there is no airplanes and you think that you could build a machine that will fly over the ocean and get you to this other place. Like to imagine that, to even fantasize about it, we can utter it. It means that it's possible. I mean, does anybody even know how cell phones work? Yeah, but when you were able to see how a cell phone works. Look at stuff. I don't know. Do you want to like that? Yeah, they swiped. It did all occurred. Well, Picard wasn't run by the wasn't. Yeah, I think he did that and then died. Poor guy. Yeah. Well, he didn't get to see the future. He didn't get to see these ways nine years. Motherfuckers. I just think that if something, if it's, I think we should, it's worth. It'd be morning run very his life. He never saw these space nine. He never saw the new battle saga lactica, which he's lucky. So that show kick T show right in the dead. Oh, yeah. I was going to say it was bad. The track is such a shit compared to battle saga lactica. Oh my God. I never watched every problem you have every time you're thinking like, oh, they're doing this is lame within two seasons. It'll pay off. Oh, dude. Battle saga lactica on the sci-fi channel was the greatest. Amazing. I'm sure. I'm getting it done with it in a real way. Yeah. Real like situations, like with Game of Thrones has horrors, you know, and burgers. By the way, how hot is that real? Bitch, the blonde one in one one. Oh, oh, oh, I'm sorry. Oh, hot is. It's ridiculous. I've take it bird holes and socks. Oh, the silence become the big hot chicks. That's part of the plot. Oh, cool. I don't want to spoil or spoil or if you haven't seen the DVD series, you got to get that. Get it right now. I'm some credulous Brian Callum told me about that. I'm like, that's going to suck, dude. It's a remake of a show that was kind of hokey. This show is not hokey at all. Joe, in all seriousness, man, because you're like one of the busy people I know. How do you find time to watch Battlestar Galacta, Aang Breaking Bad, and Game of Thrones? Well, I know. Right now, I don't have hardly any time. Right now, I watch Battlestar. It was a long time ago. You know, when I was just doing like fear factor in the UFC, I had way more time. It's back in the days of Breaking Bad, it just started. Things were different back then. I've watched straighten it off. I'm just breaking bad. It's while getting tattooed. I watched the first season while getting my left arm done. Right arm. Sorry. I'm trying to catch up on Breaking Bad. I fucking love it. It's so good. You have to catch up. You know, it's better. You talk about it with Homeland. Homeland, better. I heard that was bad. That was season one. I'm up to season two. Stunningly good. Stunningly good. What do you guys think of walking dead? It's awesome and sucks. It's fucking sucks. It's fucking sucks. It's so shit. Every time they resolve a conflict, it's over the way they describe their emotions. This guy is all done. The guy, the spoiler, spoiler alert, the bad guy, the number one bad guy in the third season. Come on. You guys are teetering on the edge of fucking this whole thing up. You need to regroup, get together as a group of writers, do some mushrooms and figure out where the fuck you're going. So could you tell me that? Did they had this other writers and then they've got really emotional for a while and they came in as a guy. Everybody get the fuck out and they hired a legit action guy. This is, here's the problem. I think the problem is TV, not the writers. It's what TV tends to do to creativity. If you read the comics, the comics are some of the most bleak, horrific things that you've ever seen where it's like every few pages is a gut punch where you're like, what the fuck? It's not like this emotional kind of sappy thing. It's like you are existing in a world where you are going to die probably by being eaten by the undead. That's what they were saying to Pocklep. What are you saying about that versus the world of TV? I'm saying what happens is TV is like, oh. By the undead that's what they were saying apocalypse. There was a way but but what was so what are you saying about that versus the world of TV? I'm saying what happens is TV is nice. Oh, we can't make it too dark. We can't kill that character Why do you think because it isn't an established business model and we have to keep some kind of stability in the system And we want to stuff this up to make you question to measure the yeah like homicide homicide didn't last because it didn't have any clear cut victories for the good I'm gonna do a spoiler is that why they call it programming? Let me do it not not with the series, but with the comic books. Can I do a spoiler? The comic books don't spoiler you just spoiler alert. So spoiler alert spoiler. Oh It's spoiler to me. You're not gonna become comics. I'll dare you. I know your turn. I don't read What are you gonna get to listen to this? I had comics on my iPad once on a plane and you May High or flight about the fact You know why you know why you know I have gone. Why is your responded? You're responding. I'm like oh, I got him dancing You gotta play dead in front of a bear man I'm a bear Myself is a twin You guess my time has come Yeah, you were you were fucking dancing. You're free the road kick it's pretty. Oh road is a fucking you might as well Just get punched in the face just get kicked in the stomach I had a regroup for about a year also also This is a movie sent me into pressure more than anything which one revolutionary road. What's that? That's brilliant dude With the caprio and Kate Winslet and it was about it's about a married couple and it flashes Backward between the banality of day-to-day life like what happens after you get what you want versus the hopes and dreams of when they first met and Yes, it made me Just did it read about the bushes You know what it did it made you it made you collide against against frustrated ambitions and a life of having to settle and settle and settle and settle and to become a stale facsimile of what you're going to find your dreams after that Excited about Paris is the best part. Yeah, you're just like oh, yes, they're gonna move to Paris Like a Richard Link ladder film. They're gonna be in Europe. You know, it's so good No, yes, it's gonna be awesome for you. Yes, I don't like it. I want to give a report I'm gonna report on what you've been looking at on the laptop during this thing It's now gone from a series of videos of like weird vintage cars Portious at one point he was just looking at what he called an accelerometer You're just looking at like a car accelerant like the Dometer accelerating that was like five minutes A car speeding and now you're looking at well, I don't know if you know this talking, but I'm crazy There's no rhyme or rhythm to it I need 13 different things going on It's like the drums of war pigs. I have no sense. I just I am what I am son Do you want to see a two minute a two minute trippy video? Yeah, I did a new video says we are already cyborgs It's kind of about the stuff from the conference. We were just that yeah, but okay, but let's let's pass that join around before Thank you. Oh, yeah, we live the world Yes, thanks to the new Roman Empire for we Fuck dude we're so far from more. Yeah. We're like vomitoriums. Do you ever go to one of those? Vomitorium they just yes, well, no, they just show the old ones in like in Israel Oh, no, they show you where you have to go to vomit and they come right back to party and they left out the part about fucking kids But Mama wait, I don't what's a vomit or you just eat and party and drink just keep going and going and like oh I can't eat anymore. You know that one where you like can't eat more and then vomit you go to this room We just get to vomit and then you come back it's like a urinal But instead of peeing you just vomit out as much as you can of the booze and the food and you go back to drinking and eating Yeah, the Romans supposedly did it with feathers those though, you know, really Before the vomit or you know Romans wanted to party so hard that they were willing to just eat as much as they want to and then throw up So they could eat again the way its coffee thinks of living forever. They thought of partying forever right Well, it's also because mortality was at such a high level back that ever present infant mortality is 50% People were dying left and right and sword fights. I mean it was that was some crazy ass. Yeah But how much different is that? Am I different? emergency Why stop with free t-shirts Oh, is it Say higher primate dot com shirt available at higher primate dot com They're also great for mop it up spills You wash right off Those salt crystals are great man. I got to get some of those they're cool if you want to bang yoga teachers Nobody in the house if you had a house and it was totally set up like Like you were like soddenham come into my presence You had a home on the wall and like these are beside your bed dude You're in and all you need is like some quote from some really obscure Indian guy on the wall I go he's my guru. I just have a video of duck in plain behind the bird. Oh, duck it gets to start singing my apartment I'm describing the department Trying to fuck with him. I like to why you tell him to do all my stuff Duncan could actually sing them songs you could sing you have chance Oh You know the one the one I'm chanting right now is a great chant because it sounds exactly the way Nitrous oxide sounds when you do nitrous oxide if you chant it long enough It's the sound of when you get super high and so the channels are a.m Ram it's simple so the chant just goes That is we do whip it You hear that when you do it You're hearing the old mitzel you're hearing is your brain cells committee suicide You're hearing your brain cells dance You're wearing your brain cells tapping to give you like brain damage. We're just a short amount of time Nitrous oxide a pressure Nitrous oxide is good Same thing does give you I'm pretty sure going to Dennis is not good. You're right about that But that's a simple great chant that you could do at any time Ram Yeah, but what is that chance that you do that crazy when you have memorized that's what I'm talking about You know that whole You have a memorized now that's the chance that goes Oh my god on your turn on Dacia Gannon Gannon Sri like he actually really taught me not as major you could have in a ma Sri jatana mana be stamped up you time enough But they are a yam rupa kadiam. I am that that is everything to come Vande ham shiguro shiita pada kanalam shiguru invite you knife arms Josh You're a pom secretita sajana agrana thami tham tham sajana But beatam sad shit Do you still do that thing when you put amazing use that in I lost it way. So wait, what is that? That's amazing that's a chant that you say at the beginning You would you might pray if you were in the bhakti yoga You would pray that into you would pray that prior to reading the bhagavad gita And that's our prayer that is basically you are The first verse is very beautiful it goes I was born to the darkest of ignorance But my spiritual master opened my eyes with a torch of knowledge which I love that a lot But it's like basically the idea is like When you come in a contact with truth, which is what any of the sutras are by the way I love the bhagavad gita, but I just started reading the yoga sutras of patangalee Yeah, which are fucking great man. They blow the bhagavad gita out of the water as far as I'm you don't find a potential sutras What the the second thing is Which which part? Yes, I Think it can seem pretentious and I think that people can use it as a tail feather as you mentioned And I will it fully admit that I've used it as a tail feather Before but I think in the same way that you were talking about like reproduction Kind of lures you into creating robots or advances society in the same way I think people get drawn to philosophy for reasons that are just like well, this will maybe seem smart And then you know on the one hand, but almost tail feathers. Yeah, yeah I think that it people worry about it in other people But what's crazy about this stuff is that once you you you get into it for weird reasons But once you get into it then it starts it starts deconstructing you it starts breaking your heart because it's going to this very Micro level of the way that we tend to work subjectively, which is what I will but that subjective experiences Only think that ultimately matters, you know in terms of your interior world, right? I mean you talk about truth I think it was Werner Herzog the documentary film maker that was talking about the difference between ecstatic truth and factual truth and he said you know if facts were the most interesting thing in the world then the phone book Will be the world's most interesting book All right, obviously there's this other Experience that we still call truth. Maybe it's italicized or whatever it is But it's that ecstatic truth. It's subjective truth It's the truth of the poet, you know a journalist may be more accurate in describing the facts of an event But a poet may never Roger Doug deep and down the way to overcome the spurs whatever it is the poet would reveal deeper truths If I know place in the others literal grid, well, this is it. We're in a hurry. There's also Interesting can't very interesting. Oh, I fucking love him, man I just saw him in spring break. Oh, wait. No, not spring breakers. What I see me. He played a villain though Jack Reacher Yeah, it was great, but it wasn't a weird I think I got that milky. I was a good actor. It's a great actor, which is weird. Yeah, I love Werner Herzog man He's the shit. I would really love to get him off the record to give his opinion on grizzly man Whether or not he knew that he was making a comedy He knew he know no Werner Herzog knows he's making comedy because in all of his documentaries is an element of comedy He is smart enough to know what the person watching his movie is thinking and he knows When he does this that he knows that we are thinking this has got to be a comedy Werner is hilarious if that's the case and cynical in that sense then that might be grizzly man might be the greatest creation of Comedy yeah, real subtle. It's a really it's a wonderful comedy so subtle and so goddamn brilliantly crazy It's so it's wonderful It like celebrates people and all our wackiness and there's like a certain comfort in watching a film about a guy who's completely off the rails That's living with grizzlies. Yeah, I like it as we you know, we might not like it But it makes us feel better about ourselves man And we've got a guy who's way more fucked up than us and makes us feel better about ourselves Did you find him also kind of fascinating? Because I fucked yeah It was actually fascinating because that's the thing about when you watch a movie I mean part of what happens when you're watching a movie is the same thing They don't REM and people when they they've done them FMR ice cans of people when they watch movies and they say it's very similar to when you're dreaming Uh-huh, so they're the self that kind of the self awareness disappears Yeah, that's why you're able to like become the character that you're identified with they call it a Diyctic shift when you assume the viewpoint of one of the characters. Yeah, so you watch film a grizzly man It allows you to actually enter the consciousness perhaps of this person. Yeah, that's what the whole thing about cinema allows us to do That's why I feel like that might be fascinating say the name for the shift again. Daedic to shift Yeah, I love that term man because enlightenment is the ultimate shift which is where you do the Diyactic shift you're so the point of the whole to the whole that's the idea is like we are always on the precipice of this final shift Yeah We're terrified to make that shift because we want to be an individual and the idea of going backwards that one time Yeah, of taking off the neurological VR goggles Yeah, sociological VR goggles the consensus trends. Yeah, cultural operating system We don't want to do it. We don't want to be It's easier to become another person in the movie than it is to become the whole. Yes It makes my heart Terrifying no, but it's I would the reason I did it is because I love movies a lot And so I was a little kid I would watch movies and one of the coolest experiences is that you became Indiana Jones Like for two hours you were Indiana Jones no, fine They're so what is happening like how come sometimes you become the movie and other times you don't and when you don't like life sucks Right like oh, I'm watching this movie. It's not sucking me in right You know what? movie watching and dreaming are strangely familiar exist a man Familiar experiences similar experiences, but apparently it has to do with yourself awareness The lateral prefrontal cortex the same thing that turns off when people are in flow states when rappers are freest on right? The self editing the self-consciousness disappears and we love transcending our self-consciousness because it's the moment in which We see that there's an infinite amount of subjective experiences that we can have Wow We can be Indiana Jones. We can be you know anybody we want You know we're not bound by our Individuated state which as amazing as it is. It's still limited is that lateral prefrontal frontal cortex that you're talking about Is that the neo cortex? It is that both infront like is the neo cortex? I have no idea It's as lateral so I imagine it's on this side. Oh, yeah, yeah, but this is the reason I saw this is because they were talking about it in the article about movies and you blurring Blending into the films But also another article was talking about flow states and when they did fMRI scans on freestyle rappers Yeah, versus memorite and it was like the same thing But this is a terrifying thing for people the flow state that you're talking about if you have identified yourself With a level of suffering or with a level of control or with a level of always being the thing driving the car Then this flow state you're talking about is a form of death. You don't want to be there a lot of people the people who are Sucking better the ones who are the most wanting to be in control the people who have the most awful marijuana trips are always the control Free it's like they could but think about it the reason that movies are so good at is because first they sit you in a really comfortable Place it's a comfortable You're in the dark the phones are off They make sure that you are comfortable so that they can ease you in and when the movie starts you're still yourself You're still fidgeting you might have to pee but as soon as it starts they guide you with music They're set and setting in form the direction that your consciousness is going and before you know what you're on a ride Like the roller coaster has started and all of a sudden you forget yourself So I just like mushroom trips and then at the end of the day it becomes the most The best experience ever right because when the great movies done you're like wow that was awesome I don't know where I went but I loved it right but when the movie sucks it was a really unpleasant experience So we love losing ourselves, but it's also what we're most terrified of so this is the idea that when we die The exact same experience happens where you're like holy shit Maybe that was fucking amazing. I thought I was human Maybe it's just an extended period of dreaming. Yeah Moving with the movie now is becomes the same state of 80 years That's why the movie inception is still brilliant when they go into limbo Limbo was 80 years our entire life could be one of those limbo's that we forgot that we decided to go to sleep In the dream of the dream didn't really lock me in. I don't know why did you just you should have been more high when you saw it Oh, maybe no, I think inception was I think inception Gaww was a little like what it was a little too refined it was a little you had to follow it a little too close He's a little too much like he was explaining her he makes cube or something I'm sure you like I'm sure your mind likes that I like you know It wasn't like the matrix which is sort of a more of a visceral thing But it's still they're both pointing to the same idea which is that whatever your experience of reality is May in fact just be a dream well Or some kind of hallucination or an aspect of a simulation that you've become absorbed You know, it's interesting you mentioned that because I actually brought something to read to you guys about the matrix So I'm gonna load it up. Oh cool and it's exactly about this conversation. We're having it's almost like I thought at some point We're gonna start talking about blending into movies and breaking the ego and that whole thing So I'm just gonna load that lady that was suing the person that The mother's made the matrix do you remember that actually lost did she really there was a settlement maybe I sure there was a settlement. Yeah, I think I remember that Yeah, that never means anything does it right then sometimes means you want to back all right You're just bored of dealing with it. Yeah, sometimes it's that something like you're gonna win How about we just stop this right now? Yeah, sometimes it's that too It's different things you never settlement never you know Maybe she had an original idea and they took they took it to a different place, but maybe they can trace the origin Yeah, who's this there was a woman who sued the brother Brothers You just go away from memory on that that'd be great if you got it right why won't the story about Sophia Stewart in her home matrix No, that's not a matrix Let's hear it. Okay. Let me read you this while you search for that So this is article by Eric Davis and he's talking about day cart and the matrix and the and the false reality genre of filmmaking So films that reveal a crack in your reality the possibility of the hidden door of a rabbit hole to fall through and so he says We you know that's even the matrix when he's in the hotel room and they're about to give him the pill Yes, okay, that's the craziest part of the movie So he says we too are in that decrepit hotel room with Lawrence Fishburns Morpheus who is really speaking to us when he addresses Neo the ever wooden caneries you know something what you know you can't explain But you feel it you felt it your whole life We weren't you felt that something is wrong with the world You don't know what but it's like there like a splinter in your mind and establishing that itch which I suppose most of us share However, we interpret it Morpheus offers to scratch you will give Neo nothing more than knowledge of the truth i.e. No solutions to the problems posed by said truth and then he goes on and he says like a serpent in the Garden of Eden Which which okay so whoa Morpheus offers Neo a pill like a like a like the serpent in the Garden of Eden Warfians offers Neo a pill Neo of course swallows the molecular package Which is really the most heroic act in the film for Neo must then pass his own Cartesian passage through madness melting into the mirror that alludes not only to Lewis Carroll But to the mystic psychotic collapse and disappearance of the externalized ego that stabilizes our inner void As Neo phases out of the matrix he opens up however briefly the fractured barter That is the secret thrill of every fan of the false reality genre the moment when baseline reality dissolves But no new reality has yet emerged in its pixelating weight Cool, that's great man. I mean the fact that Eric Davis reads this deep into the film That's why you kind of cut a chat with yeah, so let's listen the store tell the case She it was dismissed when she failed to show up for a preliminary hearing of her case Oh, so that can mean one of two things you didn't mean she's crazy or they paid her to not show up No, they she would just like yeah, why not they made a settlement with her author record I know they don't just not show up and they say like they may scare the shit out of her and told them how to show up Something happened she didn't show up. I think they scared the woolen ski. I mean maybe she had no case at all and she was just crazy The guy's your laser because that was a lawyer That's right the angels God the angel of God. Yeah, I was his lawyer He I had to go I had to get a lawyer to go to court. Yeah, how long were you in court with that thing? But a year are you kidding? Yeah, how many times? No, we're good a court to keep responding to them. He sued me for being a false prophet and no, no I'm sorry. He wanted someone. Yeah, and it and being a bad lawyer And the better business bureau came after me. So you lost the case no This girl Lisa helped me The case now to show her he was so many for all the riches in the world And then when they when the she had to read it to the judge like this guy's crazy She's like what do you mean because read that and she did the judge read it and he was like Oh, it's they made him rewrite it and he goes okay that $800 billion Was what he's doing The rages in the world that leaves a lot on the table a lot of rope negotiation I mean assuming that you're gonna continue to be more successful He did promise me though that when he did eventually become king of kings he could repay me with Untold riches King of Kings is a big big title for a guy living in a homeless shelter I represent him pro bono. I love this guy's like levels of riches He has all the riches in the world, but that's exceeded by untold riches no all the rich in the world's more Well, then if you pay him all the riches in the world and he pays you back in untold riches You're getting ripped off. Yeah. Yeah. It's a bad. That's what he's suing me for. I denied him why he's not really paying you back He's giving you a little bit of what you give me some for helping him. Yeah, that's that's about right You're just saying riches are confined to the world. Are you disagree? Oh? Untold riches could be all the riches Me isn't a turning oh I got higher you to represent me That would have been a me with her name is fake attorney Duncan represents fake attorney Ari being sued by crazy guy He kept trying to use bigger lingo because I would sometimes so he'd be like where to for That's awesome the plaintiffs who are attacking me He also wanted to say Diego State Hospital. I think they really fucked him up. I think you got in the psych word there Oh, they really fucked him up. Yeah. I think he wanted to do that guy Dean Dean Gather no who talked to the dead Dean Dean something Dean Edwards Dean Edward John Edwards, yeah, I think this is a comic because it was just like the guy ran for president Dean Edward yeah, and I remember saying like well why would he said he wanted to sue him for being a false prophet No, like why would you get that money? Hey wait. Can I change subjects? Crazy guy You're talking about just because we're talking about riches outside the world. Yeah. Oh, yeah This meteor harvesting thing. Do you know about this planetary resources? Yeah, oh, yeah Peter D. Amanda's is behind the dude. They just launched a million dollar Kickstarter project to create a space telescope for public use Because you know they're launching a whole fleet of tiny space telescopes to scan for near-Earth asteroids that we can then land on and leverage for resources Oh back in my typical one has like a trillion dollars worth of plutonium really? Oh my god, that's why they're doing it They're not doing this when they when they're talking about NASA wants to grab an asteroid or a meteor it's a meteor in asteroid asteroid they're when they say this you know they're not doing this you know it's not just scientific reasons They don't just want to I don't know if they want to harvest the riches beyond all previous limits, but okay Because that's just an incentive. Yeah, they can really pull it off and that helps that's why they would go do that That's why there's technology So that somebody can make money and then yeah, how do they know there's plutonium in those things? Oh, they know they know they know the chemical Composition to ask or it's a filter can make estimations about what Jupiter's composed of I mean That's kind of insane about humanity that's exciting use our brains to extend our On Earth what's the mechanism of determining the contents of an asteroid? You know they knew the last few Elements that here at our table. They knew how much they'd weigh This is they knew where they fit in in that chart They like we haven't discovered them, but we know exactly what the way And with their mass ability of the human brain to acquire such knowledge about the building blocks of the physical world What does that say about like us as like this you see Loved me into that group and that shit's preposterous. Well, I don't even those aren't even related to me Those are totally different kind of animals those people that have figured that out But I don't think they are because the fact that we can have this conversation means we can acknowledge some kind of Understanding of what we're talking. I mean, I think childlike is a childlike understanding Comparison to the dude figure out what a quark glue on Plasma yeah, but it's a way and then made it right made something that if you get a sugar cube of it It'll fall straight through the center of the earth because it'll weigh like 400 billion pounds or something You think that's not exactly animal you think is a different kind of brain You think like if we went and sat with him for a couple ways you could explain it to us like I mean I think he'd be normal times, you know, I think people people are remarkably adaptable and people go down certain path I think in life Yeah, and if you meet a guy who's like been a ballet dancer since he was four years old and now he's 25 to do in these twirls in the air and shit you would look at that guy moving. I don't know why I chose ballet Then yeah, but you would look at that guy moving there going like that guy is so far down the path I could never possibly catch up to right, but I think you could do ballet human being have a human being So of a capacity for continuing down a path in a very far way to the point where they're almost Unrecognizable from when they first started and insane Specialization like a malleability like in a by no apparent martial arts special. It's amazing how you can see that about let's say a ballet artist Yeah, dancing and stuff like why I can never do that you could easily say there's no way I could but every Bight things they could do stand up enough funny with no training at all That wasn't funny that they don't they don't really know what we're doing It's like they think that we're just telling jokes and we absolutely are but it's all about where to put them how to say I think I think They're sad up philosopher. It's also hypnotism because there's some weird thing that you're doing where you can get them in Away your thing Going your voice. Yeah, and you get them tune into the way you're thinking by giving them shit that they want to listen to and if you could find that Rhythm like where it's it's a thought that they would entertain themselves then they'll allow your mind to work for them because like oh this guy's got a very aware mind I'm curious to hear what how he looks at things allow him to think for me. It's the same thing president Yeah People are plugging into you the same way when you watch a movie you become the character movie those people are plugging into You know that moment when you enter that flow state. Do you feel like a conductor in an orchestra like literally like you move Sort of yeah, I'm not even done to our orchestra. That's exactly how it is Yeah, yeah You guys are in a flow you become in sync something there is interesting that's happening And I don't know if we can even measure that like when people sync up like that. Yeah, whether it's lots of people to one person or lots of other people like yeah, you know it is down for that you know it was careful right feeling I think you can study the way that Metallic particles react to magnets I think you can shift away sound waves affect water We use those metaphors we say he's so magnetic Yeah, I mean use those metaphors to explain something for which we have no instrumentation Yeah, way to quantify or measure yet we employ those capacities We use those capacities we pay people millions of dollars because they're charismatic Well, how do you measure charisma is there a little machine that measures it like radiation like well? Yes, 97 kelvins of charisma. So we employ these things, but we can't measure them They exist, but we can't measure you can focus attention what what you're doing an attention is a Specific pattern of neural activity so the idea is that you have this group of people in your Transforming their neural activity to match some intention that you have whether it's because you want them to listen Your speech about hotels don't you can see that like did you wish there was like a special light you could use the could show Yeah We can see the cell phone signals going through us right now I see how you you're my attention Go and catch a group of people dancing who are all on ecstasy and what you are look at the right fishes fish mover Yes, coral re yes, or look at yes, you see this exact same undulating In the same I can hit in order to things Well, there's an essay dude called virtual reality and hallucination written by Diana Slattery and reality sandwich And it's all about that she says the capture and management of attention Is a vital component a state of immersion a state of absorption is a vital component at any kind of interpersonal Transformation or education or influence of any capacity or growth in other words You need to be completely sucked into whatever it is that's going to really like transform you I'm good inside of you. Yeah, so it all has to do with the capture and management management of attention and what are psychedelics if not Attention technology yeah rhetoric technologies. What is language if not a technology to capture attention and shift Since then any discipline is a psychedelic a psychedelic experience in the long haul. Yes, because disciplines transform yes Yes, and they focus attention. Yeah He's in a tension for publishing you just want people to put the laundry away while they're watching just not fold shit Just look at it. It's all you want So you get lost in it Get people on your side. Focusing attention is the key to everything if we had the power to decide at any given moment to focus our Intention on the best possible thing that we could focus our attention on our life would be like a living breathing sculpture It would be like a dream like constantly Jerking off in the new socks, but think about how it sounds like a dream But think think about how profitable being able to grab people's attention is oh my god It's everything it's like everything it's the currency of this new age Attention attention is the new limited resource Yeah, attention is the new oil in a world of social media of infinite media infinite channels who succeeds But the one who is most physically able to capture and manage attention and that's where like you see theres the phenomenon of something like this You guys I'm always talking about like you know It's been a year people are still saying come back and have this conversation I mean that just means that you've tapped into a nerve that millions are feeling and when you consider that 10,000 hours of content is uploaded to YouTube every hour They you still have millions of people that come in and join this conversation shows like the power of that like it's like It's like you know shining a little bit brighter than the other 10,000 hours, but it's a funny thing when the attention Doesn't tune in like when you see Obama in Germany recently do you see that shit this beach he gave oh? It's creepy that's like Alex Jones level creepy Why can't you mention well no not aside from the fact that there was only like lat the first time he came there It was packed hordes of people came to see him this time it was sparse and empty But what was really creepy was his echoing message about how we have to give up freedom for security and you hear this coming out. It's like Obama was saying it. Oh, yeah Yeah, oh yeah He was saying he was fucking sticking up for the goddamn NSA because as we pull up that for security and you hear this coming out it's like obama was saying it oh yeah yeah oh yeah he was saying he was fucking sticking up for the god damn n. I say because as we pull up that James you find that it might be a long speech but it was spooky he's out there bacon and the heat sweating and giving this this proclamation of how there's a balance between security he was just talking about the importance of the security state and by the way you know there's a logical part of my brain that considers the what they're saying I have to allow myself to give consideration well we do you know what I mean but there's enough because well especially because I'm thinking well if this allows them to stop somebody from blowing themselves up in the subway then cool you know what a pickle you're in what a pickle you're in if if you do if you know that if I have this much what a width when it comes to monitoring then I can stop people from getting blown up what happened at the Boston Marathon I can stop a kid from getting turned into fucking hamburger me right that so now you're basically saying well what do we do here are we gonna just do we just say okay well I guess the cost of people's privacy is that from time to time children get evaporated or do you say no we've got to grow up to the fact that we're an interconnected system we're sells in a bigger organism it's time I don't think the price is worth it we can't trust the government not only that I think we're looking at the thing incorrectly I don't I think the thing they should be concentrating on is the mental health issue yeah what what makes people willing to lash out and kill large that's another thing instead of instead of what is that where you think you can do with that you can invest in research for mental health and you would solve a lot more murders we know when babies are born potentially we know we have love we have birth certificates we know where people are living yeah so security numbers why can't we find out whether or not people are doing really bad well it's hard with our now whether or not people are losing their minds what's hard when they're in Yemen not meaning in America we can't find out yeah think we we do not have an accurate account of our citizens yet we could pretend that we're some sort of a community yeah we don't have an accurate account of the health of our citizens when sats only they weren't gonna cover my mental health anymore because of some type of Obamacare that went into action oh this is I can't carry everybody can't carry also only plan one gets a plan two gets none oh my god I was like I hope another Jared lawfner goes into your building and shoots everyone you say that yeah yeah what are they gonna pull every right after that they're gonna pull everyone's Mental health insurance yeah because that crazy guy lost his health well that's what you're turning us all one of us gonna do that yeah let me ask you something do you think that when a person emo flows like that like if we're talking about what happened to that person on like a human scale we might say okay well maybe you know years of disaffection and radicalization in propaganda and mediation from the wrong influences and his focus attention on the wrong place could be mental personality yeah could be a real issue yeah medical issue right but let's so let's zoom out for a little bit and think of that person as a cell in the bigger organism is he like a cancer cell is he the equivalent of like when a cancer cell starts to like replicate without concern for the rest of the cells in the system I mean it's that way it's a broken thing yeah could it be fixed like just like we want to make advances in medicine to detect cancer cells before they you know metastasize can we find human beings before they metastasize into into that yeah I think it's not an either or I think sometimes yes sometimes no I think sometimes it's probably a medical issue yeah what about research insurance being up to find it yeah to find that the the genetic markers that predispose you to that and it's not usually we gotta watch these people it isn't culture ultimately let technology that does that is your culture like when we call TV we call it program it programs you it teaches you about right and wrong and what's legal and what's not legal and if you're part of the pop culture you know your programed into a kind of mainstream consensus trends that basically says we're moderately free as long as you don't physically hurt me and I don't physically hurt you and you know you don't do certain things but we have these kind of frameworks to impose some kind of an order so that the system can some kind of can have some kind of function so it just makes you wonder you know like especially with the privacy things you know are they really like spying on me or is it more like I'm a billion lines of code mix with a billion other lines of code just a bunch of algorithm here's what's going here's what's going here's what's going and then they just detect when there's like weird behavior associated with violence that they would zoom in or they will use it they will use anything you've done wrong as an excuse to go and really go after you know you if you say if you said no if they already want to fuck with you they can look at your stuff and say oh he owns too large a lobster which is a federal offense all right let me ask you whether or not you bought a new one and they can use that say you broke along when there's people who want to blow themselves up in subways do you think that that's going to occupy most of their let's say this spot this is why because some guy who works there you fucked his ex girlfriend oh snap son damn should just go real you know I mean so human and then you're giving that guy the power to abuse it yeah that's what I don't like and I think that's what this guy is saying is absolutely possible here's my question that the people that work at the organization like him and you keep referring to him as a high school dropout which is hilarious like he was your coder didn't you guys higher up yeah is you pretending you know no this guy why do they when does it ever worked this is the question we have to ask you know that saying if we don't understand what we're doing or Peter let's look in the past what it what point has a government gain full access to the information flow of its citizenry where it hasn't gone wrong show me where what what nation has it been where it's like oh yes that was that that was that one government that new it studied all the correspondence by all its citizens and it didn't go wrong at all it didn't tighten down yeah I become a security state it was a utopia no no no no no it doesn't exist in all ways bat North Korea yes okay but here's a counter argument to that do you think that if given the proper instruments the citizenry could police themselves could we have yeah now the society that becomes like AirBnB or everybody can rent their own place and everybody else judges everybody else and you don't raise everybody out the no you about a good And they already told you by four and a half stars. I always ask my brother, I was like, how do you know somebody from Airbnb is not gonna be some serial killer who's gonna come into pieces? He's like, well, because you can look at the 50 other people that state his house and they rate his cleanliness and they rate his, so you can go anywhere in the world and have this- Same with Tokers WorkNow at Airstock.com. Network's that way. We regulate each other. Self-regulating network. So it's almost like we are connecting to each other and it's like the homeostasis is being formed where the system is self-regulating. We made this government in a time where we didn't have that ability. And now we do. Right, so the government is becoming obsolete. Right, so it's not- The government's an appendance. It's not utopia, but these decentralized peer networks that self-regulate each other with no top-down management but just lateral is leaning towards a kind of like space in which we can- Well, we have Congress because we didn't have the ability to send some of ourselves. Yeah, it's a free California. We can't speak in Washington. So we need to send some guy as our congressmen to speak for us. But now we can speak for ourselves. We don't need that. A lot of people doing it of sending it around. It's a two point note. I mean, the we need literally like, I, iOS doesn't get an upgrade for our iPhone every six months we freak out. Like we need to upgrade literally the way the whole government will system works. Yeah. To use these as a kind of- But they should be online. It's really simple. The idea that anybody controls it is ridiculous. It should be online. And there should be some sort of anonymous type group that controls the code and make sure that nobody can fuck with it. I think, you know, or something like that. Someone who's on top of shit or maybe they are. Maybe they are. I think they're like a global ethic amongst the houses. Like, anonymous is us. By the way, but no one's giving, here's the thing. No one's giving this power up. This is where I think that, they're just taking you. This is where I think this fervent form of naive futurist comes into being where, and not just futurist, spiritualist, and a lot of other people think, oh, you know, these, as you're saying these, what do you call it, peerless networks? Yeah, these, these centralized peer networks. And by the way, when I say you, I mean me too, because I do have this hope that somehow this thing is just like an escalation towards bliss and it's all gonna work itself out. I do think that, but again, if you look back at history, you will see that even if a thing has become archaic and antiquated, it doesn't mean that the people running that thing are gonna give it up. No, no, they don't wanna give it up. They will not give it up. The only way they give it up is through violence. Bam. And this is our inevitability here. Yeah. In for revolution, period in our lifetime. It's been a year since. It's been a year since. It's been a year since. That's our inevitability here. Yeah. And he says that, you know, like, the radio industry didn't want like TV to become a thing. And it didn't need to be violence for TV to like become that we're not talking about. And it didn't need to be the need to be. And it started goddamn revolution. No, I'm ready to cheer it on. No, but I'm on my power and I'm not gonna talk about it. But I'm ready to say, here's some water you guys got there in fight for us. But I think that these technologies will meet resistance from these establishment, but I don't think that it requires violence for transformation to occur. I mean, we're seeing it through social media and the old, what are you talking about? Some pussy Syria, liberal, liberal, Liberia. Again, the other one. I think you mean, Libya. Yeah, yeah, that's the one. Yeah, always gets, always gets overthrown. By aren't, they don't give up. They don't give up and they have the gun. So the only way to give it up. Taking the gun. Here's the, here's the, which other ways, what is it? Younger people who are growing up with the entire, different, diasing in terms of future. I don't think that a representative of governments is responsible. I just think that we have to have more accountability. And the thing that gives more accountability than anything is the internet. It forces accountability. So I think that's, I think ultimately you can't record some updates anymore. You can, though. You can. Yes, you can. They can arrest you? No, they can't. No, I mean, individual places have passed laws trying to make that real, but there's a bunch of videos online that show people telling cops that. They told me that I couldn't take a picture of TSA. I saw a baby being left on the counter. So it was funny. So you can't take a picture of the checkpoint. Like that's wrong. What you're telling me is not true. I'm going to take more pictures. I gotta say, I don't want there to be violence, man. I don't think that needs to be. I think the dream, the naive dream of the futurists is it's like you look in the animal kingdom. You look in, not just the animal kingdom, but you look at any massive change that has ever happened is always surrounded by a release of energy. When things rapidly change, there's a release of energy and energy releases are always violent. Bam, they're called explosions. So it's like, it doesn't have to be though. Just because it's a real game. It's gonna be a psychic explosion. It can be a consciousness explosion. It doesn't really matter. It's gonna be a clear machine. I mean, we're experiencing that. It's just again, right. The psychedelic state of seeing the whole history unfold in a matter of a few seconds. I think this is just slow. So we're not really understanding what's happening, but we're seeing all these. The psychedelic state of the world is the same. We're seeing all these paradigms, crumble in front of us. And the reason being is because they're being exposed, they're being exposed by the internet. It's just happening to us too slowly. Or it's happening, it's too confusing as to which directions can go. There's too much peril in it. It's the last few people that are just like, hey, it's changing like, no, no, no, no, no. How do the robots make that? I atola understand that it's not good to put women in beekeeper outfits. How did you know? I completely could grow with that. But I had an interesting experience. I was just in Berlin for a couple days. And I was hanging out with this steam room and spa over at the Soho house there. Yes. And it's co-ed. So beautiful naked girls are walking around and showering in front of you. Whoa. In Germany, and it's perfectly normal. And of course, I'm loving it, but I'm also slightly like what's happening here. And then I think we're just as primitive here with separating the men's room in the female room, compared to them, we're like the beekeeper suit. Do you know what I mean? Indeed. I know what you're saying. And I would think of myself as no, we're liberal here in America and I'm not. But look how shamelessly those women are just walking around naked. I told her. It's like, relax. We're not fucking. I told her. I totally agree with you. I think that it's what you're seeing as a spectrum of men kind of controlling women. Like if a woman takes her shirt off at the beach, she gets arrested in the United States. Crazy. But I think that if I'm going to be on some part of that spectrum, I definitely want to be on the part of the spectrum where the definition of shirt is like a shoelace or something. I'd rather be no shoelace at all. But in that way, all I'm saying is I don't understand the solution to fundamentalist of any religion, controlling massive populations, or in the case of North Korea, people controlling massive. I don't see how some Android Jesus, I don't see how, Currswell's manifestation of full brain emulation and the subsequent in-pathic connection that happens with people. I don't understand how that makes a person who's wield the control over a chunk of land using a false god. I don't understand how that's going to make them be like, you know what? I guess I was wrong. Well, you can all just live with it. But our society has been transformed by a change in consciousness. I mean, you could argue that the 60s fundamentally change the way we think. I mean, this place used to be a lot more puret than it is now. You're on used to be a lot more liberal. OK, so you have it. You have more things happening. You have cycles. You have things before. Well, I hear it's very liberal now amongst the people. Yeah, there's a section of the government. There's a very secularism. But the government is what's really good. But you and the new guy who got an office, but there's always going to be the Ayatollah that's a supreme leader. Yeah, exactly. It's really a weird situation. It's very strange. And the guy who's the Ayatollahs been the Ayatollahs that's like 89 or something like that. Really? Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy like that. Yeah. Well, you know what, man? Let me just say this because I don't want to come out sounding like Ari. Like I want some violent revolution. I don't want why I see it inevitable. Have you ever have Stephen Pinker on the show? I don't think it's now one. So Stephen Pinker called Better Angels of Our Nature. He wrote a book that called The Better Angels of Our Nature is a tech talk called The Myth of Violence. And he actually went up there and explained that the chances of a man dying at the hands of another man today are the lowest than they've ever been able to all of you in history. The world has actually never been less violent than it is today. But look at Syria. 100,000 people. Like it's a lot. But I guess what I was saying is that it used to be where? Yeah. The Mongols killed a million in a day. Right. Right. Right. I see what you're saying. Yes. It's that spectrum. It's that spectrum. Some insane numbers. Probably I'm not being exaggerated. Well, they're a battle like two hours here. 72 hours they killed a million people with horses. Unhorseback. No nuclear bomb. Just swords. That's there must be so tired after that. You're chopping our mouth. Yeah. That's it. That's when you got to run when they're that tired. They kill the million people. Yeah. Neely in. Yeah. We have to really grasp it. It's hard too, but we have to try to grasp. Just what a short period of time we haven't been to barbarians. Yeah. I mean, even the Catholic Church, I mean, you go back to the 1500s. They were drinking. They had like mistresses. The Pope said mistresses. They even break the kids that armies. Yeah. They raped kids. They had armies. They had full armies. The Pope had armies. The Catholic Church had armies. The Vatican had army behind it. It's great. I mean, you're talking about like really nutty. She like they asked for the Pope's help once in fighting off the Mongols. Really? Yeah. I don't want to send any troops. They got lucky. Fucking Mongols died off. Here's the thing, man. I want to be pessimistic again. Because I've been thinking about this. So it's like, OK, in the same way that it used to be, if a person had a great idea and wanted to transmit it, he'd have to get a printing press. And he'd have to like, you know, to get that idea around it, took a long time. The idea would have to go buy boats. Yeah. Right. Now it's like, if you want to build like a nuclear bomb, like it's really hard, like you've got to have centrifuges, plutonium. It's a fucking bitch. Like you can't just do it if you want to build a nuke. But as matter, as 3D printers begin to become more and more advanced. We get you on that. And they start working at the atomic level. Then in the same way that we have accessibility to instantaneous communication, people are going to have accessibility to instantaneous. 3D print guns with a creation of all kinds of fucked up weapons. Look, that's what we're going to need an account of all the people in our community. That's what we're going to need an account of them in a loving way. No, but all the people who have society, like looking out for each other. Yeah. The idea is that every guy is basement with a nuclear bomb. You're right. You're right. But the idea is that every baby has potential to become an awesome human being. Right. That's the idea. Right. But some of them just get shit rolls with the dice. And they get one, wound up with two asshole methhead parents who fucking leave them in a basement one day for 24 hours. And they starve for death. You know, this shit like that happens to kids. You just get a shit roll with the dice or you can get an awesome roll of the dice. Yes. You know, I mean, that's possible too. It's I think it's our job collectively as a human species to concentrate on the least fortunate amongst us. I think it's it's the thing that everyone takes for granted. Everyone ignores and every single guy who runs for president doesn't bring it up. They never they never say, look, our society is only as strong as its weakest link. We got a bunch of people that are being ignored and they're an awesome resource. If we if we educated them and helped them and move them forward in some way, who knows what kind of great benefit you could get out of this right? Unity of people. It's true. I just think of that guy on locked up raw. That one like, you know, like the guy I can't remember which guy it is like one of these like the people that you see and locked up raw or just like, you know, like I I think because you know, I've I've thought, oh, I know the way to fix that is like you flood the prisons without LSD and like if these people are fair. Which help a little that would definitely help a little. You're eventually going to have a 12 monkey situation. I think you can do somebody's going to have so much effect on the rest of the population with like a toxin or like a bunch of nuclear weapons that it'll just drastically change everything. Well, you know what? I think society has always thought that this was coming or not. You know, it's like there's always people that believe that the apocalypse is around the corner and there's always people that had faith. And like Jason said, this is the safest time to be alive ever. But yet we're still like, fuck the sky's falling. Yeah. But you know, it's almost like a part of being a human to recognize all the flaws around us to make it glaringly obvious that we're aware of them and the folks were tension on them and hopefully slow down the progress. Of us being scared and erotic and almost like negative has been biologically selected for to warn us against potential consequences. Like the, you know, the early the early caveman was chilling out looking at the sky got eaten, quite the one that was like scared of impending doom survived. So there's no coincidence that we have evolved that. But until we start like playing with our own genomes, like we can't change our basic dispositions, which is to pay attention to whatever we think is dangerous. But I think it does have, you know, knowledge is power. When you appreciate, oh, really the world has never been safer. That's interesting. Not to say there's not as other things to worry about. It's not to say that there's not school shootings and 3D printing guns could be dangerous. But let's look at the actual facts as it is today. Yeah, but all it would take, but in the beginning, if one guy out of 100 of them, one little knowledge, he would punch some people. Right. And then technology got better. He stabbed two people and then they stopped and then technology got better. He put off a bomb and then that technology got better. He flew a plane into a building and that technology gets better. You can affect millions and millions of millions of people all at once with just one, one guy that falls in the cracks. Well, this is very, very much like the internet. But it's funny. All right. And you're eight of the surveillance state because you could see how in an accelerating technology, we're going to blow each other up with increasing, uh, with increasing competency. You can see the necessity for perhaps, uh, you know, an observation of our, it's a fucking, that's what I'm saying. It's a pickle man. Yeah, but I think it's going to happen anyway. You're never going to stay fully at you. You can't monitor everybody. But just because something's going to happen doesn't mean you don't try to stop it. I mean, it's a lay at the trends seem irreversible. the trend towards everybody having access to everything at all times. I think we're going to have a real problem with money because money right now is just, you know, it's used to be based on gold. And now we got this one's and zero thing that rock and that doesn't really make any sense at all. I think the Bitcoin is not going to last, but the thing that comes right after Bitcoin is going to be the one. Oh, if you guys heard about this, it points to me the first. But I wonder. I mean, I think it's, it's, we live in a really strange time because as access to information gets more and more transparent and more and more free where we all have access to everything. Well, then what is that? What exactly is financial resources? It's going to become obvious where it is. Where are those ones and zeros? Where do they go? No, it's not. It's not. Sorry, go ahead. I'm just saying it's like there will be a permeation point where transparency gets a point where everyone has access to everything at all times. You're not going to be able to store any secrets. So you're not going to be able to have money. You're not going to be able to put ones and zeros all in your bank account. Doesn't mean anything. So it'll take your ones and zeros. But there might not be a reason for anybody to hurt each other. Like, you know, it might not, it might have to be that. Right. My Kenna says we're all going to move into universes of our own construction. But then like, Kurzweil and Peter Diamand is just say, you know, technology is a resource liberating mechanism. The whole idea of scarcity is just contextual. You know, we fight over 1% of the freshwater in the world when this is a water planet. desalination revolution could give us all the water we could ever need. We fight over energy. We get 10,000 times more energy from the sun than we would ever need. With nanotechnology matter becomes a programmable medium. We can turn anything into anything. So I mean, when we have just like infinite abundance potentially, what would we fight about? There would be no incentive to fight pussy. We could call it pussy. We could call it pussy. We live in virtual reality. You know what it's like diamonds. The night we've been here, we don't want fake diamonds. They want real diamonds that came from coal. And the guys are going to want real pussy that you earn. Oh, she's a real person. Well, we can have it in virtual reality. We can have virtual games where we can be heroes that are only in your argument. And the terrifying flaw in your argument is the assumption that people do things for a reason. You're saying people do things because they don't have enough or they do things because of this or that. Some of the most horrible things are done for no reason at all. They're done because the bio computer that somebody's running clicked the wrong way and they decided it'd be fun to hear the sound of a teenage boy. That's that's that's that's that's that's that's a cancer cell. That's a thing that's not doing. It's not moving towards complexity and organization in this sublime. Right. Like the rest of the evolutionary process. That's why there's the urge to kill it. Right. There's the urge to kill it. The interesting thing and I think this I heard, I think McKenna said this, there's this relay, there's a race happening right now. There's a race happening because it's it's not as though these two things can exist at the same time. It's like we were talking about this and I've been thinking out a bunch since how, you know, in phones, of course, the other conflict minerals. What's the name of that shit in phone? It's a cold tan. So in phones is cold tan. So we know that in our phones in this device that's allowing us this greater connectivity is the suffering of children and African, African minds. So we see in nature that there is this intertwining of horror and of darkness and light. And to think that somehow technology is going to make things all light is to say that we will actually rewire the universe. And in fact, it seems like what's happening is an acceleration on both sides of the scale. And is that acceleration happens? There will be an equivalent amount of this orgasmic utopian. Talyard Desjardins, Omega Point with the other side of the thing, which is the absolute obliteration of all humanity through nuclear weapons or bio weapons. Now, here's the hopeful thing is what Martin Luther King said, which is the universe bends in the direction of justice. And there is this hope that there's a refraction in this lens where things are going towards the direction of creation instead of a horror. Steven Johnson says it's not utopia, but it's leaning that way. So you know, you go to the things are better. They're not perfect. They're better. You technology amplifies the good enough that amplifies the bad at us in us, but maybe it amplifies the good a little bit more than it amplifies the bad. So that eventually it might subvert completely. That's the light. The light might swallow the darkness. The extra be my transcend entropy completely. You know, we might become immortal gods living outside of time. You know, and maybe that's the singularity. Yeah. Sounds a lot like the battle that's been hell in heaven. It does. Yeah. It's almost things like that. It's a thing. It's a coincidence. We need those archetypes to make sense of what's happening. We've used the same archetypes, religion, salvation, transcendence, the same things. The difference is that religion never produced with technology produced. Religion never let us fly through the air. Religion never gave us cell phones and never gave us the internet. Technology does. So in the whole in the whole area in our desire to believe that these things are going to help us transcend our limitations. You know, technology is actually delivering a little bit more than the previous stuff. Oh, a lot of you are. I dare you with your little bit. Well, there you go. A lot more. Cyborg arms. Trying to make friends. Kids are hearing again. They made Galileo apologize. Yeah, they said you did. You were wrong. The church. Yeah, there was a lot of business to do with. You guys want to see a trippy video about us being cyborgs. Okay, we're going to wrap this up with this trippy video. Okay, I gotta get out of here. All right, cool. All day. Let's do it. Howdy, howdy, howdy. Happy mushroom fest to everyone who's participating. Shroom fest pitches. God is love. Everything's going to be fine. Forget all that explosion shit. Yes. And before we go, we would just like to thank hover.com, go to hover.com forward, Rogan, get 10% off of your domain name purchases and stamps.com. If you click on the microphone, enter in the code word JRE, get yourself a special offer and on it.com. That's O-N-N-I-T. Use the code name Rogan, save yourself 10% off any and all supplements. I've had a wacky few actually like month and a half lately ladies and gentlemen. And I wouldn't have been able to do all this stuff if I didn't enjoy the shit out of it. And it's a fascinating experience. So I want to thank all of you. And I want you guys to follow all my friends on Twitter, including Jason Silva. What is it? Jason Silva. Jason Silva. Yeah. At Jason Silva, at R.E. Schafir. Watch my storyteller show online on YouTube. Yeah, there's a cover of them now. It was the first one was really good too. Where did you film those? Cheetos. Oh, that's hilarious. Yeah. That's what it looked like. It looked like some sort of a strip club environment. It's perfect. And TJ Miller's one was really good too. Yeah. That was really funny. And it's a really interesting sort of setup that we have it. I love that Comedy Central had the balls to put that online like that. produced it, make it like a real show, like a legit TV show, put it online. And if it gets a good reaction, they'll probably one-dove doing something like that on television. But all the comics, yeah, exactly. And then all the comics like you do what you feel is great. Yeah. So go and check it out and support it. Joe Diaz is coming. Support it, folks, because R. Schafir is a bad motherfucker. I like to come on television for you guys. It's concept to sound. So pass it around. He would like to get someone that sweet, sweet TV money. Most of it, I really just want to put on a good show for people. You do. You're in time. It's 100% pure. You're a real legit comic, R. Schafir. It's an honor of watching you grow from being a dude who is just sort of getting on stage the first time to being a legit headliner. It's awesome. It's cool to say. Thanks, man. Wow. Same to you, Duncan Tressley. You too, Comedy Central. This is not happening. All right, you fucks. Follow Duncan Tressley on Twitter, Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N. Tressley, T-R-U-S-S-E-L. This is my podcast, Duncan Tressley Family. Our Hollywood. Yes, double L. That's Duncan Tressley. Awesome. All right, you fucks. If I may add, I would love everyone to check out Brain Games on National Geographic. I have a new series. It airs Monday night. We're doing season two now in the fall, but currently we're still airing it next Monday is the final episode, actually, the 12th episode. Please check out Brain Games on National Geographic. I also launched a new YouTube channel called YouTube.com slash shots of awe. I'm releasing new videos of my craziest, press-o psychedelic videos every week. So YouTube.com slash shots of awe. If you read me, I made that video. It would be a little bit of shots of awe, just A-W, and we just have kittens all day long. Oh, this one is shots of awe, A-W-E. But if you check it out, that new video is called We Are Already Cyborgs. That's the one I want you to check it out. Hopefully with that Jason, so let's do you have that thing queued up? YouTube.com slash shots of awe. It's the first one down. It's called We Are Already Cyborgs. Oh, there you are. We're already Cyborgs, but can't get a goddamn YouTube video to play. You're fired! Destroy the planet! How dare you. All right, well, let's just recommend the people watching it. It's called shots of awe on YouTube, and we are already cyborgs, which I concur. Awesome. Thank you, Kurt. You're a bad motherfucker. Cosmic Dick'slinger. Oh, yes. The great Jason, so thanks for that. Thank you for having me. Thank you. I'm Steve here, powerful Duncan Trousel, powerful Jamie. We're out of here at your dirty fox. We'll see you next week with new shenanigans and Ari Shafir and I go to Alaska to conquer the Great White North. Yeah. Go fishing like a motherfucker. You're a randy dog. All right, you're a fox. Awesome. See you soon. We love the shit out of you. All right, big kiss. All right. Let's do it.