Here we go folks. I know we have some issues. I know in the past that has always gone perfectly But today we're gonna try our hardest Come and try our hardest Get shit together folks put it together This episode of the Joe Rogan's podcast is brought to you by audible.com if you go to audible.com forward slash Joe you will get one free audiobook and You will get 33 days of audible service if you have never used audible.com or heard of them It's an excellent resource for audiobooks Perhaps the best on the net and that's a strong statement, but I stand by it more than a hundred thousand different titles Great books like our friend Chris Ryan sex at dawn. That's on that's available on audible. You can get that for free if you go to audible.com forward slash Joe If you don't use audio books, you're a silly bitch because they're awesome It's great if you have to travel if you get stuck in traffic if you're sitting on a bus It's it's an amazing thing that can take an otherwise wasted moment in time and actually make it enjoyable and make it educational Make you know enrich yourself while you're on the bus pitch get it together and if you go to audible.com forward slash Joe You can get it together for free for 30 bucks or for 30 days rather 30 days for free audio service and one free audiobook go try it Check it out. We are also brought to you by hover. Hover is a domain named company that's owned by the same people that own Ting and if you know how how gushy and and love you we are the ting you know that we feel the same way about hover The idea behind ting what I what I love about it is that they're trying to give you a a great deal on excellent service and they're trying to make things as sort of as easy and ethical as as simple and fair as possible and that same sort of attitude is taken up by hover They try to provide you with things for free that other domain name companies will make you charge for it like who is domain name privacy If you go to hover.com forward slash Rogan you will get 10% off your domain name registrations. I actually have domains registered through hover I got a bunch of them that I'll probably never use but I had an idea Can't tell you right now, man. I can't tell you I had a project in mine Um, but uh, but you know what I don't I have kids and projects I started them up and then I go jin with the fuck am I doing with this the weed silly website idea But if you wanted to register or web something I obviously run actual web. I mean I have jo Rogan.net and there's other websites But if you want to start your own hover is a way to go go check it out and I believe you get a free domain name registration if you sign up for more than a year. All right. Isn't that something like that? Domain with a year. Yeah, it's an awesome company. So go check it out hover.com forward slash Rogan go there save some money We are also about to buy is that it no we have one more right. Oh stamp.com stamp.com which if you if you've ever seen those silly Desquered kitty cat t-shirts that Brian red band creates and if you haven't seen them go to desquat.tv They're they're pretty badass and especially the hypnotic looking one. It's like a psychedelic cat. I love that little fucker But Brian sends all that stuff through stamps.com If you are someone who runs your own business go into the post office can be a real pain Yes, it's a long waiting line to deal with some unenthusiastic person It doesn't really want to weigh your shit and tell you how much it costs and pay in the ass huge turn There's like those people waiting behind you are like really your your bringing boxes of shit in here You can actually do all this stuff right from your desk. You all you have to do is go to stamps.com and and check out how it works you you buy and print actual official US postage for any letter or package using your own Computer and printer means it's an amazing thing they send you a digital scale it calculates the exact postage There's a little um microphone if you go to stamps.com There's a little microphone on the upper corner if you click on it and enter the promo code JRE you will get a 110 dollar bonus offer which includes a digital scale and up to $55 a free postage It's an excellent service folks and again if you run a business and you don't use stamps by dot com You're really being silly because it's it will make your life so much more simple If you have to dread those treks to the post office That scale will be good for weighing out tobacco too How dare you? How dare you in the middle of a stamp dot I don't think you're really talking about tobacco. Yes, I do not believe you Listen, we in no way endorse selling illegal tobacco and then shipping it using stamps.com That is not what stamps.com is for okay Stamptos it's for flags if you're selling American flags If you've got maybe ammo that needs to be shipped Legally state-to-state Yes, go to stamps.com, but please no illegal tobacco Look at it. It was that pretty badass scale right there Those all right ladies and gentlemen just go there the code is JRE use it stamps.com It's fucking awesome go check it out that stamps.com at the top of the home page enter JRE Enjoy relax repeat rinse Douglas rush cough is here ladies and gentlemen cue the music Do not do it The Joe Rogan experience Too loud yeah, I'm sorry We have an adjustment thing here. It's too loud. We can actually lower your volume. Where you at? Are you this one right here? Yeah Is that better? Yeah, yeah, okay. Cool. Sorry about that didn't mean to blow yours off Thanks for joining us. Thanks for having me Douglas rush cough if you do not know of him Is what'd you call yourself a media analyst? What would you call me theoist media author mainly? author mainly yeah, and your new book is called present shock when everything happens all at once is that would everything happens now And then when everything happens now I saw quite a few of your videos online. It really really really interesting conversations and one of them that really struck me was You there were several of them that struck me but one of them was your story of being mugged and You you told people on an online room like where you got mugged and people were upset that you in telling them that you got Didn't tell in the world that you got mugged there. It was lowering their property values Yeah, that was a Bad one That's so crazy. Yeah, I mean it was one thing to get mugged which is kind of freaky in itself You know and whatever you know shame and weirdness goes with that, but I Guess what I was trying to do I mean deep down was probably a listen you know Love and affection from people on my list. You know, so I put up. Oh, you know, and there was a social Some social responsibility to it. So I put up where I got mugged because everyone should know this is maybe a dangerous Stretch here. We got to maybe get a light but yeah, so I sent I sent it out and then the first two emails I got back from this like loving List of parents was how dare you say exactly where it happened? You know, we live right across the street You know, you're gonna lower our property values. Are you selling now? Is that is that no? We're not selling but it was a really weird time when people needed their property values to go up because they were trying to get bigger mortgages and pay down and do all that And it was just like so panicky there about that that some you know, someone was afraid of What if a newspaper covers it and it's bad and what if it's so weird when it ones and zeros? Trump humanity You know, and in that case that's exactly what that is. That's one's and zeros trump humanity Well, yeah, and two kinds of ones and zeros, you know that the ones and zeros of money Yeah, you know and the ones and zeros of sort of of digital technology which I think Can create a kind of a distance Because you're not feeling the impact of saying that to someone's face. Yeah, yeah, there's a weird Communication it takes place online. That's you know, it doesn't have any Consequence, you know, you can you can do it anonymously and there's this it's like these barbs that you can just send out and illogically like In ways that you would never if you had to deal with someone one on one because you would feel it you would look at You would feel the response you would be like why are you saying this like like why are you being such an asshole? But because you are anonymous you right so people are just like in this unnatural Communication thing right but then the part that then worries me after that is if you get used to doing it like that in an anonymous way online Does that start to make the behavior a bit more normative when you're even with your identity? Yeah, I guarantee it has to it has to there's no free rides when it comes to that I really feel like your thoughts your can like there was always a thing I remember I wasn't high school Well someone in my school newspaper wrote like a funny critique about the Boy Scouts and One of the things that he didn't like about the Boy Scouts was that they wanted you to keep your thoughts pure And he's like, you know, well my thoughts are my own thoughts, you know, I'm just as long as I don't deal anything I don't think there's anything wrong with my thoughts. All right. I thought that was really smartly argued I remember reading that going wild. This kids pretty clever, but then I thought about him like but you if you're thinking about creepy shit You probably are kind of creepy, you know, and it's it's not gonna get me better just you know You're just gonna eventually one day you're gonna snap and then you're gonna do something be thing Yeah, if you really are like the I don't know I mean everyone has their own definition of thoughts being pure You know like a more lenient person might allow a lot of like healthy sexual things in the idea of thoughts being pure as long It's not creeping, but there's other people that would just sit around and say well Let me just think about creepy shit all day and not do it and I'm fine But you're not there's no free ride there may be though you think so I mean well I mean what you're describing what you're describing is, you know the benefits of an absolute police state as long as it was always right Yeah, that's no problem. You know that's the problem I mean and then you can always get your my my narrative report, you know Just make me there. I'm not really subscribing that. I'm just saying that you really can't have really shitty thoughts and get through And I think that if you're really shitty online you have those thoughts even if it's only online I really believe that I can't genuinely genuinely should be I mean it's just how you decide what's what's shitty and what's not but yeah No, it's People when there the meaner you are online Without your face the meaner you can be online with your face and the meaner you can get In real life, you know until you just got mean people do you investigate people's toilet? Like if someone says you something weird on Twitter Do you go to their Twitter page and see just all their county shit that they write to everybody and go oh there Let's just crazy. I will admit I Focus way more on the country Tweets and emails and things and on the ones that are positive loving about I'll get like 10 emails. Oh your book was great. Oh, I love it. You've changed my life my children Worship at your altar because I could delete delete delete delete delete delete. I'll let you watch out with your rushcough This guy You're my child Yes, this is the biggest piece you should have ever read what and you get thousand people loved it more than life It's all right, but I'll spend the rest of my week trying to convince this one guy. Oh, no, you don't I? I'm not a bad guy why the book is actually You got to learn the internet. Yeah, well now Well, it's never it's hard it's hard not to engage people because they're they're it's like a person saying it to you It's it's very similar and to someone who's public, you know, you're out there You have your name is out there and the videos are out there Anyone can find out about you and see you they can reach you too and reaching you on Twitter You know they can send you some shitty thing just to get a Rise from you and then they're just making you dance and then you're dancing dancing to someone else's spell So you got to learn how to just look at yourself I thought that got yeah, and we have to leave it, but you got to be able to do that to the point where Where it's healthy and not beyond yes at some point if everybody's going rush cough wake up Your book needs to be this when it's you know, you've got you can do this, but you can't do that I Well in the end of the sale of the market, but tell me I guess yeah The market would tell you but yeah, you're not a dumb guy You'd never do that you never make a book like that. It was so often out of line You would look yourself away. I can tell I'm talking to you for 10 minutes You're not that kind of guy that kind of guy that kind of guy that would do that It's like there's there's certain people that are functional crazy and they can like figure some things out and chase Some things down and then they'll get stuck in some sort of a weird rut and you can't talk them out of it and you know You realize oh he was crazy all the time. He just figured out how to get through life You know those are the ones that will go off on crazy tansions and some people go what are you doing? Because the guy wasn't really nuts in the first place. You're not nuts. You're out. Yeah, you don't have to worry about that You just need to get that one out of you. You need to keep a passive people around you Keep telling you you're not insane They gotta like I think there's a good thing that comes from criticism though because Even really harsh criticism is because if they're ridiculous and if you look at what they're saying if it's ridiculous A mean and that it really reveals far more about them than it really does about you But look at what they're saying and is there any merit to it at all? Does it make any sense or is it just nonsense? Is it just a guy being an asshole or if you weren't you could you find merit in it? Like I found criticism from the biggest assholes, but it was like there was like a Hair of accuracy into it that made me like reconsider certain things. Yeah I mean the most valuable thing about it for me Entertaining it to some extent is just it makes me it makes me more flexible You know as a thinker you know if you can wrap your head around you know, oh where am I wrong? Right it can make you a little indecisive because it's like well he's right and he's also right in this one right Well, I sometimes things are complicated. I know but that's the whole that's you know for me the object of the game That's why I keep writing. I'm writing about the now, you know present being present if you're actually present You have to be present with yourself And you're present who you're with right you know and that's the thing that everybody looks to be avoiding one way or another You know whether whether they're doing a coke's I got her money or they're doing it because they got to check a device I mean there's the constant S&C and it's just I see so few people I walk into rooms now and I feel like You know, I don't feel like I'm in a room with these people. There's no sort of social cohesion They're not really present. They're each in their own Little segment, you know interconnected with the internet Friends yeah, and then not connected with with each other, you know, I am you know, I'm a net Fan I've been since late 80s. I've been you know pro You know boy boingers cyberpunk type person But you know I keep feeling like rather than using these things to to reach out to other people and connect You know we're using these things for business. They've gotten super aggressive behaviors Got in way worse and I don't even think it's our fault. I honestly think it's in these cases It's because we're living on this this An operating system but an economic operating system that just needs to feed Off the net when it should be our space not the economy space Yeah, it's I feel like we're in a stage of progression This interconnectivity progression where we're starting off with you know We're starting off with just regular telephones and that has moved to cellular phones Which everybody carries which is gonna move into some Google glasses type thing which is going to eventually? I mean down the line if you extrapolate 100 years or whatever it's gonna take there's gonna be some really crazy Interconnectivity that people share and I think this stage that we're going through right now the anonymous stage of being able to like Make a Twitter account on some fake name and just start saying mean things to random people like that ability is gonna go away You're not gonna have this anonymous portal like I just think if you look at the way things I feel like The way I look at the future is like the thing that's gonna be really scarce is secrets I think we're gonna be able to connect with each other in Some way that we probably can't even imagine right now whether it's some neuro chip or something that you embed in your body Whether it's nanotechnology whatever it is there's gonna come a day where we're like completely interconnected with each other but the Beauty of that though is if it really worked it would bring us back to the now that we've been avoiding all this time Yeah, I would have based a face live interaction where you can't Buckle with each other because you're here. You know, there's this guy Strangely look at this. I met this guy this show guy Um, you know a stage magician guy who could tell when people are lying. I don't know if you've ever seen this guy He's like work for the FBI and stuff and he can like he does all these tricks He lines up 10 people and he says okay one of you think and he can really tell period When people are lying and I was thinking if he can tell that people are lying because he's got this talent It means that on some level we all know we all have that ability So we all on some level know when the other one's lying to us so it's it's kind of been if you're actually in the moment It's all exposed anyway Yeah, I think there's a weird feeling that you get when someone's being deceptive There's a weird feeling you get where you're like There's a sense of disturbance when your community came with them you this but you can't put it in a tangible There's nothing you could say always X amount of weight. So here. I know this is a real thing You know here. I put it on a scale. It's but there's some weird thing that happens When you when you're with something like you can tell if someone's upset at you and not saying it They can be saying all the right words, but you know like there's a certain there's a coldness or a lack of warmth Or there's a little something I wrote about those women in What's it called the house wise of Orange County? Really I got obsessed with them because they were just having all of these awful disagreements all the time The communications guy in front of you know what why is there communication breaking down And right so this is what I do so I know So I concluded in the end that it's because they've put so much Botox in their faces that they can't Actually execute facial expressions in an honest way anywhere in a way that the other person organically can react to my god These women in trying to kind of freeze time at age 29 ended up making themselves inaccessible To the now that they're in wow Because you know you see one who say oh, you know my you know my daughter I think she might have cancer and the other one's like oh, I'm so sorry But she doesn't in a smile right? So the first one she's I can't believe I told her my daughter You know his cancer and the other one she says she's sorry, but I can tell she's not You know that's sort of I mean that's it's just a metaphor, but uh, but it's true They're like stuffing cotton in their mouth and they can't you can't understand what they're saying right? They're they're ruining the facial communication expressions Of facial communication, right? And then what do we live in the weather shooting poison in their face to freeze right? But they're to freeze it in time is the thing they're trying to stop. Yeah Time and that's like it's I understand the urge to stop time, but when you stop time you lose the moment That's kind of the whole point I'm making second the the net it can stop time in a certain way, but You're gonna lose certain moments that you know so I'm I'm all for being on the net and having a net moment But you know even here, you know, I've heard you do those ads before for those sponsors and you could just cut and paste You know you could cycle seven of them and maybe people wouldn't even know it's the same ones You know you could cut and paste from another show and throw it in but you decide no I'm actually gonna sit here and read these three ads with my friends Well, if I didn't do it, I'd be really bored You know I I would never want to just read and add so I we always do it that way We've always money you make one, you know, that's the end of the model of the industrial age Of course is to make print out more. Yeah, and the only way we would The only way we could even do any of the stuff the way we're doing is because we don't have anybody that we have to approve With you know no one I don't have to go to NBC and say hey This is what we're thinking and doing. I know you have these commercials But we're just gonna talk shit and occasionally we'll get to the point of the commercial but but ironically on the long run It ends up Making more money. Yeah, certainly more money for the people who are actually doing it You know, maybe by the other system you can make more total money, but it's gonna go to You know, God knows what does some institution anyway? You know, so so the fact that it is that it is live and It is of what an mp3 mainly it is mainly a podcast You know you think on the first hand because I'm looking to do make a kind of radio choice myself and it's like well I can do this for the man and Make this amount of money kind of guaranteed But I'm gonna have to stay between these sight lines and Or I can go this other route and actually do the thing I do You know, yeah, there's nothing of a choice there. Yeah, not in this day and age It's not necessarily it's they used to be a time where you you would have to choose you would have well This internet thing who knows if it's gonna work out It's crazy like you you have an option to immediately jump in and get a gigantic group of people that are gonna start retweeting and tweeting and listening to your stuff and you'll you'll develop a giant following in no time and As that's happening all you're doing is you're you know Selling ads for companies that you actually believe in you, right? You could that's the only way you should do it Fuck working for some company that tells you not to swear or not to do this or not to discuss that or you know That's not the stance we're taking on this particular complicated issue You know fuck that that's just that's the enemy of real thought the enemy of real thought is committee You know, I don't know what you're really thinking if everything you say has to go through a committee before it comes out of your mouth I want to know what the fuck you're thinking and especially in like the sense of a radio show You know a guy on a radio. That's like the whole thing it used to be like even DJs You used to be this DJ likes this music. So this is why you're awesome or broadcasting from the same city that you're in Yeah, never went to the then clear channel took over and it was like oh my gosh So we're getting a recording that's done by computer By all the way this is my local rock and roll stations What are those jack Fm's which is essentially like playing shuffle when you're your iPod? There's you know could be anything of a number of things that they approve and they pretend we're wacky We just don't have any rules like oh we're jack Fm And it's like a standard model. There's like a hundred jacks across the country and probably even more than that It's weird. I think radio is completely on its way out. I think they're fucked I think that's like our it's a silly way to do it and no one's gonna stick with it after a while Like why you're gonna have internet access in your car within no time That's a that's easy. They could do that right now I already get that with podcasts on the iPhone because I have my iPhone Bluetooth to my car So I'll just immediately say oh I'd like the list to a dunk of trussle podcast and in a I've done it had a red light Yeah, we're so easy at a red light. It's one two dunk in There he is. Oh the one aspect of radio that I feel like I would miss is that local terrestrial quality of it because I mean yet we could still have like you know you can have a LA channel and I could have a you know this part in New York channel and you know We could do that Technically with with digital, you know where you'd pick your your so-called regional thing It'll be local stuff, but the mediums not biased towards that the medium is it's all equivalent, you know, and I wonder would we drift Further away from from local and the kind of the things that matter to us in the here and now or You know, or we choose that stuff I think you know instead of like a local radio station You're going to have a million people in LA making their own Music making their own putting their own shit out there that you can choose from You know whether it's a music list like a Pandora list or something like that someone puts together or whether it's podcasting I just think the idea of a local Representative was always gross, you know, it was always gross wolf man Jack was always gross because for every wolf man Jack There was a million other dudes that probably had interesting ideas as well and they had no outlet So you have one guy has this outlet from this particular time that's crazy That that idea sucks the idea that we're dealing with now is way better It's like a billion outlets six billion outlets and and there's no local anymore There's people that are in that town. It'll tell you about things, but everyone's More connected than ever before right and because they are I mean the economy as we know it also has to go away too Right, you know, there's once you have six billion people doing podcasts I mean in you got two billion left doing farming It's like where'd all the businesses go and you also lose those iconic figures like the wolf man Jack or like Howard Stern or like The mate well, I mean I think you could still choose you would just have major Every once in a while something major would happen right, but it wasn't one beat wouldn't be that one guy who's your town's guy You know like when I grew up in Boston. It was Charles Lockwood era Charles Lockwood there and the big mattress was like this he would call this like morning shows called the big mattress It was a great guy in Lockwood era really nice guy met him too eventually, but he he he he was like the number one Radio DJ in Boston everybody knew it you'd go to when I was doing construction Go to job sites people would turn on the big mattress listen to Lockwood era and It was that was a show It was like that was the show and the only way to get a show like that is to not have a lot of options You know to show that everybody agrees we're all gonna listen to you know It's gonna be only like three options You know disco no one out listening to disco, you know We know there wasn't like the internet quality options that that that that changes the whole game Like there's never gonna be a CBS radio on the internet. No, it's just it does it will and it's gonna replace Everything terrestrial. I mean I mean ever since so if you're saying we're saying everything's gonna be replaced Everything terrestrial is gonna be replaced first it's radio then it's other stuff All we have to make sure then is before we lose all those things which we're gonna inevitably lose to say to ourselves What is what is it we value about those things that we want to bring into? These digital things Before we're untethered in there, you know before it's all the way Yeah, well, we want us our cake. We want it to we want the digital era and we still want mom and pop stores Right train to like keep it all together and that's the question is can you get both? You know so can you have this very traditional narrative 20th century industrial age culture? We have right aside You know this sort of steady state economy and peer-to-peer currencies and local CSS you know can we have an iPhone and organic chart and No slavery in Africa to get either. Yeah, is that possible? I'm hoping so I move towards it or not, you know It seems like that's what a great percentage of the world would like But it's we've made shockingly little progress and moving towards that potentially utopia right but then but you know As long as we got a hope or You know try to envision oh, yeah, no, I would say okay, but but this shift that we're undergoing now from an Analog era to a digital one is a bigger shift than just Then just that there's a whole different digital media environment that we've gone into so we've gone into this from this this time is money expansionist economy live by the clock Universe to one that's potentially a synchronous. That's just off that Off that there. I remember when the net first came up. It was like it was you know people in Austin and slackers and cyberpunks The idea was that the net was going to give us more slack, right? You know and it's ended up for most people kind of doing the opposite because they're always on and working and being monitored and all that and distracted but I mean I think if we if we Take command of the way we're programming these things then we can use them to sort of to create You know the gorgeous culture slack to create You know what a few of us are kind of discovering we can do like you're doing with this right? You're just doing your thing Yeah, I think we're trying to resist the inevitable and that inevitable is the symbiotic computer relationship there's gonna be some sort of Biomechanical connections that's one myth talking through Oh my god. I want to do another man with that phone to a million people listening in their car wherever the fuck they are I think we're just like yeah, it's I really don't feel like we can stop that it seems like the things that we got so excited by as these are where the fuck they are. And you think, right? Yeah, I really don't feel like we can stop that. It seems like the things that we got so excited by as these higher-functioning primates are these new things that we've created that input us or give us input in a way that our bodies completely not designed to get, like through your earphones, like listening to a podcast, like a computer itself, the ability to watch a video, the ability to go to the movies. It's all, this is the stimuli that's coming at us. It's just, we're not designed for it. But it's reconfiguring itself to be as seductive as possible. Yeah, right. Because it's what it's for, right? It's seduces into itself so that the companies behind it can make money. And because we move constantly into a path of progression. And if you look at the technology, it's always going to move into a stronger, right? We're never satisfied with any particular result in any particular time. We're more choices. Yeah, we want more choices. We want it to be powerful, more fast. We want better graphics. We want bigger booms. That's not realistic enough. Let's take it to the next level. It's in this desire to get these experiences. We're pushing the technology. Like, ultimately, that's just getting push. But then what's interesting to me about that is while all that's pushing ahead, what we get in a digital media environment is we end up retrieving weird medieval values. You get burning, man. And at seeing people doing peer-to-peer stuff, trying to have their local currencies, which they haven't had since medieval times. You see the stuff that gets retrieved and paganism and meshing up roots to heal yourself with things, make your culture, all these things are what we've lost over the last thousand years. That's what the Renaissance and Industrial Age was about, stamping that out and putting everybody on the assembly line at Ford. So it's fun. As we move forward, we get these great old recurrences, which to me is reassuring. It means that we are bringing something with us into this next place. I think it's also that the current system is so flawed that people are willing to try anything and that they're actually actively thinking about what can we do differently? Can we make a local currency? Right. Which is interesting. It's like the two places I've gotten emails from in the last many years of people doing social currencies are either from a place like, it's a good New York where they're doing it because they're just, you know, strange and trying to try something weird and good or like Lansing, Michigan, where there's no GM plan, there's no bank that's gonna give money to a factory to open up to hire people and their desperate. They're like, well, I've got skills. I know how to fix a refrigerator and they have needs. So can't we just make an economy that way? You know, those are the places where people are actually asking where they're ready. I just don't like that readiness seems to involve being just so not just fed up but uncomfortable, you know, that you've got to do something. Yeah. We're clearly going through a change. We're clearly going through a change as a culture that we weren't prepared for and we're sort of making our way as we go along. And there's a lot of mistakes along the way. And the evidence that points to it, one of the best pieces is your story about people getting upset at you because you got mugged and called in the story. You know, and said the location. That's one of the best examples of people like losing a script. Like along the way in this crazy thing that we're doing where we develop currency and then there's things called property values and there's mortgages and equity and all this crazy shit along the way. You know, we're going to have to figure out how to stay human. And when you see like instant failure, like, oh my God, I got mugged. You fucking asshole. Why'd you say the place? Yeah, it's interesting. I mean, it's in every single one of my books and I've written like 12 now. You know, they're all finally about how do we bring humanity into this thing that seems to have lost it. And so I did it for business. I did it for the economy with life ink as the book you're talking about. I did it for Judaism. It was something called nothing sacred. Saying Judaism should be this ongoing conversation. Keep it alive. Keep it human. Don't let it lock down. And now this one, it's weird. Cause it's like I'm kind of admitting that it's what I've got something but realized it myself, but I'm kind of saying, oh my gosh, I'm a humanist. You know, I'm a humanist and technology enthusiast. And how do you be both? Cause so many of the other folks who are sort of pro technology, sort of my posse. They're all sort of talking about not human beings being enabled by technology surpassing us. You know, some singularity or, you know, some moment in the future where computers get smarter than us and then we're not really needed anymore. It might not be that simple. I've been thinking about it a lot lately. And one of the things I think is why do we have this idea of competition and why would the computer enjoy that idea with us? Our idea is based entirely on our biological makeup. Our need to reproduce our need to prove ourselves to our mate, our need to protect against strangers, all these instincts that a computer's not gonna have at all. So the idea of competition with humans for resources or even the idea that survival is imperative and that you have an ego and you can't die. They're not gonna have any of that. So why would they be in competition with us? Why would it just be like a new... It wouldn't be because of them, it'd be because of the way we programmed them. We programmed them. But it's gonna become sentient though. That's really... That they wouldn't do the bad thing because when I keep this around, but it doesn't matter. I don't even, it's not a matter of them being able to do that because I don't even think they will. I don't think they can. It's more a matter of people in the here and now saying that human beings are really only important insofar as we can be the shepherds and organizers of information. Information is the thing that's evolving towards greater states of complexity. And once human beings are no longer the best at making complex information, but computers are the best at it, then there's just no need for humans anymore. With the computers, killers are not, I don't know, but they give us a good time, who knows? But just the whole idea that we should be developing technology with this in mind. I don't know, it negates what I think is an essential for us anyway, centrality of humanity in the equation. Well, I think people don't recognize how much we need each other. We don't recognize how important positive interaction is with other people to your health and the way you feel about life. There's clearly a relationship that people have to each other that we're in denial about. We lock ourselves up in our apartments or in our homes and we shut our car doors and we roll down the window. And that's one of the reasons why people will only give people the finger when they're in the car. You never do that in real life. You feel like you're in some sort of a contained world. And even though you're not even anonymous, you're still like, fuck you, how many people do you give the finger in real life? Like nobody. But once a year, I'll give somebody the finger. Somebody does something crazy and a beep at me. Fuck you. Fuck you. It's beautiful. It's a beautiful thing to do. But that eventually, I think we have to accept the fact that we are only happy when the people around us are happy, when we're in harmony with the people around us. We're not happy when we're in conflict. We're not happy when we're not happy when we fuck people over. I know people that have done bad things and business and bad things ethically and bad, you know. And they're not happy people. But then in the current culture, they can compensate for that with medicine. Yes. It's a good time to press. That gets them through the night. But you have to hope. I mean, I always do, which is a vain hope. I hope that the people who do bad stuff but then make up for it with drugs still feel worse than I do. Not taking those drugs and trying to do good stuff. You don't want to believe that these kind of guys, like I used to see, I won't even say his name. One of those millionaires down at Nick's games. And I always think, I sure hope he's not happy. Yeah, no. That's funny. Which isn't very fair, but well, all he's doing is playing some really crazy game that was around before he was ever born. He just got into it and got really good at it. The game itself has been anise. Just the stock market itself. Just the idea that the wealth of a person can vary day by day because of confidence. You know, confidence, computer consumer confidence in a product can shift and change with recall. And then you watching these numbers go up and down. Like what the fuck are you even talking about? Most of the explanations you see, I watch these business sites and they'll go down and they say, oh, mark it down because of such and such and London. And then it's like by the time that piece comes out, that market's actually back up. And they're already constructing their, let's tie market going back up to another random feature. You know, it's like the explanations after the fact have so little to do with whatever some algorithm decided, it was going to suddenly ultra fast trade something and throw the stock up. You know, it's like at this point it truly is, that's the best place to see humans combating machines. It's on the market where it's like there's human traders competing with these programmed algorithms. And the algorithms are certainly winning the war. And if you look at their screens while they're doing it, it is almost like code. Like the average person who doesn't understand it doesn't know what the fuck the stock market's saying, the symbols and the SAO and this and that and the ones and the zeros, you look at all that, you have no idea what that is. I mean, how is that really different than a computer code that you're reading? I mean, that's essentially like a way that people are tapping into this bizarre system. I mean, it was at one time the sort of the price of something had to do with something. It's like there's a factory. Oh, it's factory went slower today in the rain. The market will go down on that side. It was like real. And I think it's got certainly further and further from whatever is going on in that company or their earnings or the things. It's absolutely abstracted to the point now where people don't even invest in companies. Where you invest in something like when Facebook went public, people bought it like nine in the morning and like nine, 10, they're all in stuff that it hasn't gone up. It's like, wait a minute. I was supposed to, you know, I thought this was my wealth. Triple my wealth. It's like, no, you don't make money on the trade. You're supposed to make money on when you've done it. But now we've got derivatives and derivatives of derivatives and derivatives of derivatives of derivatives on there, which is just a way of kind of shrinking the atmosphere. Explain that for people don't know what that means. So if you buy a stock, I mean, you buy a stock and you hope it goes up and then you sell it in the future. If you'd rather make up that time right now, I can sell it in the future right now. I can basically sell that future sale because I think that sale is gonna be a good one now. I can say, what if I did that trade? I'm gonna have it now. But when am I trading then? I'm trading on an abstraction from what something's gonna be worth at some moment in the future. So it's like, I'm trading on the stock over time. And then someone else will say, well, I'm gonna trade on the abstraction of that. I'm gonna trade on whether or not people think the stock in the future is gonna be worth more next minute than this minute. It's like, well, what's that? So basically what you're doing is you're buying the stock over time, over time, over time. You're creating these things, these derivatives of whatever the original investment was, which is kind of just a derivative of the thing. The pork belly, this derivative of the pork belly, derivatives of the derivatives, derivatives of the derivatives of the derivatives, all ever tighter ways of saying, what is pork belly gonna be worth? You know, on February 3rd. Why is that legal? Well, it's legal because the economy requires it, right? We have a kind of money, right? That has a clock in it. It's lent into existence and has to be paid back more than got lent out. So our economy needs to expand by hooker by crooks somehow. It has to grow in order for it to survive. That's just the way central currency works. They need to find more surface area for the money, more ways for people to buy stuff. So instead of just having, there's not enough of a company to buy. So now we can bet on how that company's gonna do in some future, that we can bet on that, or we can bet on that. But what we're really doing is trying to kind of compress all of this time right onto like the head of a pin, so we can bet on that. So I don't have to sit and wait, you know, 3,000 years for Facebook to be worth something. I can trade on this future worth now. But the whole joke of that is people who are trading that way, they're these computers that are trading faster than them. So I put in one of my super fast crazy, you know, derivative trade, Goldman Sachs sees that order coming in on the computer. They're so close to the exchange, they can execute an order before my order even goes through based on having seen that I was gonna do what I'm gonna do. So they can literally trade in my future. Right, I am in their past. No, that's digital time shift. That sounds like it's cheating. That's like someone running a quick server and their local and then you have like 150 ping. Exactly. That's bullshit. I think so. Well, the sole bullshit. The irony of it is it's gotten so big right during it of trading is bigger than regular trading. Oh my God. So that the New York Stock Exchange actually just got bought. The exchange itself got bought by its derivative exchange. So it's almost just like the proof is in the pudding. It's like the derivative owns the market at this point. But that's when you get, what an interview. How could the government even ever deny how incompetent they are when they allowed that? Like that alone to like someone should just like have a broadcast on national television, you know, one of those town hall sort of events where he sit down with the main people that run the country and go, how the fuck are you allowing this? How, how are you few not fix this? Why would you ever try to do anything else before you fix this? When they made the decision, they genuinely thought it would be good for business. But it doesn't, it's so- It's just in the short term. I will never understand where it all goes. The business people promised them figured out before it got really bad. Oh my God. We figured out before it got really bad. How much bigger is the derivative economy? I don't know exactly. I mean, it seemed, I was looking trying to find out what the sort of trading was. It seemed from what I could tell like that 94% of trades are now derivative because they're in because they're fat. Because there's such a bigger volume. Oh my God. That's insane. No one's gonna like, you're not gonna buy, you know, 10,000 shares of Honeywell today because that's, you know, whatever, $60,000 or something. But you could buy like 10,000 futures on Honeywell because they're really cheap. Oh my God. That is so crazy. So I remember it. 4% of trades are the good looking and the, I'm scared. How many more is I think it's ultra fast too as a whole other, there's sort of two different, two different realms. But yeah, it's huge. They must all be crazy. Everyone involved in that must know that they're bringing on the matrix. They must know that they're the first steps before the digital machine takes over. They must know. They must know that there's no humanity in that stock market shit that's chaos. Well, the thing is, and again, I don't want digital technology to get blamed for this. Right? Because the real operating system they're promoting is not the digital operating system. It's the economic operating system underneath it. It's this 13th century central currency interest bearing that based economy. And none of the guys who I thought would get us out, you know, evoliums with Twitter, Mark Zuckerberg with Facebook, the kids from Google. Right. They're getting, each of them had a real shot. It even Bill Gates at breaking the central economy and flipping things the other way. How do you think they're not going public? Not be, not doing it with venture capital saying, if Google can hack web search, if Facebook can hack social, if Twitter can hack everybody, why can't they, you know, if they're so busy disintermediating all these different things, why doesn't any one of them yet want to disintermediate central banking and say, no, Mr. Chase, we don't actually need you. We're going to do our whole thing through Kickstarter, say. Like one of your didn't want to do things. Yeah. Yeah. That's an interesting point of view. I think they probably would never want to take that stand because they would be killed. I would imagine there's a lot of money and in them not being successful with that quest, you know, to ensure that they're remaining in control. At which, you know, you're doing PayPal. Okay. We're going to let people do individual transactions. That was their, their original model. And they were going to make money on the float. And then the banks came to them and said, oh, you're not allowed to do that. You're not a bank, PayPal kids. You got to be, you know, connected to the bank or you're going to have to be connected to one of us. And that's when, you know, PayPal kind of becomes just part of eBay rather than whatever these crazy guys might have done. And I suppose there's this point, you know, where, you know, innocently these companies, they get bigger and bigger, bigger hoping to do the right things. And then it's like, we're going to, we're not going to let you do this if you don't, if you don't play by our rules. But I also feel like there's companies that if you're willing to go smaller, if you're willing to let it grow a little bit slower, that you can scale up, you can become a big ethical corporation. Yeah. Yeah. I was always wondered why a big corporation couldn't be ethical. Why can't you have a big corporation with a good ideology behind it? You know, but I think it's really because of shareholders, right? Yeah. And shareholders are impatient. Shareholders are there. They're not really there. Right? They're distant. Their shareholders are our people who just want to see a number go up by the next quarter. And if you have to make a number go up by the next quarter, then you're going to have to be thinking about something other than doing good in the world. Yeah. If it is one's and zero's at all cost, yeah, if that's the game you're playing and that you've got shareholders, then you're going to throw you in jail if you don't do that. I mean, that's your fiduciary responsibility. And it's a fascinating thing that a corporation can do something that an individual would be a total piece of shit to do. If it was one person that was involved in this one guy, what he did was he, you know, he gave the loans to the third world company, the countries that they couldn't pay back. He went over there monopolized their natural resources, himself, dug the oil line, himself polluted the river, himself, you know, rifting killed the villagers himself. He'd be like, Jesus Christ, lock that fucking guy in jail. He's making people work for five dollars a week. You know, that guy there he is, there he is holding down, you know, but because it's a corporation, you're like, well, they're making money for their exactly. And how many people who want the one hand, you know, will read, you know, good magazine or something or listen to us and, and, NPR and be all sad about that stuff still has a 401k plan with stocks in the very companies that are doing those things. So who are they? They're the ones who actually own the company, they're the shareholder who wants the thing to go up so they can send the kid to college. You know, I mean, it's it's interesting how circular it gets. So I mean, for how unvirtuous that circle is though, I think unwinding it is just, is just as easy. So it's like, okay, instead of doing these sort of long distance, long term, disconnected investments and mining companies, I'm going to invest my money and where I see it and people I actually know in the place where I am who are trying to do something, you know, and bring it, bring it. If not, if not local, at least, at least into your present, at least into your into your visible reality. Yeah. And it really is the, the pursuit of the end goal of simply only ones and zeros done through a corporate way is really anti-human. I mean, that's the, that's the real anti-human aspect of it. Is that it will engage human suffering as long as it's willing to extract ones and zeros from that. Like it calculates how much human suffering are we willing to cause? How much devastation to the environment or we willing to cause so much, you know, which is why then the question becomes, I mean, in the nightmare scenario, then is you invest that into technology so that your robots, no, they're not in competition with us, but they are playing the corporate program. They have no desire other than to extract. Exactly. And meaning from us. And those computers running algorithms recognize trends in the marketplace before a human could ever see it coming and then round or counter. And meanwhile, as we're making ourselves dumber about technology, we're in this code academy t-shirt, right? One people to learn to code as we become more stupid about our computers, our computers are getting smarter about us, right? Yeah. Doing big data repositories of every, every, every keystroke, right? Every, you know, are there they know, you know, they know stuff about us. They knew some teenage girls pregnant before family did. And you know, they know when kids are going to be gay before they know themselves. You know, it's like, think that they're, they're, they're, they're Scott really smart. And how about the weirdness that comes when you go to a Google, uh, when you Google something or you look for things, certain things online. And then say you go to a YouTube and there's ads for things that you've recently looked at tantalizing ads. Oh, I see you're into jeeps. Why we have a Jeep for sale and it's a new Jeep. And here's a video you can click on. And there A, B testing that, you know, understand which is, which is the every act to last year, girl in Jeep or not going to link you. Girl in, okay. Give them that next time. You have tips. This guy needs to see tits. Like they'll show you everything that you're into. You like you son of a bitch. How do you know by the way? It's weird. And it's just to be getting weird. Accepting it slowly accepting the needle into our vein that pumps in nano cells that eventually replace human tissue. If there's going to be a commercial that's giving an artificial guy, he's going to be saying, why would you want to be natural? You're going to rot. It's not fun. Life gets even better. It's going to be 1000. You buy your little nano bots too. I'm like the most reputable company. You know, the one that you really like and the great user agreement. And then after it's in you, it's like they get bought by Google. And all of a sudden your user agreement shifted. It's like, you know, agree to, you know, do you want to have, you know, do you want to remember your children's names? You know, okay, then time is this new user agreement. Right. Otherwise you get a nose, no data. You have enough for two people, two phone numbers. You're murdered. You're 911. I'm just like your phone. Like your phone. It's not registered. I don't know what it's called 911. That'll be the same thing. Well, you should have paid your bill. Mr. Rushcoff. I don't know why you didn't want to pay your bill. Now here you are with no recourse. Yeah. You're going to look at a shiny guy from the future. He's 1000 years old and he looks great. But again, it's going to be all artificial. Yeah. But again, it's not, it's not with all that artificialness. It's not necessarily, although it maybe is. It's not necessarily the technology that's the problem in this equation. You're, it's the company that owns the technology. Right. But ultimately what's getting done, the technology is getting pushed. That seems to be right. The case in every single situation. And ultimately at the top of the execution food chain, where you look at like what is being done at the end level. That's really the game changer. The technology constantly increases. And with every, you know, overtake with every, you know, new, gigantic invention and bundles of money that go along with it. And all the people that got fucked over at the end of the day, the technology keeps moving forward. And it keeps getting stronger and stronger and stronger. It does. But it's not just stronger though. It's, it's fundamentally different. I mean, that's the thing that McLuhan was trying to bring up. And Marshall McLuhan, the media theorist, he was looking at, that the different environments, the different media, different kinds of technology create. So, you know, fire had a change, had a media environment, had a technological environment with fire now, you know, people could then go live further north and colder places. And little apes, you know, who were smart enough to have fire, could get away from big dumb apes who, you know, couldn't travel to chase them. You know, we got different. Right? So all sorts of things happen because it's something like fire or the invention of text or the invention of text changed. Well, for me, it changed the way we look at time, right? Because now I can write something now that I'm going to be accountable for later. So we can have contracts with text. We got history. We got the Judeo-Christian line of thought. We got law and ethics. You know, we got, we got the calendar. You know, then, you know, that all went along and we developed. Then we get the printing press. and we get the clock. Right now the clock all of a sudden we go, oh, wow, now we can actually break down the Dan to these little pieces. We put one up at the town square and that's when time became money. That's when it's like, OK, now you can work for an hour for me. Instead of making a thing that you're connected to and selling it to me, now you can work for the hour or two hours or three hours. We got a standard. And now we get the digital media environment, you know, which is just as different as the industrial age media environment that in the clock was from the printing press, from the from written text from from from even fire. You know, and in the digital media environment, there's this. Uh, it's not just more tech. It's it's more it's more of a sense of of moving through time and a choice to choice to choice to choice way. You know, where we just have more choices than we know what to do. We spend more time processing choice itself than we do getting the things that we've chosen. You know, it's like the the call waiting is almost like the typical kind of digital choice. It just ended. I'm talking to this level and I've got a call waiting. What do I do? You know, just to be put in that just to be put yourself in that in that interruptive state is very digital because you want to have the choice because that person wants to reach you. But how, you know, how that interrupts what, uh, what used to be a more continuous way of just of moving through life. Yeah, it, it certainly gives us more options than we're naturally designed to handle and the more people have on their Facebook page, the more likely they really have zero connection to those people. The, the idea, I mean, like, like we're, we're designed for Dunbar's number. And 150 people, yeah, you get, you get 5,000 people on your Facebook page. Who the fuck does that mean? Who are you talking about? Yeah. Well, you're going on the marketing. And you know, it's good. But what kind of interaction are you really having? Well, it's not the same. It's not a human to human interaction. The other weird thing about Facebook for me again is how it compresses time. So it's like, they're these people from like second and third grade. I'm finally, you know, 45 whatever you're away from that. And then it's like, you know, two weeks ago, hi, I'm Marcy from second grade. It's like, oh, God, I'd finally I'd left that behind me. It's on Marcy. I don't know who she is. It's right. Why was it who she relates to? It's just, it was in the past for a reason. Right. And now it's here. But then on the front end, I've got the computer on the other side calculating everything about my keystrokes. So they know my future. Right. They know who's going to be pregnant, who's going to be gay, who's going to be this going to be that. So it's like, okay, so it was like my past is all in here. And now my future is all in here. And everything's just sort of crushed in on me there. I don't feel, I don't feel autonomous anymore. I don't feel like I have agents. I don't feel in charge. I can't get away from anything. And I can't actually be moving towards anything with a sense of free will. But can you though? I mean, you're sort of in control of how much you interact with it, how much you change it. You did. That's why I dropped Facebook. You dropped it. Yeah. I was just like that. Too much. Yeah. But you still use Twitter. Yeah. What was it? Why is Facebook problematic? Facebook is a problem that, well, real problem with Facebook is I'm not in charge of what I do on Facebook. Why is that? Because Mark Zuckerberg can use me or my likeness in an ad of something that I don't even know what it is. Oh, what did you say? So you can't do that anymore though. I thought. Oh, really? He undid that? Yeah. I think that was something that wasn't supposed to happen supposedly or they backtracked about that. They do. They go two steps forward, one step back, two step forward, one step back. It's sort of an ever-evolving user agreement. I mean, where the part that I had gotten concerned about was, you know, I'm on there as an author, right? I'm on there by my book. Love me. I like my ideas. I can't do that. I can't solicit the likes of other people, of readers, of people who I'm supposedly advising about this stuff, of especially about sort of media ethics and integrity, I can't invite them to like my page when that very active liking is making them vulnerable to marketing that's going to be passing through me beyond my control. Yes. And no, because they're also providing you with this excellent connection with all these people that's available through Facebook, which not as limited as Twitter with a hundred and forty cares. No, I'm willing to pay for the privilege to reach those people. Well, I'm not willing to have them and their likenesses used to represent things. I don't think that they understand that what liking makes someone vulnerable to. You know, I don't feel... I mean, on some sense, this is patronizing, I guess. What I'm saying is I think I know stuff about this technology that they don't... If they all knew really how this worked, if they all knew the implications of what they were doing, then I would say, let's go for it. But ultimately, the worst consequences is what marketing they're going to be marketed to. They're going to be represented. So their image would then be put on something. say let's let's go for it but i don't know if you're worse consequences is what marketing they're gonna be marketed to be represented so their image would then be put on something oh so if they're no i'm pretty sure they i'm 100% sure they don't they drop that thing of using their photos and advertising yeah like you're not going to profit they they're not allowed to just take your photos and just uh just go ahead and photos no they're not going to do it with your photos that you're talking about generous you're talking about the photo the photo the photo thing they bought no no i'm not talking about using but for you were saying like using it for i'm saying that's sponsored stories and how they use people in a sponsored story at least the day that i quit at that point it would nothing oh you could turn that off but yeah that that that there's things like that that are on but there's ways of turning them off yeah i'm confused you get it but what is a sponsored story what do you mean people don't know i feel like most people don't know and just to be there it just didn't seem like and it also because i so don't trust who they are and what they're what they're about i don't trust them as a company the way i want to trust the kinds of companies i like get bigger and bigger and deeper and deeper into my lives and eventually put probes in my brain and do not trust them because Justin Timberlake played them in a movie is that part of it the other one no he played the other one he played uh Shawn uh um you put a good guy no he played just what's the my space story and how much of it is about coke and horse because i would have with those guys they just take that money and pretty crazy but if you're gonna if you're gonna take facebook if you're gonna say you i don't trust facebook you can't trust twitter you can't trust google you can't trust any of the stuff you use i'm aware right now i'm aware of the ways that twitter is broadcast i feel in control of how i'm tweeted and retweeted i don't always worse though because they're actually to the point where you you try to go back in time in your timeline you can't they're cut they're gets a cutoff point where you you can't download your own tweets unless you know the exact link in the end of giving you your history uh they said i still can't do it on mine and that's the same with like twit picks or all these photo ones like some of them now you say that so which is okay you're saying that you want your if you're going to do tweets you want to be addition for your free for your free tweeting you want them to maintain an archive of you and everyone else well i'm i personally i personally don't have a problem with it but what i'm saying is that that's kind of more ridiculous to me than facebook the fact i can't even access stuff that i've that i mean you can't totally say that i wish i was so i'm concerned about i mean this is what in the book i call it digifrenia you know i feel like the problem with with digital for most people is not this idea of information overload there's too much stuff coming at them but they're they can't maintain more than one online persona simultaneously there's too many sort of individual instances of us and if you're going to have different instances of yourself you know even your email inbox is some is an instance of a sort if you're going to have all these different different things out there filling up or interacting you want to be damn well sure that you're in charge of each one of them you know and i don't feel i felt like facebook was now doing things on my behalf i was step of control well you make a very good point in that having more than one version of yourself comes very problematic especially if you're involved in any like real i mean i'm sure you probably interact with quite a few people every day and to do that on twitter's semi-manageable do it to do it when you can but to do that on twitter and then you have to hop over to facebook too it's like you should have one portal no one portal at least one that's one that i was always said you know because i don't really i didn't go to facebook much on i go there and they'd be like some relative you know all i just heard of your mom's passing it was like six months have gone by before i found that message you know i want to uh it can solve them or whatever um it's it's it's just such a it's for me it was such an awful interface anyway that i was just losing losing stuff there but yeah it's uh i don't think it's just has to do with oh i get more uh at correspondence from other people so i've got to i've got limited more than others i think it really has to do with um well if anything it's at least i'm a canary in the cage for what's coming for everybody else i mean you know people only used to get one or two emails and now it's just streaming in for everybody yeah if you send me something on facebook i don't read it it's a just to let everybody know because they pile up i don't have time to read them so i'm with you in a certain way i still use facebook to put up links but it's connected to my twitter and i'm pretty cognizant of that so when i put a tweet up on when i put a link up on facebook i make sure it's short enough to fit into a tweet yeah with with a link at least with with twitter i mean you you understand what you're putting out you put out this little 140 things it went to your people and those words are out there right it's like with with a tool like facebook um you don't really have the same sense of of ownership over what's going on and you don't have you don't actually have it right your picture is used Douglas went into starbucks just now yeah i could turn it off so everyone should turn it off you know so right so again you know it's like i feel like it's it's a useful it's a useful tool but it's it's uh it's just part of the untrustworthiness of a good portion of the net yeah well i could see that with someone else being control of the the interaction and someone else being control ultimately of like when you saw a user agreement you have all this information you just sort of put up online you're you're trusting it to them and then turn their marketing to you i mean that's it's really clean relationships as long as they don't fuck you but yeah yeah i mean there's a point at which you know i'm all i'll let netflix and i to whoever's in behind my tv remote i mean now they know all that stuff right i mean i'll let them craft commercials around me i'll i'll i'll accept in this in this little uh arrangement we have with business i'll accept anything in coming you know should but don't use me for your outgoing in other words once you're taking the person's identity and then saying oh you know how let's down the street like this uh sit come to you should watch that and then my when i'm watching is getting broadcast to them or what they think i'd be watching that's where it starts to be like oh now i'm being disempowered now i'm being taken i think yeah it's it's a great facebook is one of the most popular websites online and it's also one of the best ways to waste time like you can waste a day easily just looking up people that you used to have sex with you know just find them and go what is a spitch up to oh my goodness look how fat you got you know you could do that all day you could do that all day that could be you know entertaining and you're not getting shit done it's right it's like it's like that i tried to use twitter um one of the things that i do with it is when and where whenever someone sends me something fascinating in a link i retweet it um and because of that you become like a portal for cool shit and people know that if they send me cool shit all retweeting and so you get all this cool shit just starts coming to you when you sort of have that idea and then you send it they send it to you and then it becomes this really exponentially expanding thing where you know you you have this like a radio channel or like an information dump what percent of the tweets that you get do you think you what pass on um it's not that high percentage because it's not always you're a thing filter well i'll have to look at it you know i mean if it's really interesting i'll look at it but sometimes i'll send you something like oh dude that's nonsense like what do you talk did you see where this came from like you read the link no no that is not big foot and that guy's refrigerator shut the fuck up man stop that but that makes you reliable reliable filter yeah you can't just retweet things but i do read occasionally if someone sends something really preposterous i will retweet it just to see how people react you know there's um or if someone if people get mad at me i'll retweet it just to see how they react it's just it's just we live in strange times and it's uh the the the the twitter interface is a very bizarre one the idea that you only give 140 characters and people abuse the shit out of that sometimes people send me like 30 tweets in a row explaining something to me like dude stop well now you know it's all the the do you know things like snapchat you played with that or no what is that the one where you you take a picture and it like you can send it but it dissolves in like three seconds or five things all right so it's like kids apparently i mean this is the dark secret kids are leaving Facebook you know the demographic the younger like you know they are in the 16 it's like falling totally off and they're doing things like snapchat because they don't want they don't want to be putting everything they're doing on their permanent record i mean finally sure like it shows them when they're posting it only lasts for three minutes and then you see you screenshot it though and then you say they don't reupload it well he knows but if you screenshot it it at least tells them that they've i mean so it's been defeated but if you screen save it they at least the person who sent you the thing knows that you did that they've given given that control but yeah but just the quest for truly uh you know july present based non archival still yeah but you know what's because when we were silly we got to do you know working a lot of the 7-11 it's like and there was no camera in the back either it was really just it would happen in the 7-11 stays at 7-11 you know now it's like it's every single silly thing they did if they didn't post about it their friend posted about it so it's still up there and it's like may as well be petche you know a patch into the side of the the parthenon not only that but the the ideas behind what you can and can't do or enforce by these archaic laws that were written when none of this digital technology was available so because of that he get a lot of weird shit happens like there's a one girl who got charged with child pornography because she was sending photos of her naked body to boys in her class and so the cops arrested her and charged this young girl she's 15 years old with child pornography selling pictures yeah they I mean you talk about losing the scripts that's that's really losing the script for life I mean that is that is the nutty a shit ever you're you you found a child pouring a kingpin right there now it's like she happens to be a child yeah it's like you know exactly zero tolerance son it doesn't matter if she's a child but dad it's it's her vagina doesn't matter son she's a criminal she's victimizing she's for patient is rape dark hunger she's feeding the dark hunger son we need to discourage this in a big way solitary confinement yeah but that's really just a temporal lag hopefully yeah I believe so I think that our laws then catch up are we I mean and also I mean some sense a lack lack of privacy could help that along too it's like if you know if Google camera is finding like tens of thousands of people who are just smoking joints in the street of every american city you know at some point they have to go okay let's just let people smoke pop let gays get married I would say yes except the smoke pot thing there's money in enforcing it the biggest issue more money in enforcing sure being in selling it no but it would be to different people and you have to pry it from the hands of the people that are making making money by keeping it illegal whether it's the private prison industry whether it's the prison guard unions whether it's different pharmaceutical companies that would stand to lose profits what I there's going to be a bunch of people that are trying to stop anything any change especially changes in legality because there's a big business in blocking people up for shit I know so they're going to have to maintain an illegal population right well we're to stay alive they're going to have to arrest more and more if they're going to have corporate growth yeah greater greater percentage of americans to be in prison every single year until it's an asymptotic herb and there's like one guy left that becomes a really interesting scenario if marijuana does become legal and you can trade on the future of marijuana what the fuck man I want to does have it there are some stocks that that are marijuana stocks really yeah that people trade how is that possible well they're the companies that I guess that already laid out a marijuana strategy or anybody for look at that percentage of the US prison population that are non violent drug offenders in the 1980 and then in 2012 and then 2012 it's 25 percent yeah the war on drugs folks they're winning more people are in jail I guess is I'm in their winning I don't know I'm still a private prison system it's good for the economy the whole thing is fucking bananas it's just the fact that in this day and age you still can't make a logical argument as to why certain things are legal and illegal certain things that are legal which are devastating to your health and then when you find out that information's been withheld and that companies may have known about certain risks no one seems to go to jail if anything happens people get fined a little bit but if that was an individual a person that did that oh my god there would be a horrible human being a personal person one person is responsible for all the deaths that came from aspirin alone you would want to head what's whether there's some there's some ways to get more conscious of it though because it's all of us right it's all of us who are part of that system or owning that corporation as shareholders or whatever and they're these things like um if you've ever seen a slaveryfootprint.org no it's a fun website you got to do when you're feeling good about yourself though what it does is um you put in everything that you own if you have a car or not where you live and this and that and it calculates how many slaves are working for you right now oh my god and like with like whatever getting that yeah I get them a libdenham for your iPhone or whatever it is or you know losing their fingers and some some other real thing the licked in them well lived in them lived in them yeah it's a metal is it rare rare metal wow I never hold that one I've just recently heard a cold tan that's the stuff that they get in a Congo for selling yeah something that's really good with an activity yeah something to do with a electronic connectivity in the use of your cell phones it's I've found it to be so bizarre and one of the more bizarre things in life that the most complex stuff that we use like cell phones like computers that they very base of it the origins there's a mine there's a whole other problem but there's also human suffering yeah which is why I don't like the idea that my computer which could really do everything I needed to do is render it obsolete by changes in operating systems that really are unnecessary except to sell another computer you know the difference does not but I think necessary because they're trying to continue to improve the product and they're continuing to add more functionality and I stopped leaving that at least at the rate at which they do I sometimes feel like there's a but used to be sort of windows and intel that you know windows will make a complex operating system so that you'd have to get the next intel chip and then intel would create a tweak on that that makes you need the next you know the next windows operating system they sort of would leap frog each other and it feels like that with them yeah you know your your yeah your iPhone does better things now than three iPhones ago but what about all these iPhones in the garbage and all these people who lost all this stuff they amount of time compressed into one of these one of these devices is really intense you know that that at least one of our our our goals when we're developing new technologies and new technology pathways should be well what's the one that's going to actually require the sales of the least of the fewest amount of computers I don't know many people are going how could we sell how could we need to sell less computer so that we're you know people don't have to throw out these old lines have you seen those photos of Cuba of the old cars yeah because Cuba doesn't get new cars they have cars from like the 50s and the shits on 60s and the yeah but a lot of gorgeous yeah the beautiful but they do drive like shit that's the problem if you drive like a modern day BMW and then you go back to one of those stupid shavies from the 1950s those things are dog shop really they break terrible they handle like a horse on roller skates they're ridiculous cars they're so stupid so you gotta be thrown into rebel without a cause today and you hopped in that car it would not be that it wouldn't be the experience we're thinking they're dog shit they're terrible you could with a Prius you could easily get away from some guy in a 55 shabby there's no way you keep up there's like those things are terrible they can't take corners the brakes of this stupid drum brakes I mean it might as well have a rock that you throw out that's attached to a rope to slow your car still you take a you take a 57 t-bird over a segue yes over just because it could rain okay but I like the idea that you know they've managed to recycle these cars and keep them working and keep them running and it's it's really cool to see and aesthetically it's beautiful it's gorgeous when you see a modern street in this day and age and you see these beautiful like and you could tell they're proud people because these are shiny cars I mean they're painted nice and they're done well and they're restored well or at least maintained well I mean I don't know how many miles some of these cars have on them but they do look it does look amazing I know and there is that you know I feel like there's a hunger for stuff not just 50s but also sort of 60s madman period that the nostalgia for that is sort of that's right before this digital age started that's like the height of the TV agents you know putting satellites in space there was that innocence you know it's funny because people look at these kind of shows and say oh you know aren't they you know it's about it's about their you know decadence and I'm like now it's about their innocence you know they believe in there they got you know what's that you know and you look around LA it's like everybody's got hey what we feel it in their house and trying to get those old GE refrigerators with this sort of rounded covers you know there's that longing for it's like the industrial age just feels so real you know it's a solid when people made stuff you know it wasn't just kind of printed right yeah there's that that also like when you see those cars there's like such a human element and that old stuff like even like 60s muscle cars like those are sort of like human created works of art as opposed to you know you look at like a new monster or something like that a real modern car and they like looks like something that just like came out of a machine they screwed it together and it came out of a machine you look at like a 69 Chevy that doesn't like a Chevy Camaro 69 Camaro that's that's something somebody fucking screwed together there's some men working behind that there's some people put tires on on the wheel and bolted it down in place there's some guys who work some wrenches there's no doubt about it you look at that thing that's a mechanical creation it's not a computer creation and we're slowly moving towards the Prius and I'm fine with computer creation aesthetic if it means that we don't have to work right yeah but it's like though they didn't it's like so they get rid of all those guys screw it in the the screws and it's like so they just let them stay in their houses no this guy's up to pick up new work that's the whole thing too it's like so now we have the big problem in America is unemployment right but I'm talking about getting jobs jobs jobs for people who wants a job I don't want a job you don't want a job people don't want jobs people want the stuff that you get when you have a job they want the money that you get for having a job but they don't want the jobs right so meanwhile we've got more than enough stuff we're burning food every week so keep market prices high we're tearing down bank of America's tearing down houses in California because they're in foreclosure you can't just let someone live in it it's gonna bring prices down they tear them down why do they tear them down because they're they're would have to sell at distressed prices that would then lower prices of other properties that they're trying to keep up well it would cost them more I mean if you own 10 houses in a town and one isn't going to sell you'd rather tear it down than right and if the bank comes along and creates some sort of a program to give houses to needy people then it's gonna lower the real estate values of the of the mortgages that they've invested in that are already teetering so they can't do that so charity itself becomes unprofitable well it's never been quite profitable that's like less than an incredible what if we figured out that okay we only need rather than having everybody work 40 hour weeks which is based on a clock of the industrial age how much can we have people working at weekend what if people really have to work that much for us to have everything we want right what if 10% of people could work you know two days a week and we get everything went so you go in you do your work I'm gonna do my work in April 2007 you know and then I'm gonna go again and march what if it got that you really didn't need everybody working all the time for everybody to have stuff we couldn't deal with that not because we don't have technologies to do that we can't deal with it because we don't have an economy we don't know how to divvy out the spoils you know the reason that you have a job is so that you can be entitled to a share of what's actually an abundance but because there's not enough jobs for people we got to rip up stuff and ruin stuff that's in abundance right you know this is we can't give it out there's also the social issue of not having jobs when people don't feel like they've made their own way or pulled their own weight they feel un they feel right well that's what we've got a well-fairy yeah but you got to replace employment you know with work you know employment is a new invention employment again industrial age we used to work for each other in ourselves we only got jobs when we got the clock when we could work on the clock then we're employed right but we don't have to be employed in order to work in order to have meaning if you don't have to have your job you don't stop so you just have to find a new niche into the system you have to find a new thing you can contribute to your to the world yeah I completely agree with that too many people find sort of a pre-existing way to interact and they don't create their own way to interact and in doing so you oftentimes miss on one of the best things which is accomplishing things whether it's accomplishing starting your own restaurant and keeping it open and you know having a car a shop that only fixes a certain type automobile that you really love to work on you know when you can figure out a way to do something that you actually have a passion for and it's like that the the old cliche it stops becoming work it just it becomes you know you don't really have a job you have a thing that you love right and you're in flow yeah but how many people have that well you can't have it in this kind of economy you can't have it when you're this kind of education system you can't have it but about just real naturally dull people that need to be pushed in a direction well yeah but you know so not everyone has to be the one that figures out how to do a new method of biodynamic Rudolph Steiner farming on there organic community supported agriculture plant someone can just go there and plant you know plant carrots it's also the issue of how human beings are raised in the first place which is so huge and not really addressed the the reason why some of these people fall into these mindless jobs it's because never along the line of they've been stimulated never along the line by their family by the school systems by their environment by their atmosphere by their you know their fellow knuckleheads in their community they're all just surrounded by people who are either like minded or less or you know or supported and they're you kind of fucked and then when something comes along that eliminates that job for that guy that robot job when he was 45 years old and 50 years old he has to start again and sort of reignite some sort of passion curiosity or die off like a dinosaur and it's hard too because he was like in the thing he did you know if you're a toll collector right you know and you get better and better at it and then you start you know then test see how many people you can make eye contact with when you get in the tolls and how many lives can you change with that I I mean gosh you can be that you could live the Bodhisattva life as a toll collector you know they take that away from him and it's not just that he can't be retrained he doesn't have motivation you know know what I mean it's not that he's not his fault that they broke his heart yeah they should have a show where a guy's a toll collector and just see how he interacts with people and then give him projects like today you're just going to casually mention your penis and let's see how many people freak out back to your reality roots yeah that'd be funny you're doing you have to you're going to do a toll collector you got to do it pretty fast yeah well it's it's a weird way to experiment how people interact when they don't have to it when it's really quick you know how many people treat you like shit how many people like how you doing what's going on everything cool all right man you take care you know this you're going to get a broad variety of the way people interacting I think that would kind of fascinating it wouldn't like hold up as a series but maybe it is in a one hour special the toll guy yeah yeah yeah just have a guy and you have to do like break it up with like we'll sit down yeah little chairs and then have a discussion about the last couple of ones that we've seen and what it really means people love that fast track thing now though they don't want to pay it totally want to put a little thing up there they just go through like New York is one of the weirdest scenarios ever because somewhere along the line they just decided to make people pay to get to the city it used to be that they were paying to get the bridge but they paid that fucking thing off a long time ago every bridge got paid off a long time ago but the revenue is so intoxicating they just kept with it we can't understand that in California because we don't really have a plate we can't get anywhere those bridges were built but now they got it all be rebuilt they rebuilt us I understand Hudson Bridge they were building it building in billing it and by the time they finished they had to start rebuilding it again it's just that that many years two reasons why that's nonsense the big one is is the dumbest way to make traffic you have a spot where everyone has to stop on the way into the city that is so stupid when you are going from long island to Manhattan that is the most a maddening shit to do at 8 30 in the morning you want to fucking kill somebody because it's so stupid you're maybe any stop at your little box you should make people pay either either you could justify the construction of the bridge the maintaining of the bridge but they should pay for it through their taxes and that's it there shouldn't be a spot we have to stop because that's fucking dumb the only reason why you would want to do that is you want to check cars for bombs or nutty people or you're just trying to discourage yeah well I guess it's a very strange hundreds hundreds of scourge get people onto l ir and do rapid transit the way gone and candid and discouraged people from coming into the city because the the easier it is to get in the city the more this traffic sucks and it sucks already it's terrible you can't fix the suck that way you can make more suck $20 give you the green light do you live in Manhattan no do you live in New York live in Westchester County I lived in New Rochelle for a little bit yeah yeah Eastings on Hudson oh yeah it's um that's a that's a beautiful that's nice that a whole Westchester has got some nice spots yeah it does it's a little snooty some of it so there's a couple of towns in Westchester that kind of retained some yeah little bit it's a reality you know it's not just Westchester is a weird it is though you'll be in a neighborhood where you're seeing these mansions with these giant lawns and then you'll go half a mile and you're in the projects and you'll have a lot of projects so much little more Jersey Jersey ask yeah drive through oranges that it really you get that sense I mean most of Westchester's pretty pretty affluent at this point you know but you know it's not as affluent as Manhattan Manhattan's the most affluent in the area right well yeah I mean you if you're inside Bloomberg's bubble if you made it in there somehow you know when you when an apartment was a million now you've got $10 million a real estate or something but um you know anywhere else didn't quite it's not quite that those places are madness those multi million dollar apartments you like the way of living in a big city like that is so alien it only exists in Manhattan where you have so many people living in apartments and it creates it's a different community and in the sense it's more connected than than Los Angeles's well it is I mean most things about it are are kind of more consonant with our era and our digital economy and all that it's a better carbon footprint to stack people up like that that they've everybody having lawns and fertilizer and whatever else they get in the suburb so I mean it's it's good on on most of those levels it's just New York itself is so crazy expensive you know through God knows what sort of real estate shenanigans are done that's what sort of then for me colors the experience of you know urban joy there you know no one is an artist or you know a writer regular of regular means could live there yeah that's where it gets really crazy we see a small apartment is like 3,000 bucks a month and you're like okay that's just nuts that means a guy who makes 50,000 dollars a year has to give up three quarters of his income to pay his fucking rent that's nuts right so it's like I mean I don't know if you need crime to make it better but you know if you go back to the income to pay his fucking rent that's nuts right so it's like i mean i don't know if you need crime uh... to to make it better but you know you go back to that that era of you know boss gia you know he couldn't live in manhattan you know no no no no the folks from then or the Ramones or well they were queens actually but uh... uh... you know war hauler any of his do you remember forty seconds treat the real yeah but that's a thing though it's like it's also it was criminal it was you know it was awful terrifying yeah it was terrifying and yeah there's certain some part that wax is nostalgic but that's not a good old days that you really want to return to either it's just like how can you have a new york that works and it's still artistic and alive and vibrant and fertile and not have people you know getting stabbed in the subway yeah and how can you have so many rich people living together because you have to be lived there i mean it's it's really difficult to pull off living in manhattan if you don't have at least you know of upper middle class income so yeah it's a strange strange place unlike any place in this country you know there's no place in the country that's so overvalued and you get a decent apartment in san francisco for half of what you'd spend on apartment in manhattan although san francisco now it's gotten worse something yeah one of those lists well a lot of the worst there's some places outside of san francisco that are just insane like where near uh stanford uh they have um i think it's called atherdin it's the highest real estate in the country uh and you you look at these people that i know have this house up there is it's an acre and a half it was worth fifteen million dollars it's like what are you talking about it doesn't make any sense but it's like everybody in that neighborhood is all they're all tech people they all they all made insane amounts of money in the various tech bubbles and booms over the years and all that google monies up there and all that apple monies up there and there's just a lot of fucking people that have incredible amounts cash up there so real estate they need houses this is what they live so real estate through the fucking roof right like you will look if you look at like i i enjoy doing that sometimes like hmm could i live in phoenix let's see what you know what the the neighborhoods are like in phoenix and i'll go look at real estate in phoenix for goof you look in atherdin and what's eleven million dollars you like get the fuck out of here that's eleven million dollars well they gotta be you know bike distance from facebook or river yeah it's an it's an amazing bubble of money it is a strange one of really strange one because again you go mile over and we stopped at this windy's and it was like a really sketchy windy's like really like this place is kind of fucking dirt baggish to be a mile away from a 15 million dollar house like it's so strange well there's no middle anymore yeah that sort of got got spun out in the spin cycle at the end of the yeah this industrial age year well i mean you can't say there's none but i mean there's certainly a diminished very little yeah very little but you know like you're saying though if if that lower 98% or 99% whatever it is uh gets fed up enough it'll network with itself rather than trying to get something down from the top it's not even fed up it seems like we only act when we forced act yeah we we need a desperation we need you know we need to have no options and then we move into this new stage of understanding what the fuck the real problem it is but that's and that's different and again that's that's the whole point of being in the present of presidentism is that instead of going on some long marks on some other 20th century movement sort of this eyes on the prize and just the mean justify the means battle to the future thing we go screw all that we just want it now we're gonna just do it that's what was so encouraging about the occupy movement think what are your demands what do you want from us we don't want anything from you you know it's like we're not going to state our demands we're gonna actually do this thing you know and that's where again but do what thing though there's a real issue right to occupy the world in which we live i look i like in the occupy movement to white blood cells like they recognize there's an issue and they gather around it and you know it's like it calls attention to the issue and you know they're but they they're gathering around a six-pot i mean that they know there's something wrong here and so everybody's like like this is a spot it's all going down right there right and then they try to educate they do teach in and learn about stuff a lot of a lot of people know more about these issues now than did before and they see it as a super long-term project i mean this year they did occupy debt and the debt jubilee so what they're doing is buying pennies on the dollar the debt of people like you've got you know health bills they can't pay and all that because it's just owned by credit companies uh-huh so they buy the debt and just believe it wow so it's kind of cool you know big take ten dollars and believe like a thousand bucks of debt and it's well worth it that's interesting that's a great idea and i think that's a great community idea there's a lot of people out there that have a spare five dollars or a spare ten dollars you wouldn't even think about but if you get enough of those people you can enact some real change and really help people um what do you think is like what what is the best way besides podcasting besides books and besides having actual conversations with people where you explore these ideas what is what is the best way to get people to understand that true happiness really does come from a sense of community what one of your interviews that i saw with you you were talking about your youth and you were talking about living in a place where you all shared a large backyard and it became sort of a community thing where everybody would get together and have like a barbecue and the so yeah so well then queens and we had it was like one barbecue pit at the end of the block that was just on all weekend that's when we were lower middle class my dad got a better job we leave queens we go to large month scars daily you know these westchester towns yeah and it's like you don't barbecue with the Jones is any more barbecue against the Jones it's like every single family it's got its own like 300 hard webber grill in the backyard and no one would think you know it's like you can invite someone over i suppose but it's not that barbecue and was this solo family activity and i was thinking of well as far as the grill companies concern that's better they'd rather everyone have a grill and nobody grill together because then they get to sell more grills you know but what it's like i've looked in my uh not the neighborhood i'm in now but never i almost went to it's like everybody on the block had a snow blower i'm thinking that's really weird there's like ten houses with ten snow blowers down many snow blowers do you need for a driveway it's like that every two houses share one or every four houses share one yeah but what if you want to just get up in the morning and you don't want to talk to mr johnson see if you can use the snow blower first because you got to be a work at seven thirty you don't want to talk to mr johnson is the thing he's a dishbag maybe you should be able to have your own snow blower maybe there isn't any dishbag does he's working overtime to save up for that guy that's no more easily right what yeah well there's not a lot of people that are happy out there is the rose quote that most men leave lives of silent desperation yeah today loud desperation and marshmak luens quote that humans are the sex organs of the machine world and that has this desire to keep up with the Joneses you got to pay for those webber grills you know as the disconnect so yeah i walk in a room now and i feel it feels different when i see people sitting on their devices you know you used to walk into a room with a bunch of guys you walk in here and you you guys have devices but you can feel the family you know you can feel you guys are on an animal level in touch with each other's vibe right on whatever that subtle level is and i go into rooms now and i don't feel the same group dynamic group presence right i used to even teach in a class you know twenty years ago versus going into one today when everybody's you know tweeting what's going on in there it's just a different i'm not saying it's worse although i think it's worse um a qualitatively different experience they have more choice over what they do they can divide their attention the way they want they have more autonomy over all these things but they're losing um and maybe it's out there on the net somewhere maybe by the time we're in the great great second life we reconnect but they're they're missing a certain subtle animal contact that we don't yet fully understand maybe it just seems to be mitigated like maybe we need to just uh understand and explore like the ethics of uh when to and not to use cell phones when to and not to connect and encourage more connection and like let people know they're like look that is an impulse just like washing your hands to my turn just like there's a there's a like a lack of satisfaction in the um satisfying or the uh the completion of that impulse the check it's twitter you check your twitter check your twitter again what are you getting out of that why why not pay attention to the person who's in front of you you're doing it to like a nutty person washes their hands on yeah i mean that's the whole that's the whole reason i write you know my books are the book before this one's called program or be programmed and the idea was just to give people sort of the ten biases of digital media like they're really good for doing things far away they're not good for doing things with someone in the same room you know because they're there you know just really simple stuff like that or this time idea you know that's which is that digital technologies asynchronous it doesn't live in time so don't you try to keep up with it right because it's not in your temporal universe it's in its own you know and you can make it conform to yours but certainly don't run and chase it it's that it's kind of it's at this point it's education it's just having the conversation letting people i i'm that's the whole thing if they become more aware than you know than they stand a chance i i certainly think a lot of these things are sort of snuck up on us and we could all do with a lesson or at least an idea of how to manage them more more right more humanly exactly and the trick is for people not to see and this has been my whole thing not to see the messenger of this as the one who's saying oh this stuff so bad oh whoa the children are turning more violent you know that whole kind of PBS ish hand-ringing thing that so many writers are out there it's like are you for technology or against it you know and if you're not just going yeah yeah yeah go business they think you're against it and it's like no no i'm for technology i'm just against the way we're happened to be using it right now i don't think there's a any i don't think it's a coincidence that people are i think fundamentally less happy now i think than they have been in a long time if you look at the amount of people that are on medication for happiness and it's really what it is and if you're an antidepressant essentially you're on a medication for happiness and whether or not that's because of a chemical imbalance that you suffer from or because of the fact that your job sucks and your life sucks and you just you're just filled with suck every day and you're well for whatever it is if you look at those numbers one or two things is happening probably both one we're getting fucked over by these pharmaceutical companies and they're they get unethical doctors to prescribe that shit with impunity and there's that for sure but then there's also like people are not connecting to this world they don't they don't feel whole they don't feel sad and if you're in great pain it's better to only be in moderate pain or mild pain if you can take a pill i mean what's hard to do is to get people to go oh well actually that pain is is kind of a good sign because it means that we all need to kind of work here to change right change the way the world is and and and take some action the pain is trying to get you to change right the pain is trying to get you to avoid the pain and you should use your logic to say well what's causing this pain with this disconnect i'm not i'm not emotionally satisfied i'm not connecting with my fellow humans i'm missing something right unless you're up against the wall there's nothing you can do to change your circumstances and wish you're gonna take the pill well no it's that's the that's the danger there but i do think the more people can start to get in touch you know for me it's these rhythms you know the rhythms of life you know the 28 day lunar cycle on the fact that each week of a lunar cycle your neurotransmitters change right so you have an acetylcholine week followed by a serotonin week followed by a dopamine week followed by an orphanair for a week it's like every month is one boom boom boom boom if you know that then you're like oh this is the dopamine week that's why i feel like this or i'm getting strangely i didn't know what that's a dopamine week now but you go to it actually is a website soma space dot org that he's got it he's got it laid out there was originally it was an Olympic trainer um Irving dardic who figured this stuff out he was uh doing like exercising people different times of the day in different parts of the month and they you know they've been looking at bio you know uh a biological clocks for many years ever since the you know major league baseball pretty much discovered jet lag that people you know get more jet lag when they travel west to east and east to west they realize all these clocks are not folklore there's actually something going on here so there's circadian rhythms for the day and the night but there's also all these other rhythms controlled by different you know uh you know whether an astronomical features in traveling like that really does fuck with those rhythms right yeah yeah but as people get in touch with them i think it could help us uh you know get out of some of these uh you know drug uh drug relationships that we're having you know where we're taking drugs in order to compensate for those shifting neurotransmitters because we're trying to be on all the time right i'm in sales so i gotta be in sales when i'm in dopamine week or in serotonin week you know that's that's hard well there's also the arrogance of the human mind to think that i can manipulate the human mind yeah the human mind going like i don't like how things are running here i think i am going to take over the running of me and i'm going to invent some shit that makes me run more to my liking i'd rather just be okay with everything uh i want to be high all the time and okay with every yeah okay can you get that and then one day they're going to get what you feel like when you're on ecstasy that's going to be keep it all day just be on action see all day enjoying the world wow you've never seen this guy this color blue you know how to have those though they don't like to genuinely have those drugs because when if you're as high as you are in ecstasy or as high as you are in pot then you start figuring things out and then you start unwinding that relationship and becoming less dependent on so yeah it could yeah i mean even just a shift in the the levels of things and the approach to things gives you uh oh this is a new consciousness space that i'm occupying here for whether it's a brief moment or a long drawn out crazy trip right and it's different than the sort of palliative care of of you know pharmaceutical sure yeah yeah that that does the exact opposite it's true the ones that are available that you could buy in a regular basis for the ones that bring you closer to the hive drone exactly like slowly yeah just let you accept more and take more even you know caffeine and alcohol you know such you know easier than to tolerate the one that's interesting that sort of was playing both sides of the field here is at or all uh you know what i mean because they use it to control little kids you know it's like riddle and it's one of these uh 80d drugs that keeps those kids from you know acting out of a different class but also the counterculture is taking it for uh you know to write right or work or to get that uh uh kind of uh more like to work right i've never fucked with it but the people that i know that have said it this is a kind of camper's creativity right i guess i guess it's more for uh it's more like a speedy yeah cramming for a test yeah yeah you're getting worked on organizing shit like my friend Robert shimmel rest his soul uh he um he accidentally took it once and he had heart issues it was kind of a crazy story he picked up the wrong pill like someone else's prescription and and took an ad or all then they call this doctor it's like what am i in trouble oh my i'm scared you know i got this heart condition the guy's like you're gonna be fine you're gonna be fine you're just gonna be you're gonna be doing a lot of things over the next few hours just to accept that so he takes any study just starts fucking organizing his office and he sat down in front of his notes and he said i got more worked on than i've ever gotten before but well yeah that's why they call it speed yeah but it's uh it's a great it's a price yeah it's the ultimate industrial age drug i guess because it makes you more more productive more efficient i've had quite a few friends who've had an issue with it several you know a good friend very smart guy who uh just went um just got off of it and you know he went crazy with it for like several months and he was uh starting up a business and working with the tech company and there's a lot of hours and he just took a little ad or all to help him along the way and next thing you know he didn't add or all everything yeah yeah they do say there's this sort of i think speed long-term speed use is the closest they can model schizophrenia with drugs you know been on speed freak for a really long time you get way closer than with any you know psychodelic or yeah it's all blown it just seems like it's red lines your system yeah Lindsay low-hand's plea deal one string attached i want my ad or all was that TMZ yeah you know she's supposed to be in that like prison or that rehab for the next whatever 60 90 days is she's trying to get a plea deal so she can be an ad or all in that wait a minute they're putting her in jail again yeah what for this time uh i think it was for hitting run back in 2010 or something like that i can't remember poor kid i've been following it but there's another weird aspect of our new society that children become famous you know one of the i mean back in a surely temple days when they invented that it was like a very bad yeah yeah who would have ever thought that you would get a person like a Lindsay low-hand we raised them from the time they were child and they never know anonymity and just long to escape every day long you get fucked up and just drift away in a drunken stupor and not have to think about it yeah and they can't leave it is the thing because they're also addicted to uh to it yeah and if you do leave it it's almost worse to been a has been than to be and never was and never was you see a person walked on the street you never go oh look at that loser he was never famous he just go oh there's a guy i'll tell you there's it reminds me there was this moment that i still don't know exactly how i feel died it when they did the they did the Brady Bunch reunion it's like 10 years after the show whatever 20 years and Jan didn't show up they had a different girl for Jan and i was like go go girl in other words she broke free she will move down yeah there's she probably he flops she probably got you know all this crap for not going and a lot of people probably thought oh because she's probably too screwed up or some problem whatever and i'm like no you know you went you went into the future you know and you were not going to let that just you know define you no matter what yeah or she wanted money they didn't pay every year yeah who knows who knows who knows i know that's media is good for projecting but there's something very sad about people that live completely in the past like if you were on a show in the 1970s and you're still going to those autograph signing things and hard i heard it was a barber eaten on the radio you know i drew my genie yeah and how thinking man that's one of those it's one of those things well barber eaten also was in the time where you didn't make money like you didn't get that residual cash where people are still selling i dream of genie you know she would still be getting a piece yeah but no you didn't get shinga slice back in those Gilligan's island days those guys didn't make any money they they got fucked over Gilligan's island days was uh the you know like back in the day they never knew about like syndication they didn't they didn't have any idea things are gonna be worth so much money and then in a digital form forever dude i was supposed to be at my next thing by now whoops it's like 513 how long is this puck has a lot of beat we just go we go down with the whole thing yeah we never go from more than three hours do you have to leave says i was supposed to go where you going next what is it what am i doing i mean i've already missed 13 minutes of it um jason kalakanas we do these apologize yeah jason kalakanas he does his conference called launch what is it and it's like silicon valley entrepreneury what's gonna happen next in technology so is it like an interview or a podcast and then another podcast no a video podcast well this is too um but that's like only like you click on the thing for a digital theorist you a little bit uh touch with numbers my friend yeah and uh thank you uh and uh then Richard mesker you know him you did a dangerous um dangerous mines website which really no i've had a court you would like it you would like it you would like it if i can understand him he's local he does a great uh he used to do disinfo he meant to pay that whole website oh he did okay well Matt Matt stags the yeah he's on disinfo from yeah that's why i know him from all right so he got to get the fuck out of here i do do this was been an awesome conversation really fun yeah it's great to meet you great to meet you too thank you very much for coming on and people please go pick up his book it's called uh future shock present present excuse me present shock when everything happens now right so yeah okay available now is it available on audible.com they just do they're the company that just emailed and said they want to do the uh the one to the audio or the audio but they better yeah that's one it it's crazy that's not needs to be done right audible go go go get it go get on it um but um uh you could get it right now on amazon.com on your website www.rushcoff.com thank you very much man thank you a lot of fun to meet you thanks to the sponsors of the podcast thanks to audible.com if you go to audible.com forward slash joe you can get one free audiobook and 33 days of audible service thanks also to stamps.com and if you click on the link on stamps.com and use the code JRE you get a special offer no risk trial plus a hundred and ten dollar bonus offering including a digital scale that you should not use for illegal purposes thanks also to hover hover.com forward slash what is it rogan or something i have too many fucking thing now you're gonna make it all the same yeah i should but i don't have control that shit hover.com forward slash rogan go there get 10% off your domain name registrations and they give you a free shit like who is domain name privacy and there awesome and thanks also to honor.com go to o n n i t and if you use a code named rogan you save yourself 10% off any of our awesome supplements all right folks uh that's it for the week uh i got shit to do yo i'm busy i got a lot of things happening and uh next week um is gonna be a little sketch because i'm on the road for most of the week so we might bang out one only next week try to get through it this is all temporary and we love the fuck out of your dirty bitches all right so we see you soon oh indianapolis this weekend saturday night uh April 6th i'll be in Indianapolis with Tony Hinchcliff and uh if you've seen my live at the tabernacle special that's available for five bucks on joe rogan dot net right now this set is a hundred percent new there's nothing from that on on any of these shows so to answer all these people's questions if you should i go see you if i just bought this bitch that's all new shit i got an hour and 20 minutes now of all new shit and then i'm actually happier with it than my last special so that uh Kevin prayer this week we're gonna have some good podcasts so if you're like freaking out needing a podcast there you go hinge a lot on Thursday oh excellent Reggie Watts tonight excellence yeah pendulette awesome that's great you gonna do it he's he in town yeah i think just he's in town one day or something like wow yeah he's awesome he's a great talker too that guy will go on and on and on and i think we have cheese and chung next week oh and cheese and chung together yeah oh interesting all right uh the Douglas Rushcough ladies and gentlemen thank you everybody we'll see you soon