Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night. All day. What's up? How are you, man? How are you? It's close to me, it's close to me. It's a pleasure to meet you as well. I really enjoyed you on the Jesse Michaels podcast. So I had to have you on. Yeah, well, thank you so much, man. I love it when young people know so much about ancient history. Like, how did you get started in this? Well, it's quite literally in my blood. Back in the late, well, I say the 1890s. My family, they were cattle rustlers. Right here in the Hill country, actually, maybe a little bit further, quite a bit further west of San Antonio. They come from a lot of criminals? Probably. Yeah, there's a lot of dark history in here. And so they are cattle rustlers that are out in dried in Texas and Sanders in Texas. And I mean, right on the Rio Grande. And they were, that's how they made their money. They were fascinated kind of like everybody with finding gold, with finding lost Spanish treasure and native American artifacts. So they're living in this area called the Reagan Canyon. And I've seen it all over the place. If you look on, I think like the Smithsonian did something on the top 10 forgotten places in the United States. It's like the most remote areas of our country. And somewhere in there is Reagan Canyon. And so out there, they developed this fascination for looking for lost Spanish gold. And there are bandits that would hide up in the hills and they would sack Spanish caravans and drag the gold up into the hills to not get caught to hopefully come back for it later. And the Spanish are out there mining for gold and everything. So my family gets caught up in one of the biggest mysteries of Texas history. Like if you were to look up, if you were to go to some bookstore, there's a popular one called The Sons of Coronado. And it's like this legacy of people looking for Spanish gold. Somewhere in there, my family will be in there. And so this started in the 1890s. There's this long saga of the gold being, the treasure being dragged to San Antonio and all these people get killed. And only one of these four Reagan brothers makes it out. He gets involved in oil drilling out in East Texas. And so my family moved out to East Texas and then his son was born, which is my grandfather. And then he continues this legacy of continuing his father's oil company, but then he also begins gold mining in New Mexico. And while he's out in New Mexico, he hears these legends of these seven-lost Spanish gold mines. And because there was a local police officer who was like a treasure hunter, and he knew who my grandfather was and the story behind our family, he sought him out and they went off looking together. And I don't know how long it took them to find it, but he found the seven-lost Spanish gold mines of New Mexico. And he opened up this company called Three Bells Mining and Million Company. And that was open for about eight years. And they opened up these mines that go back to probably about the 1530s. So the Spaniards were up all the way in New Mexico in the 1530s. And they were opening up Native American gold mines and expanding them. And so he found these gold mines that go hundreds of feet into the ground as this huge, expansive gold mining operation. Well, somebody dies after a smelter explodes. And the company goes under. that lose everything. My family falls into poverty. My dad's born during that time. And my dad didn't really get to experience like all of that excitement. He had to spend his life climbing out of poverty. And but he had this love for history. He had this love for American history really. And he instilled in me the importance of history growing up. And that fascination of exploration and kind of ancient American history, hearing those stories carried over into me during my childhood. And so I've just I have always been fascinated by this. And I guess getting to where I am now, I was halfway through my marketing degree in college. And I'm sitting on my bed in my dorm room with my girlfriend at the time who I'm married to now. And we watched the movie, The Law City of Z, about Percy Faucet. And something about that guy's journey reminded me so much of my family. Kind of reminded me of my dad, reminded me of my grandpa. And it changed something in me like that day. I could not ignore, I was probably 20 at the time. I could not ignore this love that always had for ancient history. But you know, archeologists are poor. You know, they're, it's extremely hard life. And it's really hard on your family too. And I just knew I had to create a life for myself where I could do what I loved. Because I had like a 1.7 GPA in college. And I was not going to make it through my classes. And so I changed, I got a degree in cultural anthropology. I wrote like we had a mock thesis statement. I wrote it on the Amazon and the lost civilizations. And you know, how they were wiped out from Spanish and fluenza. And yes, that's where I'm at today. Wow. I think everybody, when you start looking at the history of the human race and you start looking at the history of civilizations, everyone gets fascinated. Because we kind of like woke up in this life. We didn't choose to be born during this timeline. We woke up in this timeline. And we're like, how did collectively we get here? And then you have this narrative of how collectively we got here. But then you see there's holes in this narrative. And it's real weird. And then you find out about asteroid impacts and super volcanoes. And then there's people like Zahi Hoas. So we're in charge of telling you what they know. And this is the only answer. And you're like, well, that guy's not right. And then you start like looking at guys like Graham Hancock. Or was everybody calling him a Nazi? Like what the fuck? And then you start getting deep into the weeds. And this stuff. And you're like, wow, there's a lot of resentment from the gatekeepers. There's a lot of people that have been teaching a narrative and teaching them to school. And they don't want anyone else teaching this stuff. They want to be the only people that can tell people with the history of the human races. And unfortunately for them, there's too much other evidence. It's too weird that the whole picture is not settled. It's too strange. And they keep finding new things all the time that throw a monkey wrench into the gears of the timeline of civilization. And so then you find out about Egypt. And once, I mean, that was the big one for me. Once I found out about Egypt, not found out about it, but you're like really started exploring it. Who's you discovered every grain of sand? I discovered it, no. I was dead. I dug the hole. That went about as well as I thought it would when he told me. I was hoping you were going to go a little better, honestly. Well, he had a great opportunity to win over the popular audience and come in and make a really good impression. And he did exactly the opposite. Well, I think there was a bunch of problems there. Ego being one of them, but another one being a language barrier. And then I think so. Also, years of battle. Like, if you're in conflict with people about this very thing that we're talking about, for years and years and years. And these people that you're in conflict with keep winning. Yeah. Like, I remember there was an old documentary that was narrated by Charlton Heston. He was the host of it. I don't know if you ever saw us. The mysteries of this, thanks. Yes, I've seen it on YouTube. Yeah. I believe it was on television at the time. And one of the things in that was they were trying to talk about Robert Chocks' work with the water erosion around the temple, this thing. And there was this very arrogant archaeologist. I don't remember his name, but I remember he had a smackable face. He was just so arrogant. He's like, where is the evidence of this civilization that existed 10,000 years ago? Well, now we have evidence. No, go back to the topic through a giant monkey wrench into the gears of this narrative. And now they're forced to reckon with this. Zahi didn't even know what go back to the tip he was. Which was, yeah. There was a lot of things that he wasn't familiar with. Like, is that tip? Or is it either the turn or the turn of Kingsless, which talks about the pre-dynastic, like semi-metallogical kings going back, you know, tens of thousands of years. Yes. How do you not know that? You know, how was he the former head of the ministry of antiquity and culture? How are you not familiar with this? Right. Well, he just dismisses it. Yeah. But aggressively. Yeah. Which is like, there's no way you know everything. There's no way. And then it was also the data from the Italian scientists that were studying this tomography and this ability to look underground with satellite radar and also dismissing that. But then I brought up a temple of Osiris. But they looked into that. Like, you could see it. They have, like, they showed where the chambers are. They, it works. This was only 50 feet into ground. You know, like, OK, pretty well. Well, how do you know how deep that stuff goes? It works 50 feet. Who's to say it doesn't work two kilometers? Like they're saying. Yeah. I was having a conversation with like my mentor, Dr. Ed Barnhart. He's a friend of Graham. He was one of Graham's guest experts on season two of ancient apocalypse when he went to the Maya realm. He and I were talking this morning. And he was like, he's like, you know, it's become a battle of like, who has this right to talk about these things? Right. Does the fact that I have a degree in anthropology, that's what gives me the right to have more of an opinion on somebody else? That's kind of what it's become. And it's like one side is a costing the other over their fascinations and their interest and the fact that they're able to make a living from the things that they're fascinated about and talking about it. Right. And it feels like academia has become bitter. Because you know, being in the academic world is a very rough in jaded place and a lot of young aspiring archaeologists who existed, who maybe would have had an approach like me, but existed during this time where you could only have your pursuits if the university signed off on it. Right. But now universities are like, I geologically captured. And every little thing that you do has to be aligned with to university. And so all of your fascinating ideas that you have in your mid 20s, you know, to your mid 30s when you're young and able to go off into the jungle and find something, they all get shut down by people who had their ideas shut down. But now it's like it's the Wild West where you can have somebody like me or whoever put together an expedition and, you know, I legally cannot start digging up the ground and excavating things. But I can go and document things and survey things on my own, you know, with local permission, whatever. But yeah, it's like digging things up in certain countries. If you get permission or so. Well, I mean, yeah, if I got, if I got permission, but I mean, you would be, it would be next to impossible for me for somebody like me to do that. Why would that be? What would be the hurdles? Oh, well, you would have the local universities there who also have their own, you know, high credentialed people who are going to, you know, if I don't come in with a PhD, I'm never going to go get a PhD. But if I don't come in with something like that, then I don't have the experience. I don't have, you know, the authority to be able to do something like this. And they would never trust me to carry out like a good excavation damage. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So they would never, they would never trust that. There's some reasonable, reasonable explanations for why. Yeah. Yeah. Because people have looted. I mean, yeah. Who knows how much of ancient Egypt has just gone. I mean, who knows? Oh, man. So many wealthy people actually ate mummies. Yeah. They actually like for people listening, I did, you didn't miss hear me. They ate mummies. They would bring them to these European aristocrats would bring them to parties and people would consume the mummies. Yeah. Which is just like, what were you guys drinking? Like, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's what's not really. Diddy party were you guys having over there where that was the idea? It's an Arley man. Yeah. So much of Egypt is is gone. And this is why I don't think that, you know, like I love, I love the mystery of the ancient world and why I'm so baffled when people want to immediately shut anything down. Because of the amount of history that has lost to us is completely baffling. You know, Egypt has been getting looted. And we know for the last, let's say 3000 years at least countries, foreign nations have been coming in and raiding Egypt and taking the artifacts out. And so, you know, so much of the artifact, so much of the artifact record is lost. And I think that the real problem is the confidence with which somebody like Zahi speaks. It's okay for you to have your perspective in the way that you view the ancient world based on the data that's been available to you. It's okay to have your opinions. But when you're so confident about your opinions that you then begin to chastise other people, put them down for it. And then go the next, the next mile and start making accusations of them being a racist and things like that. The point devil approach. That's really not good. Right. It's not good. But it's like that guy embodies what you don't like about academia. You see him physically, he embodies it. Like it's like that's what it is. It's these weak men. These weird kind of bitchy, weak men that decide that they're in control things in the way they shut people down is by casting the worst bejorative on them, especially like the Graham Hancock's of calling him racist. Like what? Because he's interested in Atlantis. I really did not like the letter that they wrote to Netflix to try to get season one, take it down to make some apocalypse. And you know, they sometimes they'll rebuttal and say, Oh, well, you know, I never blatantly called him a racist. Like, well, okay, even if you didn't blatantly do it, you insinuated it. And you were okay with insinuating it. And some of these people exist in a realm where in their little bubbles where they throw around the word racist all the time. And then when they get to the wider world where the rest of us exist, they find out very quickly that none of we don't throw that term around lightly and accused people of these things. And then you know, at the end of the podcast, um, when he said, uh, you you ask, you know, things, the kind of temperature came down. And then I think maybe you asked something like, like, you know, well, what can people do to help archaeology? And he was like, Oh, well, you can donate to the SAA. But the SAA is the one that wrote the letter. It's like, oh, man, that's just, uh, it's, it's, uh, it's not a good look. Well, it's a real problem with human beings, um, and ego when they have, uh, positions of power and authority, um, especially over something that is very esoteric, something that is like, and also completely complex. Like when you're dealing with trying to decide for higher glibs and trying to, and then, you know, the fact that we know that the library of Alexandria was burned down. So who knows what was lost in that several different times, like five different times. I wonder who it any of that just got stolen out of there. And then they blamed it on like, you know, so the first time, uh, Caesar is chasing his rival Pompey across the Mediterranean and Pompey flees to Alexandria. And, um, Alexandria was kind of in the basket of Rome. Uh, they, the, the, the, the, the, the telomeres who are the Greek pharaohs in, in Egypt. So the Greeks are controlling Egypt after Alexander comes in 332 BC. So Alexander dies. His best friend told me it becomes pharaoh. So, um, but the telomeres were very weak, not very good rulers. And so Rome kind of does like what the US does, where they get pulled in the conflicts and then once they're there and they conquer everything, they seize all the power, you know, and so Rome had done this to, uh, had done this to Egypt. And so they controlled Egypt and they were pulling all of their, uh, they were keeping the telomeres in power, uh, the Roman soldiers were, and they were pulling all that grain into Egypt. And so Caesar follows Pompey, uh, chases him to, to Alexandria. And so that Caesar can't, or so that Pompey can't flee, Caesar says, will burn the docks. Well, when you landed in Alexandria, uh, you would land at this dock that went to a road called Soma Road. So you had Soma Road and Canopic Way. And it was like the street corner. It must have been amazing to see in real life. Like think about this. You have the library of Alexandria. You all, all this is all in one block. You have the library of Alexandria. You have the museum, which is right next to it. So both together, they make the world's first university. And I mean, you can just imagine like walking through those halls across the street from that is, uh, Alexander's mausoleum. So, uh, his mausoleum, we think the emperor Hadrian, if you've heard of Hadrian before, um, that he modeled his mausoleum on Alexander's. So we kind of have an idea of like what the mausoleum looked like. You don't have a marble statue of Alexander on top. So people are walking by every day in the middle of this town. And then across street from that is the palatial district where all the rich people live. And then off by the bay, you would have had Cleopatra's palace. And so it's this beautiful place. But when the boats come into the dock, you had to give up all the scrolls that you had because the tolemies are obsessed with obtaining the world's knowledge. And they want the originals. They don't want to copy. So what they would tell people is you give us your writings. We'll write down a copy and we'll give you back your original. But what they would do is give back the copy and keep the original. And this is something called the library wars. This is the whole thing. So, um, but this was it was connected to the docks. And so most of the buildings in Alexandria are made out of stone to prevent fires. Um, but the interior of Alexandria's library would have had all these wooden shelves that will cross where you'd stack all the scrolls in. So everything just maybe the actual structure of the buildings is it burned down, but the entire interior of it burns up. And so when, uh, when Caesar sets fire to the docks to burn all of poppy ships, it crawls up the docks and burns the library down. Well, uh, um, Augustus did the same thing. What a decade and a half later Augustus came and he seized Alexandria. And this is where this is when Cleopatra and Mark Anthony die. He sees it. And then there are rebellions because the Alexandriaians are very rebellious. They don't want to be ruled by, uh, by the Romans. And, um, so there's, uh, I think it's, I think it's Caracalla that, uh, he was being made fun of by the Alexandria. There was a theater in town. It's actually the place where standup comedy was invented, uh, in Alexandria. Yeah. So, so real and the butt of all the jokes was always the Roman emperor. So, so you have people like talking shit about the Roman emperor standing up, you know, in the, in the middle of Alexandria's theater. And so the Roman emperor was always the butt of the joke. Well, Caracalla, I believe it's Caracalla. He's one of the brothers in Gladiator too, the, uh, the new Gladiator, if you've seen it. I haven't seen it. He's, he's one of the brothers, but the movie doesn't really depict the, the actual emperors very accurately. Um, but he gets tired of it. So he just comes down to Alexandria on like a royal visit and executes 25,000 people in the city of Alexandria and burns down parts. But so he burned down the library for the third time. And then there was another emperor named Aurelian, uh, when a local Alexandria declared himself the new Egyptian pharaoh. I think he was a real Egyptian. Uh, he, he declared himself like the newest pharaoh and he, he created this revolt and then Aurelian had to come and put the revolt down and he burned down the library again. So this is, we're getting close to like 300 AD at this point. Now in 365 AD, there was a, um, there was a huge earthquake, uh, that was off of the coast of Crete, I think, which is the most southern, uh, Greek aisle. And it's where the Minowans lived. I believe it's there or it's off the coast of Cyprus. And so that earthquake, like, like just, uh, reverberates down to Egypt in this massive tsunami destroys the entire city of Alexandria. And it said it was so catastrophic that, um, I think it's plenty of the elder or plenty of the younger comes down in a rescue mission from, from Italy. And he comes to Alexandria and he records that 50,000 people in the city are missing because of, you know, the, the wave it gets pushed in. And that all of the giant boats, these are giant, giant, gigantic boats in Alexandria's harbor are sitting on top of all the rooftops in the city. And it's after this point that the location of Alexander's body and the location of Alexandria's library just completely go missing. So, so they're both utterly destroyed and most likely all of the giant stones that were used to build the city were repurposed for, you know, other things. But, uh, in one fail swoop, uh, Alexandria's library, the Museon and Alexander's Mausoleum completely disappear from the historical record. Fight Night isn't just for fighter step into the action with Draft King Sportsbook in your corner as the official sports betting partner of the UFC. Draft Kings brings the action to your fingertips. Every strike take down knockout. It all hits different when you've got skin in the game. New to betting, no problem. Start simple. Pick a fighter to win. Place your bet and your end. Even better, new customers can bet just five bucks and get $300 in bonus bets if your bet wins. It's the easiest way to score big on Fight Night. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app now and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to get $300 in bonus bets. If your bet wins, when you bet just five bucks, only on Draft Kings, the crown is yours. Gameling problem called 1 800 gambling in New York called 877-8 open wire text Hope and Wyatt 467-369 in Connecticut. Help is available for a problem gambling called 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Boothulk, a cinnamon resort in Kansas, 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void in Ontario. Bet must win to receive reward. Bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio. Wow. It just shows you how vulnerable knowledge is. I really think about that today because obviously we have a lot of books and most things that are like most physics work, most work on archaeology, most work on history is available in book form. But how much of what we have is on hard drives. And if there is a power outage, just a global worldwide power outage that lasted six months, we're fucked. Like we don't know anything anymore. It's a small amount of time for an enormous cataclysmic disaster to completely erase tens of thousands of years of understanding of everything. Everything. We would have no knowledge. One generation removed from electronics would have no knowledge of how to recreate it. What steps need to be taken? What you have to build a chip plant? Where are they right now? They're in Taiwan? What the fuck are you talking about? How are we going to do this? Hard drives? That's precarious place. I mean, to be starting from scratch, starting from scratch today. You would be very similar, I think, to probably what starting from scratch was post the grape flood, post the great common impacts, all the younger drives impacts, there's stuff. Civilization, if that stuff is correct, if there is a grams positioned and Randall Carlson's position is that there was probably a much more advanced civilization than just hunter gatherers that lived 10,000 plus years ago. How many thousands of years would it take before we started calming down again? Well, it seems like it took about five, four or five thousand years before civilization emerges. A really long time. A really long time. I think about that with like foraging, you know? I was reading yesterday, I was reading exploration faucet. Have you read this before? Listen to the audiobook. It's his personal diary. Yeah. So you have, you have, there's an audiobook of that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's an audiobook. Wow. Dude, you'll get wrapped up in it. You won't be able to stop listening to it. You know, he just has these amazing experiences and, ah, man, he would be like your best, like your all time guest. You know, I think that I'm on. Sure. But I would get a great accent too. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. And, and so you listen to his audio book and the way he talks about meeting the indigenous people that live deep in the Amazon, you know, it would take him weeks to get to these little villages. And while he was out there, he would see like the systematic mathematical structure with which they would set up these giant villages and how they would build these huge, like thatch wood, homes with foundations that are stones. And these people were, he said that they had like beautiful skin. They spoke elegantly. They sang songs. And he was like, he's like, this isn't, he's like, these people in the Amazon are not primitive savages. Like my colleagues at the, the Royal Geographic Society in London believe that they are. These are people who are the fall or are the descendants of a fallen great civilization. He was like, the way they interact with each other so sophisticated. And why do you think they were, they were descendants of a fallen civilization and not the, the people that were currently living in the most modern version of the civilization. Um, I don't quite know, you know, there's some things that are, that are left out. Like he has, he has some, before he started writing this, I think he always had these ideas in the back of his mind. And so you don't really get the origin of why he initially started thinking this, but you know, while he's exploring South America, he's hearing all these stories of, you know, semi-contactive people, like you have natives who still live the, the native life, but they can speak Spanish. And he can speak a little of the Spanish and communicate with these people. So he, we hear about, oh yeah, you know, there's this, there's this huge city of gold off, you know, off in the jungle, uh, months travel that way. And it's the same kind of legend on all these Spaniards that hurt. So it's this idea of this. Well, there was this civilization that used to be out there. And so Percy thought that maybe it has something to do with Atlantis. And so that was part of his journey looking for it. And then he, um, it's actually his wife, Nina, faucet. I believe when she's in a library in England, she finds a Portuguese document. I think it's manuscript 512, have you ever heard of this? Um, I could have the name of it wrong, but I think it's manuscript 512. And in that, it's these guys who are kind of like semi professional Portuguese explorers in the mid 1700s that are going around Brazil. And they find this huge stone city with statues that they thought looked like Greek gods in the middle of the Amazon. And so, you know, the perception, like my perception looking back through it is like, well, I mean, yeah, these are Portuguese guys who come from Europe. So when they see something that's native, they're only lens to see it through is what they've grown up knowing, which is the Greek and Roman world. So that's how they communicate this idea. But they found this big stone city in the middle of, uh, I think it's, I'm pretty sure it's Brazil's jungle. And so, uh, this was completely forgotten until Percy's wife found this. So, um, you know, when he first went down to the Amazon, he was only there on a mapping expedition on behalf of, uh, on behalf of, uh, great Britain, which was, he was probably a spy. I'm, I'm guessing that that's what was actually happening there because he was a spy when he was in the military. And I think what he was doing is on an official basis. He's charting, uh, the border around Brazil, uh, uh, with the Amazon river. But really what he's doing is collecting information so that maybe Great Britain can have a colony there someday, but then the war, but then the war, uh, disrupts all of that. And he has to go fight in World War One, um, which is funny, because it's the same thing that Nazis were doing in the 1930s. But, um, anyways, so while he's there on his first, um, while he's there on his first expedition, he doesn't initially, I think he's interested in these ideas of ancient history, but it's when he's there and he's often the jungle. He's finding all these artifacts on the ground. And he was like, he's like, uh, you know, the way that the pottery, there's clay pottery and then there's, uh, you know, stone vessels and, and like, you eating utensils that he was finding really elegant little statues and things. Um, he found one that was made out of this like solid black stone that he could never, and it had this glow to it. And he could never, maybe not a glow, but like, uh, like if you shine the light on it, you can tell that it's translucent in a way. I've seen stones like this in the Aztec realm. They have these septars that have these orb things on the top. And if you shine a light on it, it's like this otherworldly looking thing. I can only imagine if you're on like, a stone. I don't know. And it's missing now. It's lost. Uh, it went missing with him or somewhere in it in his expeditions that doesn't exist anymore, but there's an illustration of it in exploration faucet that you could find. Um, and so he thought like when he was seeing all this on his first expedition, he's like, wait, these aren't these primitive savages that all my colleagues that I don't even like back home think that these people are this is, this is an advanced culture. There, there's something that's lost here. And so Percy didn't know if it was a fallen civilization that lived in the Amazon or whether it was still out there somewhere. And he was trying to find either the ruins of it or the living. And so Percy didn't know if it was a fallen civilization that lived in the Amazon or whether it was still out there somewhere And he was trying to find either the ruins of it or the living City, right? So he didn't really know if it was fallen or not. So that's it's still an interesting that he would think that way Instead of this is the pinnacle of civilization in the Amazon which is why they're so advanced I Know it's like a preconceived notion that he had that there was an advanced civilization and then it fallen Yeah, yeah, if you're looking at the way the people were living the way he's describing it sounds pretty advanced Sure, sure. Yeah, wouldn't you assume that these people had lived for thousands of years and eventually risen to this current level? Oh, yeah, yeah, I don't know. I don't know. That's the problem with preconceived notions too But I do know that that he had he had the utmost admiration and respect for these people like he he was completely infatuated with their way of life and trying to you know what his goal was was to prove that the that the like the narrow-minded perspective of The English aristocrats who thought that they were the pinnacle of civilization He was determined to prove them wrong and so he had a great admiration for these people And he wanted to try to find like a like a big big civilization something with enough people that could rival that could rival Europe and where he went missing was in the model gross or region of Brazil and And and the last place that they know that he was at was on May 29th 1925 and he wrote a letter to his wife from Dead Horse camp, and he was like it may be a while before you hear from me It could be up to a year or two before you hear from me I'm about to head into a very dense area and my trail runners who would you know go back and forth with his notes They weren't gonna follow him out there because it's too dangerous and That was the last letter that he had written and he was going He was heading off into what's called the Zingu region Which is like the Zingu River and it's one of the most hostile regions in the Amazon Maybe even maybe even today Teddy Roosevelt had trouble when when he went there But the Zingu region is where all of the major Lidar came out within the last 10 years of they found all the ruins of these giant cities and there's a city called Curie goo you I think and it had an estimated population of about a million people which is the size of Rome and You know when you look at the lidar images you can't get a perspective of how big they are I Have access to a lidar database of the entire United States and I've mapped all kinds of huge uncharted mountainsites in Florida all of the southeast I have hundreds of sites marked and When you first look at them on a map, you're like, oh, okay like maybe that looks like it's 50 feet long or something No, there'll be like 300 yards long like these giant raised platforms in the in the middle of the forest here in the US And if I had access to lidar data like that where I could measure it down in the Amazon Some of these things are miles long like raised platforms are a mile long and they have and they have highways like You know, maybe we should pull up a Just an image of a lidar scan from the Amazon, but you'll you'll see this central City area you'll see step pyramids and raised platforms Maybe this is where people lived or maybe this where the market was and there will be a road that cuts straight through it And you can see the road just goes off in the distance for miles and miles and miles and so what they would do Here we go. Yeah, this is so this is one of these sites in This one of these sites. I believe this is in Brazil or maybe it's in Northeast Bolivia And is all that area covered completely with jungle right now completely covered in jungle? Yeah So if you went out there you wouldn't see any of this you made not Realize that you were standing on a mound like you really got to train your eyes You know, I put out this I filmed this little series about a year and a half ago called jungle of stone where I was going through The jungles in Central America and we charted This city that had 16 pyramids in it You know, we were there all day long and we we charted 16 pyramids and when I put it out I got all these comments are like you're not doing anything But walking on a bunch of hills because it's so hard to see it the jungle just claims everything back So it takes you really have to sit with seeing these things in person for a while before you start recognizing Oh, that is a mound or that is a pyramid that is a structure under the jungle and so Percy faucet He where where where that light arc came out is one of the places that he told his wife He didn't share this publicly where where he thought that the city was but it's it's like bang on He was he was exactly correct about where he thought a city would be and we don't know if he reached it or not Wow, it's so interesting because how long is line arbin around for I don't know and how long has it been used I mean think about for how long people had no idea it this existed because it was completely covered with jungle They just assumed that there was evidence of a civilization would be pretty obvious. Yeah, yeah It's not and it makes me wonder like as technology increases in its potential Like what other new technologies will be discovered that will allow you to instead of like having this ambience A gueus view of under the pyramids. Yeah, have like a crystal clear like accurate Dimension by dimension almost like a 3d map this this century for sure this century is gonna be insane It's gonna be insane like you're gonna have everyone scanning everything All of the Amazon will be mapped with light art by the end of the century all of the Sahara is gonna be map with light art by the end of the century This the hare is a big one. Yeah. Yeah. Well, those are my two those are my two big things like when we talk about Atlantis and we talk about lost civilizations. I mean my thing is the Sahara and The Sahara and the Amazon, you know both of these things existed pre-isages especially if we're talking pre-isage civilization The Sahara is an oasis, you know 10,000 plus years ago. It's an oasis. You have what two or three of the world's largest Lake systems on there. You have rivers everywhere You know it would have been like a beautiful place to live abundant resources So there's no worry about food shelter Yeah, plenty of time to figure things out which is the thing that has always made sense to me if you know the history of the Nile Valley and where Egypt was like That was a wonderful place to live to try to figure things out, right? Because you have so much food and once you have so much food and you're kind of separated from everybody It's really tough to get to you. So like they lived Unchallenged in that civilization for thousands of years. Well, yeah, yeah, that that's amazing and you know whenever I You know so so growing up. I mean gosh I read fingerprints of the gods when I was 16 I remember like sitting on the couch after school and reading it and my dad's that comes with me Like that's a big book and I go I know it's like I'm reading a textbook for fun, you know and and it was a It was it was dense reading for me as a 16 year old and so you know I I would so inspired by by Graham and then I went off and like got traditionally educated and So I kind of have both of these perspectives and I'm off. I'm often shocked and disappointed at how other professional archaeologists anthropologists explain popular mysteries, you know like there was an Egyptologist on another popular podcast and and In the podcast host asked him to properly explain like you know the mystery around the pyramid and it was just so subpar I was shocked and I was like I'm not even the Egyptologist I know how to explain these things and I felt the same way about Zahi Maybe there's some kind of language barrier there, but it was also like he didn't want to explain these things on a basic level But one of the things that I never see talked about is the concentration of energy along the the Nile Valley like okay So you know if I had to if I did put up drop a pin anywhere on the earth where I think Atlantis would be I Would probably put it like in the Sahara somewhere, you know along one of these major lakes where there's a lot of people living at one time and Then later on as the Sahara dries up, you know Say beginning around like eight hundred or I'm sorry eight thousand BC It starts rapidly drying out. It's probably a little bit before that and then by about four thousand BC It's completely dry so your Sahara Only have a few places that they can go they can go to the Mediterranean coast They can go to the Atlantic coast. They can go down kind of into the Congo and in the savannas or they can go to this fertile Valley Oasis where it's like 500 yards on each side where it's just completely lush tropical Oasis and so some people went there and so you have this hyper concentration of energy and all these people living somewhere together for what we know is the first time in history like we can verify it I guess if that makes sense and And so rather than being able to have these huge pieces of property where they can all live separated from each other Kind of like in the Sahara you have all this space and so luxurious now you have to live on top of each other and you have to build up these cities or you know you're like building cities and so all that energy compacted into one place in this fertile Oasis is either destined to Completely crumble and fall apart or it's New York City. It's this thin strip of highly concentrated Genius hardworking people Figure out how to extrapolate the most out of their natural world and create some of the greatest things the world has ever seen just like New York City we did it, you know and I've never seen any Egyptologist explain things that way. I think that's I think that's a good explanation at least and I'm open to things in Egypt being much older Like this finks is definitely older than the pyramids But I'm just always disappointed at like the very low level with which Archaeologists and anthropologists will come in and try to explain things to a popular audience And it's kind of like you're asking okay, but how do you know that like explain that to me in a way that I can understand How do you know this and then there's never a proper explanation and I don't know what that is. It's like it's like they Strongly dislike the fact that there's Mystery out there and that there are other people who are attempting to answer the mystery that are not part of the good boys club You know, so they have this exactly so they have this knee jerk reaction to it all they hate all of it they don't want to be a part of all of it and That's not gonna work going forward like You know not to be political but this but this recent election showed that You're gonna have to appeal to the popular audience in the future everyone is you know Yeah, and especially when there's these forms now like YouTube where someone like you can put up videos explaining things or Jimmy Corsetti or Graham Hancock like the the access to People to share fascinating ideas. It's not limited to universities anymore And I think that drives them crazy because they spent so much time being in control And then all sudden it's just like and then through a lot of these appearances like Flint, Dibble and Zahi Their credibility erodes publicly I mean in front of everyone's eyes and then You know, there's people that are gonna support both of them on either side And who knows how much of it is even real? Because now we have AI bots and that they get turned loose by whether it's Universities like the University of Zurich that just gotten trouble for running that experiment with social media which is really wild Yeah, so we don't even know like How much of it is organic until you see something like voting and then you go Oh, this is how people really feel but how much of that has even been influenced by all these AI campaigns But we do know is that human arrogance has always been a real problem and same thing the Percy Foster was probably dealing with Fosser rather was probably dealing with when he was you know the the people back home that thought these people were primitive Yeah, it's like this arrogance that human beings looking down their nose at everything people love to be experts They love to be experts and they love to and they also equate their own self worth with being accurate about information that you really can't be accurate about Exactly instead of just being humble but yet knowledgeable Yeah, which is a great position, you know, and when you talk to someone in their humble and knowledgeable That's a well, I those are my favorite conversations because they they'll tell you what they know and what they don't know And this is why yeah, archaeologists are not doing that which is why they're rejecting people at Graham Hancock What they should be doing is embracing the work that he's doing because Because he's self-funded yeah, and because he's just selling books and you know and doing his thing and appearing on podcasts and Developing this audience. He's allowed to do all these fantastic Voyages like he's in Iraq right now like studying the ancient Sumerian civilization like with a remnants of it Well, there's two things I say there You know kind of I guess that or any theme of this is as we're about to enter into like a Archaeological Wild West in a way, you know, I think that's you know Jimmy getting involved with With go backly tippy in the trees that were there having the trees the orchers planted over the sites and they were moving them though Yeah, and it's just it's just proof that a guy like I started watching Jimmy 2018 I mean that gosh was I I just graduated from high school and And so he was kind of like inspired me to be like, you know He was this young charismatic guy that could go online and research topics and enthuse the assically present these topics and and and he was effective at doing it and inspired me for a long time and And you know lo and behold, I guess what six seven years later. He's still at it And he's actually not just inspired people to be interested in the ancient world But but had an actual effect on something on the opposite side of the planet like when all this happened I was like I was like yeah, I mean I get the concern But I don't think the Turkish government cares what any of us over here in the us think Sure enough they remove the trees and then there's kind of like the backpedaling of oh Well, it was always in the plan to remove the trees But I think it's I think you know people might disagree with Jimmy's approach whatever but But it's you can't deny the fact that he himself an independent guy Was able to make so much noise that he affected a government on the opposite side of the planet, you know And it and in a way it's like it shows me like oh you know These these expeditions that that I'm planning and things that I'm gonna go out and survey and document for myself Like these can make these can make real changes and these are things I had planned and it Florida here in the here in the southeast In the States in Central America and in the Amazon and it's like encouraging like wow I mean we're really approaching a Time when independent people are gonna start making Real noticeable differences and not just in the digital space that where people are interested in Rebbing the physical archaea exactly exactly. Yeah, Jimmy's so meticulous to him. He's such a good representative because He's really intelligent and really thought-provoking but also really honest about what he knows and what he doesn't know And he has counter arguments to his own points He'll tell you tell you something and then but also it could be this and this is what we know and because he's been really Careful in The way he expresses himself He's established this community that understands what he does and they trust him and they go no No, no, no He's gonna tell you the truth. He's gonna tell you what we know and why we know it He's not gonna make any weird ideological leaps. He's not gonna make any weird judgments He's just gonna lay out what is fascinating about these things and Because of that I mean whether he has a degree or not a great degree that guys have an a massive impact I mean I don't know how many what is right? What is bright insights YouTube channel have for subscribers and it by the way if you haven't watched any of his videos Can't recommend them enough love the guy love the stuff 1.7 by the way, he's been called an auntie Which is that's just that's what they use that's the these are the terms You know, he's been called all sorts of terrible things none of them are true he's a wonderful guy and He's just a man who's deeply fascinated with these mysteries and When he's pointing out the things that we cannot it would ball back and leban on the Trillion what they call a trillion Star-thon still something What whatever there's certain things that you can point out that people go, okay, what the fuck Like he gets to the what the fuck stuff where everybody's like, okay, what else you got? You know like how come I didn't know this? How come this isn't like something like when you're talking about ancient history the history of Whether it's Lebanon or Egypt and when they start talking about these things and they lay out the the histories of the Farrows and why are you talking about the distance? They carry these fucking enormous 80 ton rocks through the mountains and how they cut them like Why that's the mystery? Yeah, this is the big piece of evidence that these guys just wanted to dismiss Oh, so it was the national project Mm-hmm, you know like okay, yeah, but that doesn't say how you did that no five thousand years ago You need to help me out here Yeah, and when these openings exist and guys like Jimmy run through them but meticulously document things and talk about them with humility and talk about them with a general understanding of the absolute Undeniable facts and then it creates this enormous audience and then because of that enormous audience Yes, it's a huge impact. Yeah on actual archaeology and that's why they hate him It's just because he's doing their job better than they're doing their job because he's not trapped he's not stuck in this compartmentalized ideological position of working for a university Yeah, and he doesn't have to worry about funding and he doesn't have to worry about you know being chastised by his peers Because they're all bunch of bitches. He doesn't have to worry about that So he's free and there's a bunch of those guys that are emerging now and guys like yourself and I think that That's really important because the gatekeepers have been wrong every step of the way with almost everything Whether it's medical science whether it's health and nutrition Whatever it is like we they've been wrong every damn step of the way So maybe open it up. Yeah, just like the internet opened up information to everybody We need to open up the exploration of information to everybody and not have it contained with a few people that have degrees From places that we know are ideologically captured we can see how they behave We can see the things they say and the way they do things and the way they act and the way even the way they affect enrollment Based on race and gender and sexual preference like you guys are fucking crazy This is not how you're supposed to handle knowledge and information This is a dumb approach and we see that through basically every place where there's a few group of people that's isolated insulated group of people that has the ultimate Influence over whatever particular field of study is their special It's just a danger that the human ego and the human mind fall prey to almost every single time the internet what it's done is it's like this great equalizer and It's just it is it is allowed people to have these discussed and you hear a lot of people saying you shouldn't do this You shouldn't be doing this don't do your own research and don't like those are stupid sayings like you can't think like that You you're just gonna be people that say things that are absolutely ludicrous And you have to be able to listen to them and then listen to people that are more intelligent and more rational and also Objective and go that guys. That's what I'm interested in I'm interested in this guy No, he's not gonna lie, you know, and there's too many instances of Archaeologists just lying lying and attacking each other when one of them like clothes first like that Yeah, yeah. Well attacking each other. I mean I just experienced this the other day You know, so I had a Guess being early on in my career. I'm passionate about so many different things and and I'm kind of person It's like oh, I'm passionate about this. This is what I'm gonna do and so I applied to the University of Athens and Greece and I I was really into the classics and I was gonna go for that and then I just had this Let's just say I was in the jungle when I had a mind opening experience and I was reminded of the fact that My purpose here the reason I started doing all this was continuing kind of like my family's legacy and I'm interested in a lot of different things and I'm not gonna specialize I'm not gonna like hunker down in this academic path or whatever and so I just decided I'm not gonna go through this so I start You know publishing you know content in my research on the Americas again and in the Americas are very mysterious it's I mean Very comparable to Egypt. It was just the amount of questions that haven't been answered is insane and the old-mic world is fascinating and so you know there's a You know Graham in in fingerprints of the gods. He talks about how the the the old-mex He thought that they may have like like like African features and of course that was 1995 and so I don't know 2015 you guys are talking and he's like he's like well, you know I published that then but DNA researchers come out that says that you know these people don't have African DNA in them And that maybe this is Polynesian. Maybe this is Australasian people intermixing and that's why they have this unique look Whatever but in the old-mic world. There's this monument that is actually called El Negro and you look at it And it's not an omeck it is an African man and And so I post about this somewhere on my ex-account and I just kind of like list everything I've seen in the old-mic world I'm like, you know, this is really fascinating. Maybe this is evidence of Africans who were in Who were in the old-mic world and I hadn't seen this monument before I saw it in person Because you go in the old-mic in the old-mic realm in the region in Mexico And you go to these museums and you look at the the log or the ledger that people have been on and nobody Nobody has visited this museum in the last four months and before that it was you know six months before that and these monuments Just kind of sit underneath these metal roofs, you know to protect them from the rain. It's like this Just this completely lost civilization is there an image of this available online. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There we go There we go. So if you pull up an omeck head, you'll see that these guys are very different looking and especially if you can get yeah, yeah There we go Look at Okay, so that's a yeah, okay, so that's a regular omeck head so you can see that these are two different races of people You know that the omeck's have very soft features round faces Big eyes big lips kind of big noses. They have very soft features and this El Negro monument has these high cheekbones It's defined jawline This is a lot of variety just in like let's just say Italians A lot of a variety and so it couldn't just be someone who's on a Spectrum of features that I mean I don't think it's that much different. You don't think so well No, and I'm looking at it. I could I mean I could imagine like there's like I said Just you know my national Italian so you there's Italians at very thin Faces and there's these big thick ones and like yeah people very quite a bit There's enough similarities that I could say although it could be the same people well the the only counter I give to that is When you when you visit the omeck realm you see a lot more than just the heads You see a lot of omeck faces dozens and dozens and dozens of them Maybe well over a hundred and when you've seen them all and you kind of get a gist of like the way they generally look This guy will really stand out like I took a group of students there and we all as soon as we all came in and saw it Based on everything we'd been seeing for the past week it immediately stood out to us Well certainly the thick brow unique well in the old deal or wearing helmets and that that hair as well It's kind of that it's kind of that that curly hair and or at least it looks like it to me and so So anyways, you know, he could be omeck I don't you know my identity is not tied up in what I think this is or also omeck could be African like very very Clearly if that one on the left easily could be an African man Which one this guy right this one the one next to the white one to the left to let you right there It's easily could be an African man. It certainly does look that way But I was on I was on a plane to Mexico a couple months ago And I was going into the omeck realm and I look I was like I wanted to take a picture of this guy I'm looking to the left of me and he was an omeck man sitting next to me And he was he was you know, he looked like he didn't look like any Mexican have ever seen There's something there with the DNA of the omeck people That is definitely connected with Something else that that you don't see if you go to the mya realm that you don't see if you go to like Mexico City They have something in the DNA they have this very specific look about them I don't know exactly what it is, but I'm like looking and I'm like this all my guy next to me So fascinating because it clearly could have been African explorers what made it. Yeah. Well, I'll tell you what Could we look up Gosh look up the traveler omeck monument if you would please Jamie It's the traveler. I want to call him. I think he's monument 13 now There's another one called monument 19 that we should look at but he's this man. That's very clearly not There we go top left the one that's on reddit In fact, this might be my post on reddit. Yes. Yes, sir So this guy right here. All right, so this is really really fascinating. So what's diagnosis? All right, so flags Flags are invented is very unknown fact flags are invented or the first place that we have evidence for it is along the Nile Valley On these pre-dynastic pots which they're not the not the stone vases But just like clay pottery they would make little paintings on them and people have these river boats that have these flags on them And the flags would say what city you would come from or what village you had come from and so that so flags are an old World thing we don't have any evidence of flags in the new world. All right He's also wearing a turban. He's got this big turban that's draping off the back of his head And he very clearly has this distinct beer that's popping out now native Americans Sometimes they can you know they are they're asiatic they have they have Asian DNA and And Asians don't really grow typically sometimes they'll grow the little like Stash and a little bit of a beard here, but they don't have that big thick beer that you would see You know like in Europe or along the Mediterranean in the Middle East And so this guy's this big thick beard and then he's got boots on his feet as well And we think that these are these glyphs that you see to his left and right These are really really early omeck glyphs and they interpret that foot to the left as Saying that he came from somewhere. He was a traveler and so The thought here is so this is this is around 900 BC give or take a little bit They don't really they really have no idea when these when these are made like you go to all the monuments And it says made somewhere between 1500 BC and 400 BC and 400 BC They'll say 1500 BC and 400 BC and so they they really are uncertain about how old lot of these monuments are Make a big engine please But if we if we shoot for a dead center 900 BC The the Phoenicians out of the Mediterranean are launching these sailing expeditions around the coast of Africa These are the ancient worlds greatest sailors that we know of and and so there are There were like experimental archaeological or scientific I don't know Expeditions done that show if you would send one of these Early iron age boats or if you send any ship out of the Out of the the gates of Hercules or the Strait of Gibraltar and you send it out into the Atlantic just in it it drifts just a little bit too far without turning south along the African coast It will be carried by a current across the Atlantic Ocean down into the Bahamas The Caribbean and straight into the Gulf of Mexico and if that had happened If people who had looked like it there in the old world like this guy if that had happened Somebody from the old world that the largest civilization at the time the empire in this area would have been the old Mix and the the reason I feel so strongly about that is because we do not have flags Turbans or boots in the ancient Americas this guy looks nothing like a native American and the flag Turban and boots are all old world Features you know, it's fascinating to me too The image on the lower right of the birds head looks very similar to the carvings on go backly tippy Doesn't it? Yes, very the curve of the beak that's not how birds beaks look like that's that's a very distinct style of artwork Well, and it's even find the images of the birds from go backly tippy It's this it's this raised relief art style so people talk about it a lot with with go backly tippy I mean think about this. This is this is 11,600 years ago and you have You have artisans and stone masons who have been practicing for so long That now they're able to take a blank piece of stone and carve the face off to reveal The artwork from underneath it not carve the artwork into the stone Right, but carve the stone away and reveal this sculpture from a new earth How similar does that look? It's bizarre right real similar and so it's the it's the exact same kind of Art style that you see in the mic realm exactly the 3d Stone carvings instead of carving it directly into the stone Carve the stone around it. They're both doing the same thing. They take a lot of time. I mean how a lot more to imagine Stone carvings instead of carving it directly into the stone carvings stone around it. They're both doing the same thing. They take a lot of time I mean how a lot more imagine weird weird stuff It's also like the idea that this is documenting time You know that the the handbags or whatever those things are what it what it actually is is the Sun going over the earth Hmm, you know, I have I'm writing a paper about this But this might be a good place to talk about it So you know that the handbag mystery is very fascinating. We have them in Assyria. We have them Mesopotamia As far as I know I don't think one's been found in Egypt You can you can see them on the top of those T pillars and go backly-tepy And there's one on the omech realm are you familiar with this? Monument 19 if we can look that up. I mean it did it I think it's the coolest handbag and when I saw it in person I like jumped I had been waiting lose the same thing Olmec monument 19 that so this guy he's wrapped in He's sitting in Ketsal he's sitting in Ketsal koa if you could you do the one at the top level we get the full picture there We go so this stone is probably about this big this probably about this big and it sits on a table like this So he's sitting inside the feathered serpent Ketsal koa And so he's sitting inside the feathered serpent and he's holding this handbag And I'm not sure so he has this and if you can if you see he has a feathered serpent mask around his head as well I'm not sure what exactly is above him there well there actually two It's really hard to make it out But what's above him that little box looking thing is some kind of box that's being held up by two birds on each end But the important thing here is the fact that this is the first depiction of the feathered serpent in all of Mesoamerica that we know of and it's It might be the oldest handbag known as far as like what we have official dates for and so the idea here is that he's some kind of Sacred shaman bringer of enlightenment bringer of knowledge something like that and so I had been on the hunt for another handbag everywhere I go. I'm always looking for handbag. I was in Cambodia a couple weeks ago I'm going around the temples of Angkor Wat and there's hieroglyphs and and Carvings all over the walls. I'm looking for a handbag. I can't find one but when I was in when I was in central Mexico, I was at a site called Kakashla and I found another handbag person I've never like officially published it. It's all my ex if you'd want to look it up. What is the timeline for that one? They don't really know when you look at the monument. It says it says anywhere from 1400 BC to 400 BC. That's just what they think. I mean the old Mexico. The old Mac realm is so uncertain and We don't have hard dates for almost anything. They appear on the historical on this historical timeline is a fully fledged Civilization capable of creating what you're seeing from the very beginning just like so many civilizations is like as soon as they arrive You know as soon as they arrive in the world they're doing everything to the fullest capacity and We don't have any evidence in the old Mac realm of them Working their way towards being able to do things like this is just from the very beginning They're able to make monuments like this move these 50 ton all-neck heads. The largest head is this you'll find this interesting so There was a nautical engineer that mech which is an organization I'm with. It's the Maya exploration center. It's run by Dr. Ed Barnhart I'm a member of it and one of the guys that worked with us traveled into the old mac realm. He's a nautical engineer. He's fascinated with He's fascinated with how were the old mechs moving these huge heads up and down these rivers So they live in like the rivers swamps they have to cross some mountain ranges. How are you getting these heads? 90 miles away from the Sierra de la Tuchla volcanic belt That's where they're pulling the basalt from because we found unfinished heads like at the base of these big basalt quarries and They're transporting them 90 kilometers away through you know like I was saying rivers and 90 miles or kilometers I think it's kilometers. It's kilometers as the crow flies. I'm pretty sure and so much further when you're actually dealing with the complications of the terrain and and so He was fascinated like okay How did they get them to the river and and then when how did they get them on the boat and when it's on the boat? How exactly does this work if they're transporting it by boat and kind of the same mystery in Egypt too, right? Like how how do the nuances of these things work? so he devised this Algorithm or whatever where you could put in the hypothetical size of your omeck raft and put in the hypothetical size of an Olmeck head into this database or whatever and When you made a raft that was too big to go down the narrow stretches of the Coetz Calco's river Which is like the omeck's Nile river? When the raft was too big and too wide to actually go down the river and you put a five ton omeck head on it It would sink that raft But the smallest omeck head is six tons and the largest one is 52 tons So how are they? How are they doing it and this is something that like all archaeologists have quietly known this idea of they're just being transported on these simple balsa rafts Must be wrong. It's you know, it's it's unexplained. How are these things being done? And I just find this realm really fascinating Wow This route and then when do they even know what language they spoke? No, we we don't know what language they spoke We don't even know what they called themselves the only reason we call them the Olmex is because Cortez 1519 to 1521 he's moving through Mexico to conquer to no street law in the Aztec capital During this time you have these Spanish chroniclers that are taking in information You know taking in information, but not at the rate that everything's being destroyed. You know all these people are dying from this disease and influenza and There's a record of What the people who lived in the Olmex region are called at that time in 15 1520 let's say and Aztecs called them the Olmex in their language in all wattle and those Olmeck The the name means the rubber people or the people of the land of rubber they produced rubber and that's how the Olmex We're so rich so early on in time, but these were not the people living in 1519 or not the Olmex There has already the Olmex have fallen and there are other cultures that have risen and fallen in this same region as well The Olmex are far far far far into the distant past The Aztecs maybe didn't even know who the Olmecs were You know, you know, so are you familiar with Teotibokan? Yeah You know the the mat the three massive we have the temple of the Sun the temple of the moon and then the temple of Ketsokoa and they form this kind of like Orion's belt alignment similar to Giza well, you know when the Aztecs arrived in Mexico Teotibokan had been abandoned from most of a thousand years We think so when they arrived Teotibokan has already gone We don't even know the name of Teotibokan. We don't know the name of the people. We don't know the name of the city No, we know their relationship with other people around them like the Maya were at war with Teotibokan But the civilization already fallen so when the Aztecs arrived the Olmex had been gone for Almost 2,000 years at least the Olmex already been gone Teotibokan have been gone for thousand years The Maya had already collapsed to the Maya collapse long before the Spanish got there And so you know, it's just again like the the Americas are just so Mysterious and there's so much to know there and so kind of getting back to what I was saying is when I When I talk about the mysteries of the Americas I immediately get Accosted by other of my quote unquote colleagues. I don't have any colleagues in the academic realm But you know other academics who will like Immediately jump in my comment section on X or whatever and they'll reprimand me and they'll be like Oh, so back to the pseudo archaeology is it and I'm like so so I can't talk about anything that's fascinating I need to talk about things that are boring so you don't get upset with me and now it's just like the The popular audience has completely had enough of it and I'll have like 15 people jump in and defend me and be like yeah, and they'll be like and they'll be like you will be like you know Okay, this is a perfect Representation of what you guys do. I step just slightly out of this line or what you think is appropriate for me And I'm talking about things that are interesting that inspire people to be interested in the ancient world to go see these sites like these people They don't like you they don't like the people that you have on but how many people do you think you've sent to Egypt? You know like you had a significant impact the show had a significant impact on me being interested in the ancient world and I have traveled all over the world You know because largely, you know some of this show inspired me to do that and And I'm probably one of the few people that found you because of Graham Hancock yeah, rather than the other way around and And so you know I've traveled all over the world and then what I have done is inspired other people to travel around the world So you know how many of these archaeologists that are keyboard warriors hiding hiding behind you know a desk or whatever how many of these people are inspiring people to travel around the world and And you know it's just it's just again We're about to reach this like archaeological wild west where I don't really know what's gonna happen in the future You're always gonna have people that are threatened by an emerging new thing and They're they're going to attack it like you know Famously in this world Howard Stern used to attack podcast is being useless. Oh really why you waste your time? Yeah, get a radio show figure out how to do it. This is the beginning the early days You know obviously you can't do that anymore but I think the same thing is happening with art with archaeologists because Flint Dibble's own University that has an archaeology program. They're cutting the archaeology. That's not that yeah, which is this is why like you're in this like Survival mode this famine mode and fam. It's terrible, but famine thinking is always very dangerous You you see it with people that don't want other people to be successful It exists in the comedy world. There's famine thinking when other people start doing better They're sort of tacking those people they never attack people that aren't doing as well It's just a natural human instinct unfortunately and it's a natural human instinct from people with poor character And I think that these academic institutes they reinforce poor character and they they actually encourage it poor character and the this like Labeling people in the worst possible light in order to make your point Which is like ad hominem attacks are always a sign that your argument sucks Everybody knows that if you really understand debating and you really understand like the actual impact that these kind of conversations have on people The objective person on the outside looking at it See someone attacking someone calling them all his name unfounded. Mm-hmm. Oh, that guy's argument probably sucks like instantaneously So they're destroying themselves while we're doing this But this is you'll see this in every walk of life you'll see this in everything It's just a human thing when they don't want to work as hard as other people or they don't have the young fire like you have Like there's a thing that people have when they're very curious and young and they don't have Maybe a lot of responsibilities or bills or problems and they can just they can devote their energy to this pursuit The terrifies people that have been kind of like half-assing it for a long time half-assing it and hiding behind these These you know certificate on their wall that show that they're the they these are the gatekeepers of information Yeah, yeah, it's like it's not gonna work anymore. It doesn't work anymore with podcast. It's not gonna work anymore with Your kind of work in archaeology. It's not gonna work anymore with UFO disclosure it's not gonna work anymore with any of this stuff like people are Way more interested and getting to the bottom of things and they don't trust institutions anymore. Yeah, yeah and And the institutions are are feeling the pressure. Yeah independent media You know like going back to the go back to the tippy tree situation. It'll be really interesting to see You know like Jimmy's an interesting position where where and maybe there's maybe there's a way that like the relationship between Independent people and the popular enthusiastic audience and you know the archaeological departments and in turkey can have a better relationship because of these things in the future You know how that would work people like you become the head of an archaeology department That's this is really the only way it's gonna work. Yeah, it's like it's almost like these these institutions have to feel so much pressure and so much discussed from the general public that They start incorporating new people into it. You know sort of like CNN is trying to hire objective journals now Like we gotta get rid of Don Lemon and Brian Stelter or actually he's back But they so they they try to course correct because that's the only way to survive Because it's not working what you're doing is not working from from what I can see In the limited amount that I see and this this is the hard part is is sort of we get a skewed view Into the archaeological world or the academic world and and sometimes I don't even know what's what because because the archaeologists that make their opinions known are usually the ones with really bad opinions, you know and and then all the other people that are pretty agreeable they just kind of sit on the sideline right and It's hard to know like what are most people? What are most these these future archaeologists? Where do they think where are there where's their mind out in some of the young people I talked to they are fascinated by Graham Hancock they may not agree with you know like they I guess in a way I could say they may love the first nine episodes of Ancient Apocalypse but in the tenth episode where Graham gives his the end of his thesis They'll be like mmm Okay, I see the evidence differently But this is really fascinating and some of the mysteries you pointed out along the way or valid like you know the idea of Well, you know the the artifact record of the tools that we have that the Egyptians and the old kingdom were using Does not fit the megalithic architecture that they then produced okay? What's the answer to this mystery could it have been that we're missing a chapter Of history that's before that where a different civilization did it or is there For some reason there's an artifact record that's lost to us today And so you have you know guys like Graham who will come in and pause it Well, there could have been a lost civilization that did this and then an archaeologist the young archaeologist may disagree with a lost civilization But they say but Graham you really pointed out the fact and made it well known that you know the artifact record that we have how they build The pyramids that's a big mystery and how they build the pyramids. That's a big mystery This is worth considering and they like Graham you know so a lot of young archaeologists at least I say a lot It's really just the ones I talked to in my spare time that are my age. They're fascinated by these ideas And my hope is maybe these people become leaders someday, but at the same time like I don't know to get ahead in that world man Yeah, you gotta be a dog the world's poisoned and the people that top are not going to let go They're gonna stay in there to let you know gnome choms can say This is I just think it's never gonna end in that way I think it's got to become some sort of an independent branch like you know a break off. Yeah, you know Zahi is a Zahi is a really good example of what I think goes on in archaeology in Egypt You know you have a lot of different missions from different countries working in Egypt Yeah, like a German mission. Yeah, the American mission. You know different people working in different sites And I can't speak to every country that's working there. You have Australian missions that are working in Egypt against certain sites, but but You know When I when I watched Zahi I'm like, yeah, this is the what you're seeing This is the attitude that has been at the spear point of Egyptology for the last lifetime and And you can just imagine what goes on like I mean think about being on a dig site with him Think about working in his industry underneath him Think about all the people that were a part of the discoveries that he made that feel so Disrespected and so overlooked you know not once during that podcast that he ever acknowledged all the hardworking archaeologists that Or actually there in the dirt doing all this hard work He just took all this limelight and so you know clearly his identity is tied into what's in his coffee table book and You know for him to act like that's the Bible of Giza is insane I own the book and I and I've read it and it has half of a page about the subterranean chamber in kufu's pyramid So it's it's you can write a whole book about that What's your Keep going Just gonna say I was just gonna say man When you go to Egypt there's some Things that you're gonna be appalled by by like the the modern Egyptian world I uh I Do this series on YouTube called megalith you've never seen before and I'm always trying to like find these weird obscure blocks That you never see on Google and I'm walking around the side of the pyramid of And there's a turtle A human bird yeah, and it's from the guard that's like sitting up on top of the hill the Egyptian guard looking down at me And I go around to To land of kin who I'm traveling with have you heard of him before? No He's an American that lives in Egypt and he's got his theories on on the pyramids and I'm traveling with him I was like there's a turd on the pyramid over there and he's like he's like yeah You know and I was like a tourist and he goes no not not tourists and so you know That the poop on the pyramid is pretty much like That's kind of my that's kind of my mental that's burned into my brain my image of of Egyptology In some aspects like when it's isolated to Egypt I can't speak for all the other missions that operate in Egypt, but more you What's say I don't remember? What we where we at when I was gonna interrupt oh this is what I remember What is your opinion about Christopher Dunn's ideas? I don't know I really don't know man I am to for people that don't know Christopher Dunn has a theory that the Great Pyramid was actually some sort of a power generator Mm-hmm that it produce hydrogen gas. I don't know. I mean you know I know that that the Egyptians it's obvious that they have Technology that it that is lost to us today the drill holes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The way they cut the concrete They excuse me the granite. Yeah. Yeah But you know I really don't know it as far as the you know like the the manufacturing aspects the the engine I guess the engineering the potential Usages of these artifacts. It's not really like my specialty like I you know like these these vases are Those a heavy one these vases are fascinating, but you know I guess my interest would be studying like what can I what can we learn about the context around these things and How they existed in their world and how people interacted with them more so than You know what did these things or they actually used for I guess and how exactly were they made and so I just don't know about Chris Dunn's theory it you know I guess the first thing it comes in my mind is like Well, you know most of the pyramid is limestone and the interior is granite I I hear people talk about how like the makeup of the granite could be Conductive in some way, but man. It's just it's like the farthest thing from my set of knowledge right It is absolutely fascinating though because if he's accurate if he if he's on to it like boy does that change everything? Mm-hmm and if those Italian scientists that believe that there's Literally two kilometer deep structure underneath the pyramid if they're correct Boy yeah, the whole thing is like what are we even talking about now? Yeah, I find that fascinating I think that the the main drama around those scans was you know when the scans came out I don't think anybody was denying what was seen on the scans. I think it was like they They had the They had the artistic interpretations of the art concepts that they produced of what they thought was in there And I think a lot of people were like whoa. Yeah, that was a little weird because because even me I was a little bit like huh when when they they made a They made an art concept of it And they took the kings chamber in the relieving chambers in the great pyramid and super pose it onto the middle pyramid and they I guess quintupled it like they made five of them and I was thinking like Why why do that like you're kind of you're kind of undermining what your scan is when you're creating like a fantasy image? Because You're getting ahead of your skis. Yeah, you're getting ahead of yourself because you know We need to do the whole scan again But you need to have tests so like Louise Alvarez or you're familiar with him He worked on the on the Manhattan project with Oppenheimer and after the war in the 50s or in the 60s He got to go to Egypt and he scanned in the comfort pyramid He did the moo-an scans and when he was in there they tested They tested it all before so he was able to scan up through the pyramid He got the pinnacle of the pyramid and he got all four corners and so they tested it and they did it several times just to confirm that what they were getting was right and The I think the moo-an scan only scan like 19% of the pyramid. This is the 60s. So But they didn't find anything but the Stanford project came the next decade and they found subterranean Chambers under coffers pyramid. There's one like 69 feet down and another one 120 feet down huge chambers bigger than the chambers inside the pyramids and So yeah, I mean, I guess we just have to wait and see What's gonna happen? And I know that the scanned pyramids guys the ones who found the the void above The Grand Gallery in the Great Pyramid. I know they're interested in this now and they're gonna verify what if this is true or not and Yeah, I'm interested in seeing how this goes. This could be a big year, man If if they actually drill into That void above the Grand Gallery. That's gonna be a big deal What do you think's in that void? I have no idea. You know, that's pretty big right? It's a size of two semi trucks. It's The same size or bigger than the Grand Gallery itself and the Grand Gallery when you go in it's a huge building or you know You're inside a building inside of the pyramid and It's as big or bigger than that and you know the most conservative explanation is that It's an open interior that served as a ramp where they were pulling the blocks up higher up to the top Nobody really knows exactly how they were built in the in the the angle of that Grand Gallery is really really steep I don't know that you could pull an 80 ton Granite block up an angle of that steep. It seems like everyone who's an expert in and that You know who studies independently is like now you're never gonna pull oh never gonna pull weight up To be honest. I have no idea. You know, I'm I was fascinated when I heard in Egypt, tologist when I was in Egypt in January and I was asking him what do you think that they're gonna find in that void? And he was like he was telling me I think that that's where kufu is buried and I was like oh, okay really So you actually think that he's still in the pyramid. He was like yeah I think I think all the rest of it was a decoy and I think that his son who's able to continue his legacy like permanently Sealed him in that in that tune. I was like that's that's fascinating and I said you know There's other voids that they found too. What do you think of those and so we're standing on this Voluca at 1 a.m. on the Nile and we're just you know shooting the shit and he was like he's like I have something to show you And he pulls out his phone. He was like I cannot send to you, but I will show you for one second He showed me a photo of the inside of a chamber that I've never I hadn't seen before and it hasn't been published yet I'll let you know when it comes out But it's burned into my mind. It's from the floor shooting across the room All you can see is two walls meeting each other in a roof and I said I said that's in a pure that's in that's in the great Pyramid he goes and he was like And he wouldn't share he wouldn't share it. I mean I didn't want to press him too much But there was a stole his phone They can't keep this Fuck out here. Well, you know man that's happening all over the world like this delay of Information is all over the world. Do you remember the the tunnels that came out or the the Maybe's in November the headlines that no yeah I was in November the headlines that came out about the tunnels that were found under Cusco in Peru I connect to succesey womana and I go underneath the core of conscious. They knew about that a long time ago. Oh, yeah. Yeah Yeah, I documented in the in fall of last year I made friends with the head archaeologist at that site and one early morning at like 4 a.m. He took me down inside part of the tunnels and Yeah, I was I was in there before it all came out and he took me into so all these archaeologists They like live on site and these are all these are all these are all inka people So they believe that they're studying their ancestral heritage. These are really good people and I'm in there You know shotty little home. That's only archaeological site. I mean they probably make no money and but they're just they're just so passionate about this And they feel like they're doing something that's like one of the most important things anybody in the world is doing and Have you been to Peru no when you go to Cusco, man the sacred valley? It's it has something there that not even Egypt has I don't know how to explain it really it's It's it's a sacred place. It's like the sacred valley is exactly right. It's a magical kind of place Montreal, P2 You should book two days when you go because you're gonna get rained on on one of the days But you're out there on this you know 7,800 foot mountain top and it's so steep you cannot see the bottom when you're looking over the side of the city And you're just in this sacred place in the middle of the Amazon up in the mountains and it's just a different place Man, um, it has a type of charm that like not even eat it has Egypt You're gonna be blown away by the structures you're gonna be blown away by the pyramids and the temples But this is something else. It has a it has an other world lately Like you feel like you're on some kind of like Star Wars planet when you're there It's fascinating because of the environment. Yeah, it's like the environment You know, I I wondered if it was when you're in Cusco, you're an 11,500 foot elevation I wondered if I was like missing oxygen to my brain and I was like, well this place is hilarious Awesome, yeah, but no, it really is amazing and the people are so nice and So anyways, what was that? I think it's I think it was very similar to Alexandria's library. I think it was a place of study where people are studying the studying the stars Archaeo-estronomy is like it is like the next frontier of of archaeology It's the way that people it's the way that ancient people are interacting with the night sky and what they know about the cosmos You know the Maya were calculating like millions of years into the future and millions of years into the past And they had this numerology system. That's just amazing But anyways, so I met some at saucye will monitor they take me into this back room and They show me all these bodies that they pull I probably shouldn't be saying this but we're they show me all these bodies that they pulled out of the tunnels And it was these it was these they thought that they were like sacred guardians of Whatever is inside of this tunnel and these are all buried at saucye will not so there's like skulls everywhere There's boxes and all these bones. There was a there was like an obsidian Mirror with like a little stick on it bunch of gold artifacts in this room It was just boxes upon boxes upon boxes upon boxes upon boxes and I haven't seen any of this stuff published yet so this is how much of a delay there is on archaeology and What is the delay in that stuff because it would seem like such an enormous Discovery yeah, it's um what I think it is is Well, you kind of have I would I would say it's a mix of a lot of different things Let's say let's say the most non-malicious side is that these countries are totally dependent upon tourism and they want to prepare like a media You know like a big media buzz to drive tourism So they want to do it at the right time of the year and then it'll inspire people to book their trip down To the sacred valley, you know, it's all it's about it's a money-making machine right? It's it's it's their biggest draw to come and see this part of the world It seems so counterintuitive because new discoveries would make people want to visit Yeah, yeah, they just want to hold it off I to like the right part of the year. This is this is something I've heard in Peru. This is something I've heard in Egypt you know the Do you remember the tomb of topmost of the second that was just discovered recently? I heard about that so let me think that that came out two or three months ago And when I was there in October I had heard that that it was that it was found So so these things are happening way way in advance now the other side is there sort of this zahi loss effect like like Ed Barnhart my professor mentor he wanted to study In Peru whether or not the Inca or ancient Peruvians are like fusing these andesite stones together So you've seen how they how the stones like fit together in the same way that they do at the valley temple in Egypt the red granite So they're using this gray andesite. It's which is sometimes the end aside is harder than the granite in Egypt and they're they're like Morphin these stones together at impossible angles, you know I'm sure you've seen the 12 sided stone and Maybe you've seen the scoop marks on the side of the stone where it looks like the outside of the stone was softened at one point And you go like scrape a piece off and so it's it's 12-sided stone and maybe you've seen the scoop marks on the side of the stone where it looks like the outside of the stone was softened at one point And you go like scrape a piece off and so it's it's Dr. Barnhart's idea that somehow Well, and it's not without evidence so in the Chilean desert The Inca are building upon the Inca Empire were building upon roads that went all across South America And these roads weren't initially the foundations weren't laid by the Inca They may have been improved by the Inca, but they go back to the Warie Empire which predates the Inca and it almost certainly goes back further than this The southernmost point of these highways It goes off into the Chilean desert into the Ottecoma desert and they just kind of disappear into the desert and for a long time It's been a mystery of what the heck are these paruvians doing Down in the Chilean desert. What is it down there? What's the resource that they need? But there are these? There are these acid deposits that are down in that desert and Somehow they they invented somehow they invented this clay pottery that Whatever they used to make it the acid wouldn't melt through the pottery so you could carry it There's evidence of this at Tuanaku as well, which I'm sure you've heard of Tuanaku There's evidence of this acid at Tuanaku and people would talk about how the How the acid could like melt the stones and sometimes you talk about how like bird poop or bird I don't even know like throw up or whatever could could melt the stone And so there's all these you know ideas that were these myth myths about the stones melting anyways Dr. Barnard's idea was that was that those roads go down there because they are Mining and collecting the acids and they're bringing the back and they're softening the outside of the stone and rather than carving the stones to fit together They're setting the stones on top of each other and it's creating its own morph if that makes sense They're the stones are morphing together and so he there's two Reasons but you see them a lot as to why he thinks this There was an earthquake in 1650 that destroyed the Spanish city that was sitting on top of the Inca city of Cusco So you have this ancient city that's there and the stones are so massive the Spanish couldn't tear them all down So they just gave up and they built new buildings over it in 1650 this Horific earthquake knocked down the Spanish city and ancient buildings were still there had moved at all in 1950 another earthquake happened knocked down the Spanish city and the the ancient city is still standing so now these are preserved as you know cultural heritage monuments and they don't build over them But they like like a starbucks or a KFC or a McDonald's will be built inside of an ancient Inca building You're walking and it's like a megalithic stonework inside of KFC. It's amazing Wow, but it's everywhere. It's the whole city. It's the whole modern city when you go one day You just walk walk walk walk walk one of the projects. We're gonna do for the Maya exploration center I'm gonna go down to Cusco for a month and I'm gonna make The world's first map of where all the stones actually are there there is a map that tourist get But it's a shitty map. It's not even accurate so that's one of my projects is I'm gonna map all of these stones and where they are around Cusco and it'll be like on an app or a website or something where you can find it But yeah, it's it's just it's incredible So they preserve the stones and so when you're walking around getting back to why we see some images of the stones Yeah, yeah, would indicate that they possibly were melted like what's like the best man? How could you search this up? Maybe just look up Cusco Cyclopian stones we may be able to find an image and I could show you something on my phone. I know I've got it on my phone Okay, um Maybe I could send it to you, but I'll actually send it to you And So so some of these are from socks they will mine Okay, so to the top left here, so that's the 12-sided stone It's on this building when you walk around this building the name is escaping me right now It's the palace of it's the palace of something When you walk around this when you walk around this building You're gonna see some of the stones where it earthquake has separated So you have two stones that sit perfectly on top of each other. Well And when it earthquake happens one of these stones will slide back and when it does You'll see an angle that ramps up like this up to the exterior And so what it looks like is the stone is placed on top and it smushed the stone down does that make sense? Um, man, I If we searched hard enough we could find it here. I will send you this photo. I've got it on my phone Um Yeah, uh, yeah Just that idea And so it melted into place. Yeah. Oh, okay So they cut these stones used as this is the theory is that it right there? No, no, so they cut these stones Use the acid and set them in to seal So that there's no gap in between the stones So it's not that they have to carve it perfectly But rather that the weight of the other stone they get it roughly the right shape and then and then lay them down on top of each other Um, it's on it's on one of these walls So that one you have your cursor on that's fake. I walked up to it and it's like hollow I was like tapping on it's just a fake wall um Some I don't know why in cusco they have some they they some people will decorate their walls as to make them look like they're just like Clopian walls and you go knock on it and it's like plastic But there's tons and tons and tons and tons the majority of the city is just the ancient city What's this? Inkestone monument A rubber bridge down It's like someone cut out a piece of it Yeah, somebody went up to it in the middle of night like a drunk tourist and started hitting it with a hammer The 12 sided stone which is like the most sacred stone in cusco Yeah, fuck and gross Yeah, okay, so so you see this long uh the stone of the 12 angles that I went right there in the middle That stone is in that alley right there if you could find it But uh, you know also crazy there's a little building on top of that Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's so weird about it. Look at this stupid house. That's fallen apart. That's on top of these ancient stones Yeah, it's it's crazy man. It's uh, it's an amazing place. You'll walk around and just be consistently stunned by the amount of stone work that's there and what they are able to achieve and this kind of cyclopian stone work where the stones I'll have these you know no two stones are exactly alike um You you see that stone work in one place in in Egypt which is at the uh the valley temple Next to the Sphinx and you don't see that as far as I know recreated anywhere else but in Peru it's everywhere Wow, yeah, so that's kind of a repair as well. You can see that it fell apart and they put it back up But these are these are mortarless buildings. Oh, hey Go go if you go just one below the one that you're at right now So this is the temple of the moon at Machu Picchu. Look at the size of the of the stone wall That's one stone on the lower on the lower part of it And you can see that the size of the stones that are together is as earthquakes have rattled the city The wall still kind of holds together at bins and holds together completely mortarless. It's just fascinating and on top of that Machu Picchu itself 60% of the Megalithic construction work is in the foundation of Machu Picchu So it's underneath what you're seeing and uh and there are areas that are roped off where you can go down like underneath the city But it's all roped off and I I don't know a lot about it Um, I got I got a little bit of a photo of where you can go down into these I don't think I think they're like man-made labyrinths that are underneath the city But there's a lot more there and so when you're there you just get this like intrigue and uh and I was curious how Egypt would stack up because I did uh I did Peru Last year and then the day I landed from Peru. I had it off to Egypt for a month and then Damn what a life. It was that you got a great life dude. That's cool. Yeah. Well. Thank you. That's really cool It's just uh how far is this from Narska? Very far Peru is deceivingly big Peru is like half the size of the United States. Really? It's really really big. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. No idea Yeah, the Narska lines are really really really far away It's very hard to do a You can't do A tour of like all of Peru. It's too big. It would be like it would be like if you were gonna go on a United States tour You'd have to pick a place to go because it's just so massive Usually when people like do a tour of Peru They'll pick like paracas and Narska, you know, you pick these desert coastline areas and you go see that because to get from there to the sacred valley Is quite a journey Yeah, yeah, I would take it takes like a day and a half of consistently traveling to actually get there Have you seen the new scans of the Narska lines where they found new Pre-tribless. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The Man there's gonna be so much like that. That's gonna be found people are gonna be what is all that stuff fly these Well, you know, it's it's amazing like how exactly One what's the inspiration for making these giant Uh, you know the sophistication is in the planning and the math behind how exactly you make these How exactly you make these images in the ground that are Miles wide and very intricate like if you look at the spider The spider there's a spider there that's anatomically correct for a local spider that's there and there's some Aspect about the spider in a detail that they incorporate that you would only know if you were like really studying these little creatures And wanted to recreate it on a massive scale, but the legs man They're they're mapping I mean look this is this is any Normus thing in the ground that if you don't have flight You're never gonna be able to know that you did it that you did it precisely right or Unless you had very meticulous planning and everything But again, what's the inspiration for this? What's the inspiration? Why would you be doing this? What is this for? Why does it have that one leg that hooks off to the left? I don't know so that that one length and piece very strange. Well, you know the nazka they The exact timeline of their civilization is a little bit blurry But I mean they had they had disappeared more than a thousand years before the Spanish arrived Jamie can I ask you what what is that all about? Why does it have all those additional lines? Don't someone's doing different I don't know is that just art. Yeah. I think they're making it on Maybe one of those sandtables or something like that cool t-shirt. Mm-hmm. There's some other weird ones like the one that looks like an astronaut Yeah, he does. I actually think that that's a I think she thinks that's a pulpal line which is It's a different culture that does the same thing if you if you look up pulpal lines You maybe also there's quite a few of them. Look at that one the gesture one the one with the antenna the upper left. Oh, yeah Look at him. No, no, no, you know that yeah, there it is Like that one. Where does that come from? You can't make it that big Make it a little smaller. There you go. What is that? And what is the verse? What's up? This is AI on car. Oh are they? Yes, but this is a I'm sorry This is the a I looking look at the shark look at the shark on there Isn't that cool so you have seafaring dude? Okay, do you know of vinapu in in Easter Island? It's I think it's called vinapu It's this platform building that on Easter Island with all the big heads That is the exact same architecture as what we were seeing in Peru these people are traveling out into the Pacific Ocean and back You know it just it's it's fascinating man Thor hired all with kontiki. He proved it. Yep. There we go Yeah, so you know it's fallen apart. It's not the same stone. It's A local volcanic sandstone. I think I don't think that this is basalt We might be the salt Volcanic it's a volcanic stone. I'm actually pretty sure it's basalt. It's made out of the same thing of the Easter Island heads so you have this vinapu, but Another project that that Maya exploration center is working on later this year is we're going down to Make a new updated map archaeological map of Easter Island rapinui And I'm not going but it's dr. Barnhart doing it in there's another site down on the remote end of the island where there's another Structure like this that you never see mentioned and so that we're gonna document that and put that out So there's no doubt that I mean these people are incredibly advanced Incredibly connected incredibly intelligent and it's just so mysterious Okay, do you know of the blinds? The Earth of this. No. Bligh California. They're in their noscolines up there really yeah. Yeah. We should look this up Yeah, so where's life? Oh I think it's right before you get to Nevada and you're like driving so if you if you you'll pass right by if you're driving from Las Vegas in California, I think So blinds. Yeah, we should yeah, we should zoom in from Google Earth. This would be cool Where's the German on the 10 on the 10? Right where my cursor is so oh, so that's Bligh California. You might be able to look up Bligh line Okay, so I was trying to show you where it was oh, sorry. So these are the Yeah, they're huge So dude, this is not the fuck is that this this is I mean to me it's pretty obvious that there are people who are and this is they think that this is younger than the noscolines but even if it is it's pretty obvious to me that you have traders and you have people who are Very capable of traveling all up and down the Americas. It's all interconnected and I think these lines exist It's it's not really Majorly studied but I think that there's a few of these of these images that are out there and more that are further off into the desert That some people have one of them was a monkey. Yeah, how do they even know what monkeys are? I'm trying to clear Well, okay, here's that's a great that's a great question. They're were there monkeys in California now I doubt it but there An idea of how this could happen is so at Teotubicon like I was talking to you This is an hour north of Mexico City There were monkeys that we have found that were in zoos in Teotubicon like like dead monkeys that are buried and this Species of monkey is only found in the southern Amazon so it's all the way up in northern Mexico So all of these things are connected. Okay another another Jamie can we look up please for clarity that one was a nascar on the monkey was not in the California Okay, okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, those monkeys are improved well even so there are their Amazony and monkeys lines are The article starts showing different stuff Explaining what they were so comparisons to NASA found in 1932 by pilot That's just trying to figure out. Okay. Well, that's one of them looks like a giraffe That's sort of the fence could be a deer. Yeah, it could be a deer, but are deer are deer out there? Quadger petits. Well, there's deer in California for sure. There's probably the meal deer in that part of the country There certainly is in Nevada Nevada has a big population of deer California has figure represents horses reintroduced Storford did sometime after the 1500 so maybe they don't know when these school Yeah, they have no idea. Oh, that's a horse. Doesn't look like horse to me. I think the tail though is a lot longer than it Oh, yeah a little a deer they've got a little tail like a shitty artist I was stumbling on something with the old mech stuff. I think it was the old mech that there's a bunch of this guy See a zoom morphs here so much of other weird Rocks that had like Ant the primorphized animals Oh, man. Okay. Do you know about have you ever heard of where Jaguars? No, oh dude. This is like this is my shit. Okay, so Where Jaguars? It is another piece of evidence of at least Well, the lower part of North America connecting with the Amazon. Oh, dude. This is this is badass. All right, so So the very first some of the first evidence that we have of people in the Americas So you think of like where do you where do you imagine that people migrate into the Americas like where do you think we would find the first evidence at? Oh boy. Well, how would imagine be somewhere where the omecs were? Yeah, maybe so. Yeah, or you know Traditionally sure sure traditionally people think that maybe you would find it you know in Alaska coming in You know people migrating over during or before and after the ice age sure or I'm sorry during and before the ice age And then some people might think that you know You have Paul and Asians that are skipping across the the Pacific that are coming into but most of the time It's West Coast you'd find people think you'd find something out there Some of the oldest evidence that we have are 30,000 year old caves on the east side of the Amazon on the east side the opposite side of the Americas as far Away as you can possibly get from you know where people would have traditionally arrived in the Americas now That evidence is constantly changing there's constantly new things that are being found like white sands and there's what? 150,000 year old like bone tools or chisels that are being found where people were cutting into woolly mammoth bones You know crazy stuff, but one of these old evidences is People in the Amazon 20 to 30,000 years ago on the east coast in Brazil on the Atlantic coast and they have these I think it may have been Teddy Roosevelt's granddaughter that found this She was she was the South American archaeologist. She was inspired to go to the Amazon and so It's really interesting in the Olmec realm There's what's called a where Jaguar. It's just like a it's like a where wolf spell You know the sort of the same But you have this you have these two different dichotomies in the Olmec world You have the Olmec heads which by the way, I brought you ahead. Oh Nice More stuff for this table Sit right next to hecklefish So this is made from basalt by the modern Olmec people. Whoa That's cool. Yeah super cool. So these guys. Thank you These guys we don't know who they are we don't know exactly what they represent Because they're they're just guys with normal faces, you know They have Olmec faces, but they're all wearing this helmet. What the hell does the helmet mean? It could be two different things It's a signature of their divine like rulership like we think they might be kings Somebody who can you know somebody who can commission a monument this big This is the testament to his power or these are revered ballgame players the Meso American ballgame I'm sure you've dove into this a little bit or it's both that The you know the most masculine thing that you can be is a great Meso American ballgame player And that's the king he wants to see himself out of it. It's the same thing as Marcus really a son I'm freaking his name The really bad emperor God I can't remember his name, but anyways he wanted to be seen like Hercules fighting in the in the Colosseum and So we think this might be a kind of similar thing There's a whole different type of people that are existing in the Olmec realm We can look up Olmec where Jaguar please Jamie Thank you and There's a whole different type of person. So here's one image if you keep scrolling you'll see Images that are carved into so this is a little bit of a better image right here But sometimes when they're carved into jade and you can see the light reflecting off of it you get a better you get a better Image of what these things really look like so where Jaguar Olmec and maybe do jade. Oh, yeah, there we go top top right Yeah, check that guy out so that's a human. That's not an animal It is a human who has turned into the essence of a Jaguar And we see this everywhere all over the Olmec world, but they're never the Colosseal heads They're always in jade or they're smaller Olmec monuments and sometimes the heads are Sometimes the heads are Are maimed like that the head is just completely destroyed and there's these Jaguar Claw's claws that are carved into an Olmec face like tearing apart its face Tearing apart the symbol that's on the top of their head and so a lot of people wondered like why are these scratch marks in all of these Olmec monuments But all the scratch marks only appear in Olmec monuments that are not the where Jaguar and so what I think This is a little bit of research that I'm doing and I'm writing a book on the Olmec right now is what I think is There's a feud between the rulers and the shamanic class and I think that these where Jaguar are people these people who are taking some kind of hallucinogen taking a psychedelic and and basically imbuing the essence of a Jaguar and some Strange crazy way that we can't explain these are feuding with each other and when I'm in Mexico and I'm in these museums where you have these Mushrooms stone effigies that are all lined up. I'll ask a local archaeologist there I'll be like so these mushrooms. Do you think that these depict hallucinogens that people that they may have been taking to get high? Oh, no, no I'm like really you don't like you look at all the crazy shit that ancient Americans are making if you look at ancient American artwork Anywhere you can tell it's all like mind-bending stuff to look at they're clearly I think they're being influenced by plants Now this where Jaguar Isn't just isolated to the Olmec world it also pops up at a place called shavine day one tar. Have you ever heard of this? This is in the Andes. It's one of the oldest cities in the Andes so before shavine We can follow the DNA evidence of burials like you can tell like okay, these these people are younger if we carbonate their bodies that are buried Underneath these temples and they're related to these old people that are older so you're trying to piece together this DNA web But it's very very loose So there's a place called there's a culture called karal soup a culture and they are building pyramids Before the old kingdom of Egypt ever even existed. This is this is 5500 years ago at least On the coast of Peru like right on the beach and there's like 15 huge pyramids out there But this is a non Pottery non artistic culture So we don't have pottery and we don't have art from them and we don't have stones statues or anything like that Just these structures and from what we can tell they keep getting hit by these like apocalyptic storms these tropical El Nino's Leneñas that are just Destroying their civilization and they're trying to To rebuild it again and eventually they say you know what forget this we're moving up into the Andes Well when they move up into the Andes on shavine day one tar They then come in contact with Amazonians. They meet Amazonians for the first time and all the sudden these people They have pottery they have art they have gods They have a pantheon they have stone statues and they are wear jaguars. They are these Shimano people. Oh This is from oh this is this on my ex. Oh cool So So I post about this today. So these faces right here These are on the side of the temple of shavine that faces east off into the Amazon and when you look at shavine pottery It's the same as Amazonian pottery in the region. So the people of the Andes As soon as they interact with the Amazon they take they acquire this religion this culture this iconography They completely change as a people and they start building The first structures that we know of that have interiors because before this these pyramids that were out on the coastline You're like walking on top of this big stone mound, but it's shavine. It's a it's a huge square style building that you can that has open doors that you can walk in through and all of this happens as soon as they interact with Amazonians and So yeah, so this is it's a huge structure The stones that make up the staircases. Oh my god. Okay. Have you seen the name is escaping me right now But uh But wandering wolf went out there my call is and he found that He saw these big trilithon stones that are sitting on the side of the mountain in Peru do you remember this? Giant stones That white stone is the same white stone that's used in the staircases and on the door jams and the lentils here It's shavine so you see that the the open door right there at the bottom. Yeah, so those white stones on the side Those stones may have come from that quarry that he went and visited where those gigantic You know trilithon bulbex size stones are it's really really far from here. I don't I don't know that would be something good that I should know So some of its megalithic some of its decent size It's it's really that front wall right there with that entrance the steps going up to it And then on the inside of the temple you have the megalithic stone work and then you have this Then you have this monolith on the inside so you see this guy look at that That's that's a that's a human with Jaguar fangs coming out of his mouth and All of these tendon has that are on the side of the temple they're facing out towards the Amazon It's telling us that this religion this idea of these people who are Somehow doing these shamanic practices which I think are so clearly so obviously Is plants like ayahuasca or whatever it is Inducing these people into a state of consciousness where somehow they're taking on the effects of the Jaguar like a you and Paul rosily talked about this and when he was talking about his His experience with ayahuasca. I believe he said and maybe he's on this show that for a moment like he shrunk down to the side of an atom and he's floating through the Amazon and then all of a sudden he was looking through like the eyes of a Jaguar for a moment and This is something constant theme amongst people done. I want. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so this is something that I think I think it's I think it's evidence. I mean we can go we can talk about this forever But I think there's so much evidence. Oh in this cool. Yeah, well, there's also evidence that jaguars eat the same plants Yes, yeah, have you seen this on uh What is it weird nature? There's a documentary at there called weird nature Wars tripping yeah, and and it's like it makes it it makes it a kin to like catnet But it's like the gem of our also has it so this is why I brought this up Terrence We get a very fascinating theory about why Ketamine in particular feels like an empty office building and his his theory it's like ketamine is like you enter a realm, but there's no one there And this is by the way he's talking about ketamine in like the 80s and 90s course His theory is that when you Enibe when you take a psychedelic medicine when you take any sort of psychedelic plant mushroom whatever it is You're not just having an experience You are also interacting with all of the experiences that have never been had with these things Which is one of the reasons why when people take certain psychedelics they have very clear Egyptian iconography appears in their in their trip and His believe or his theory was that it's far more complex than you're taking a psychedelic drug You're taking this psychedelic that allows you to interact with all the experiences anyone has ever had with those Including jaguars Now also there's always been this conflict between the ruling class and this shamanic ritual This is the illusinian mystery. Yeah shut all that stuff down When it makes sense that the claw marks would represent the battle between the shaman's and these ruling class Who of course don't want people tripping and opening their mind and questioning authority and trying to restructure everything and like It'd be a huge problem if you're like a zahi huwa sky Trying to keep the lid on everything and just keep control and power and Then you got all these people that are tripping balls that like have completely different ideas that you you have to sound that Well, what's the what's the issue here? The issue is these guys they get together in a circle and they drink this stuff And they start having these whacky ideas. Let's put a stop to that Let's put it the same way they did with the illusinian mysteries the same way they've done countless times Shamans that were like the whole sanna-claws things where he's coming down the chimney Why was that was because Siberian shamans were ostracized? They were forced to actually not Go through the doorways because they had to sneak into people's homes so they came down chimneys This is the theory. Oh, that's fascinating. Oh, which is like why would Santa come down the chimney? It's a mainly sense. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that was the idea like shout sanna's a shaman also Shout sanna at least in modern depiction so the exact same coloration as the aminee to mascara mushroom. Oh wow You've never seen the comparison as you sanna in the mushroom The fascinating comparison then this is also hotly debated You know, they say no. We'll cochocolo is the ones that made them red and white the sanna-clawses maybe but there's old pictures of Christmas images that always include elves And aminee to mascara mushrooms. There's old Christmas cards from like the turn of the century There's old like Merry Christmas. It's fucking mushrooms. There's mushrooms everywhere So mushrooms have a micro-rise-al relationship with coniferous trees particularly aminee to mascara is you would find them underneath pine trees the same way you find brightly colored presents under Christmas trees in I'm as scary as you would find them underneath pine trees. The same way you find brightly colored presence under Christmas trees. In order to dry them, they would pick these mushrooms and hang them in the trees. So they would air dry just like ornaments on a tree. Wow. There's so many parallels. It's really weird. The Sanham was a mushroom one is a weird one. It's a really weird one because there's a ton of the like, why are we so interested in fucking pine trees? Why is it? Well, those trees had this very connected relationship with those mushrooms. Yeah. Well, you know, I find that. So you find some of the ancient pictures of Christmas, ancient, Merry Christmas images. Well, this is like, yeah. Look, look, look at that shaman, that shaman to the left. Go back to the scroll back. Look at that Siberian shaman looks exactly like the coloration of an animal, I'm going to eat a mascara. Now go to that Merry Christmas image that you have. They're right next to your cursor. Look at that. I'm going to eat a mascara. A Merry Christmas and a happy new year. I'm going to need a mascara image. These women with good times, or these children rather with good times, Christmas. Have you ever tried these mushrooms? Yes. Didn't work. Really? Yeah. I think there's well, McKenna didn't have a good experience with them either. And there's a lot of thoughts that he had about whether or not they were genetically variable, whether or not they're get geographically and they've even seasonally variable that you're not dealing with the same mushrooms. Sort of like, you know, there's different version, like, obviously manipulated, but there's a very different version of banana that we're enjoying today versus the wild banana. Oh, corn too. Yes, man. Oh, yeah. So different. A lot of different plants of like similar history. It's, I mean, fungus is a very different thing, right? Because fungus actually breathe air. They're not plants. They're much closer to animals than they are. Oh, that's fascinating. Yeah. They're real weird. And they're also really weird that they seem to be like the internet for plants, like the micro-rising relationship and the fact that they have this very bizarre network of mycelium that's under the ground. Like the largest living organism is a mushroom colony that exists. I believe in the Pacific Northwest. Oh, really? Yeah. See, you can find that. Yeah. So instead of like saying, oh, there's a mushroom that pops out of the ground. Now, that's like the fruiting body of the entire thing. The entire thing is enormous. And it's communicating with plants. It's helping the plants distribute and share resources. It's helping them get information. It's very strange. Paul Stamets is like the best guy to talk to about this stuff. He's a mycologist. And that he actually gave me that big ass mushroom at the end of the table. Oh, wow. That's a mushroom. Yeah. It's weird. They're weird. You know, this whole conversation here, it is the largest organism on earth is a fungus. The blue whale's big, but no one nearly as huge as a sprawling fungus. Really? It's an organ. Yeah. Oh, crap. Yeah. And again, it fucking breathes air could be as ancient as 8,650 years. Yeah. Good night. Good night. Wild wild stuff. And you know, this is what we know about. What about what the fuck is in the Amazon? Oh, my God. Yeah. Okay. Okay. So two things there as far as what's in the Amazon first, think about how let's just talk about North America above Mesoamerica. So like let's just let's just include like the modern day United States. Think about all the tribes that existed here, how complicated these histories are. You know, Squanto is born in the early 1600s, among these tribes in Massachusetts. And when he comes back, he forms this thing called the Wampanoic Confederation, whatever, whatever. Just in that little area, there's all these different cultures with their own history, their own knowledge and everything. That's one little part of Massachusetts. Now think about the rest of the country and how vast and sprawling and intricate and how deep that history really goes. And you can just you could place the United States inside the Amazon. That's how big the Amazon is. And we just refer to natives tribes who lived in the Amazon as Amazonians, but it's got it's so much more complicated than just that. Now, the next thing is this whole conversation about talking about the where Jaguar, you know, I get a lot of, I get a lot of flack for this, for this topic because, you know, you have let's just call it like boomer archeologist who have this knee-jerk reaction to psychedelics and hallucinogens because it's so ingrained in them that like all drugs are bad as if all drugs are the same, you know what I mean? And I've been talking to this, I was in Mexico last year and we were in the Yucatan and I was there with an archeologist from the Midwest and he was an archeo astronomer, which is like I was saying earlier, it's a guy who studies the way that I think it's like Pueblo ancestral tribes would have interacted with the night sky and studied the night sky. And I was like, I asked him, I said, okay, so what kind of hallucinogens do you think they would have had? And I think he told me like, pay OD in cannabis and stuff like that. And I was like, okay, so have you ever, um, and you know, we were like every night, we get together and we'd all smoke and just talk about ancient history and stuff. You know, you come up with so many interesting ideas and perspectives and points of view, you know, when you smoke with like an actual purpose and you're trying to, you know, think, I'm sure you know, very well, I'm talking about. And, um, and so he's sitting around with all of us and he doesn't want, you know, he's not interested. And I'm like, I'm like, so you was studying arthro astronomy for this long. Have you ever tried cannabis or pay OD or anything that's up there? I think there's another one called Dittura. Have you ever heard of this? That one's supposed to be very weird. Yeah. Yeah. Terrible experiences with that. Oh, really? Well, maybe it's a completely disassociates you. He was having a conversation with a guy in the market and he realized in the middle of the conversation and the guy thought that they were in his apartment. Oh, yeah. Like it does weird things. Well, it might explain why Tio T will con civilization and all their iconography is so terrifying. Like if you look up the great goddess of Tio Tio, it's these guys with handbags picking, uh, picking this Dittura and like putting them in their handbags. Oh, boy. Yeah. Yeah. That's a weird one. And so they're, they're whole, their whole civilization is like very dark and scary. But I asked the archaeologists that I said, okay, have you ever gone out and studied the stars? You know, from the Native American point of view, while you're smoking cannabis or you take pay out and he's like, Oh, no, I wouldn't do that. And I'm like, you have committed your entire life to studying this ancient culture that you know very well with studying the stars and taking hallucinogens. And you as someone who's supposed to be an expert in this field, you don't want to put yourself in the shoes of these people. I was like, dude, if you laid out at night with all everything you know about the plebble ancestral people and you smoked weed for the first time or you did pay out or something, you stayed up and looking in the stars. You might have an epiphany about something that you've never realized because your brain's just operating in a different way than it normally does. And he was very slow to like, you know, uh, to be open to this idea. And you know, the Zahi thing kind of reminded me of this is like, you know, he has preconceived ideas about his world and his personal beliefs that interact with the archaeology, you know, and so it's really hard for us to study the ancient world from a completely unbiased point of view because you have so many preconceived ideas about your modern world that influence your archaeology. And that's why the widely, uh, that's why there's no widely accepted, uh, or it's not widely accepted among archaeologists that Native Americans were heavily influenced by hallucinogens. I really think it's because so many of these people are, you know, older archaeologists that have a knee-jerk reaction to drugs of any kind. And they couldn't possibly fathom the reality that the culture they spent their life studying are all doing hallucinogens all the time. And that's yeah, unquestionably, unquestionably. It's totally obvious. It's completely obvious. Yeah. Yeah. It's all through these people that haven't had these experiences so they don't know what the effects would be. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So they're, they're basically just guessing. And a lot of his based on just say no propaganda from the fucking 80s. It really is. Man, I was telling my, uh, I was telling my wife this. Like I didn't, you know, I don't smoke a lot. When I do, I'm like out in big band, you know, out looking at the stars and stuff. And every time I smoke, it's like some kind of purpose, like, you know, I'm in like some kind of sacred place. And, and I don't do anything harder than just smoke cannabis. Whenever I do, I have some kind of realization about myself personally. You know, like the first time, uh, I don't know, six or seven years ago when I first went up, I was laying up looking at the night sky and we had taken some photos out in the desert and I was looking at myself and I put on a little bit of weight. And as I was looking at myself, I had disassociated and I was like, this person does not represent the brain that's in my mind. I need to lose some damn weight. You know, I had this realization on myself. The last time I was out, uh, I was out in big band laying under the stars and the middle of the desert. And, uh, and I had this like realization that, you know, all the time I spend traveling and I get to see so many amazing, uh, ancient sites and meet so many cool people and I'm just constantly go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, like I'm trying to just make this life work. And I had this realization that the most important thing I do is is make dinner for my wife and take my dog on walks. And I had, I would have never had that like epiphany like dude. All this stuff is really cool, but it's for fun. And this is the stuff that you love. Your purpose is to take your dog on walks and spend time with your wife. And one day it's going to be a spend time with your kids. And every time I go into it with this idea that I hope that I have some kind of realization I always do. And, um, and it's just like I have this, like I know that ancient plant medicine is like the key to unlocking so much of the ancient world. And, um, and, uh, so to ignore that knowing that they imbibed to ignore that knowing that it was a part of these sacred rituals. It's kind of silly, especially when you deal with the Amazon and I, Oasca. Oh yeah. Right. Yeah. I mean, if you're going to be in a place where you want to completely convene with nature, like that's the place. Like that's the place. And if there's this insanely profound hallucinogen, you know, that the brain produces and dodgenously that can be extracted from plants through this really weird method where you're taking one plant that has the drug in it, another plant, which is a monol amine oxidase inhibitor. And you're combining them together and the perfect amount, boiling it. It tastes like shit. Like why are you doing this? Like how'd you want? And then when they you ask them how they learned how to do this, like the plants taught us. Yeah. I know, right? You know, and then you, they can take that, you can take that same chemical and they'll pour it in the water and rather than fishing or, you know, spearing fish in the water or hooking them, they pour it into the water in these little, you know, they create these little canals off of the Amazon and fish piranha, whatever. We'll swim up in it and they pour that, they pour that, that liquid, wherever the hallucinogen isn't. And it stuns the fish and they all come to the top and they only take what they need and they send the rest back. Which is another reason why I don't think that Native Americans are responsible for the extinction of all the megafauna in the Americas. Because, you know, okay, so I'm, so I'm out in the woods in East Texas a couple of weeks ago. And we're just walking around and we're talking about the kato people. Have you heard of the kato Indians before? And I was trying to talk to my friend who doesn't know a lot about Native Americans, trying to like tell him, trying to give him the essence of the people. And then the words came to me and I was like, I was like, if nature itself took an anthropomorphic form, that's the Native American. These are people that lived perfectly with their environment or tried to at least most of them did. And yeah, it's just, it's just, it's amazing. Man, so much can be learned from that. It did some wasteful things. I know. I know. Yeah. Buffalo jumps. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah. That's that's true. And I'm really speaking in generalities like like I could go on and on about all the horrific things that the Aztecs did. This is just a general or the Gomanche or the Comanche. The other, you know, it's not like this was a, it's not at all like this was a utopia at all. It was complete in utter war. But then again, you're saying embodiment of nature will painters not utopia exactly. Exactly. Jack Wars on Ethiopia. Very much. Very much. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Very much so. So, you know, there's some nuance there. But yeah, just kind of, it's just fascinating. You had a, you had a good point in a podcast. I think you were talking about Orianna, his expedition down the Amazon. And you were talking about how he was able to use the stars to navigate back to the Spain. And you were like, well, you know, that's what, that's what, that's what, or not, each people, but you know, that's what people used to do. Everybody was an astronomer. How much of this experience has gone to us today? We don't sit around and look at the stars anymore. And that's one aspect. We don't, we don't interact with, you know, natural plant-based, you know, hallucinogens anymore. There's so many things about the natural world that we don't interact with. Those two are huge. And particularly the one, the first one, the stars, because people don't even consider how much light pollution. If you ask the average person with the nights, an average person lives in New York City or Boston or wherever, the night sky is polluted. You just don't think it's polluted, but it's polluted by light. And you're, you're missing this incredible, majestic image of the cosmos that's so humbling that puts you in check. Yeah, for sure. It puts you in check. It really does. Like anybody that has a diluted ego, that's gonna go away if you're confronted with the Milky Way. Yeah. And the illusions of grandeur and your, your place and ever, you're like, well, it's not possible. Yeah. Just look at this. It's like, I am nothing. I am nothing. And I'm everything. I'm a part of everything, but I am nothing. And so many of these people who exist still today exist in the, in the, uh, the natural world, like the wild, you know, Percy Foset interacting with these Amazonian tribes that still live like this today. These people are still around. They're still like, Paul Rosley sent me a video a month ago. Oh, really? Yeah. I'm going to turn this out. I'll show this video. I can't share it with the world. So ha ha. Sorry. I'm a gatekeeper. Like everybody's a gatekeeper, I guess. Yeah. But Paul doesn't want people to know where these people are. Sure. Yeah. So yeah. Trying to hide this stuff. But he took this video while he was out in the Amazon, like helping these people. So this is like video from his phone. Where is it, Paul? Oh, here it is. I can't share with anybody over to share with you. Does make sure the camera's on it. Man, that is crazy. Why old? I mean, you're so those people looking, you're looking into the past. You're looking way into the past. I mean, way into the past. Just in your frame right there, what you were looking at has existed since the beginning of time. Yes. And that's what's interesting is that exists at the same time as you and I talking about a podcast where millions of people are going to hear it. It's all electronic recording of our voice and images and then distributed wirelessly into your phone instantaneously. The moment this episode gets uploaded on Spotify, people will click it and watch it on their phone instantly. Yeah. Like all at the same time where these people are living in a home. They're in the same time zone. Yeah. Yeah. Whatever it is right now. It's the same time. That's crazy. And when our civilization, we all destroy ourselves and thousands of years go by and everything in the studio is gone. It all turns to dust. Those people will continue the legacy of humanity. Well, I wonder if those people are the preppers of the Amazonian world. Do you know what I mean? Like, like if everything did go sideways because the Europeans came over and brought all the diseases and civilization collapse. You're who's going to live? No, you're you are exactly right. So when that's a huge boy can survive. It's like the Hank Williams Junior song in reality. Dude, you are exactly correct. I mean, you're exactly correct. So when the Spaniards arrive, they obviously they land in the Bahamas with Columbus 1492, but they come down to like Hispaniola, Jamaica. And in the early 1500s, they start poking around on the shores of the Yucatan. And they're kind of trading and interacting with these people. You know, these are explorers. They're all curious. But they didn't realize that they were giving these Native Americans disease. And that disease was spreading through the Maya world. And maybe more than a decade later, when Cortez arrives in the Maya world, he documents how all the Maya people are very scrawny and small and sickly and weak. He didn't realize they were all dying off. So eventually Cortez conquers to Nosh Tila in the Aztec capital in 1521. And he sends, he sends Pizzaro down to find the gold that the Aztecs were getting from South America or from this distant land. And then 100% no exactly what South America was. He goes down to South America and he conquers the Inca Empire. And then after that, Oriana descends down to the Amazon. And when he descends down the Amazon, he sees these cities that would go on for 15 miles long. I mean, these 15 mile long cities, full of millions and millions of people, these giant circular stone buildings, these huge bustling civilizations. And then later on in the 1700s, 1800s, and then really densely in the early 1900s, like with Percy Fawcett, Theodore Roosevelt, everyone around them, they were looking for these big cities that the Spaniards had seen, but they didn't exist. And they didn't find any evidence of it at all. And a lot of people like the British and the Royal Geographic Society, they brushed it off as, oh, the Spaniards were lying so that they could secure funding for further expeditions. And this was like their livelihood, the way that they could stay rich. Of course, then the lidar proves that these civilizations were there. Now, the stuff that's been excavated in the Amazon, we haven't excavated anything in the center of the Amazon. It's really expensive. It's hard to do. Archaeologists don't want to live out there. Whatever, there's a million reasons why it doesn't happen. But on the peripheral of the Amazon, there are areas that get cut flat for logging. Like, you know, as civilizations slowly encroaches on the Amazon, they are finding these villages that are these, basically cities that are these huge geoglyphs that are cutting the ground. Have you seen these in the Amazon? They're huge. I believe so. I believe this is some sub that Graham was showing. Maybe so. I think Graham has talked about this before. Maybe he was in America before. Which if he looked at his look at Graham. Just Amazon geoglyphs, they'll come up. They're these huge squares. Yeah. So these things are, yeah, we definitely talked about these things are gigantic. And they're all over the peripherals of the Amazon. But these were the preppers living on the outside. They weren't living in the hustle and bustle of the, you know, million plus population city in the middle of the Amazon. These are the guys living on the outside. And they all survived this apocalyptic disease that went through. They're the people living in that Balaisha. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Actually, I'm moving there tomorrow. Are you really? You know, moving right now. Wow. Yeah. So cool place to live. Yeah. It's beautiful up there. Dude, it's an ancient place. Have you heard of the Nantahala rainforest? No. Oh, you got to go there tomorrow. It's in Western North Carolina in Appalachia. I grew up going to Nantahala every year. My parents live in Nantahala now. And it's a beautiful, completely magical place. And it was, it was part of what inspired this like explore, you know, kind of thing in me. When you're there, I, even as a kid, I knew that this was an ancient place. And turns out as an adult when I start researching it, it's this pocket of green. I mean, solid, dark green rainforest. In the US, we have three rainforests. We have Hawaii. We have Oregon. And we have the Nantahala rainforest. And most people don't know about. It's this pocket in the middle of these mountains that has looked exactly the same since before the ice age. It's one of the oldest places in North America. And it's just an incredibly magical, old, ancient place. And I'm just like drawn back there. But anyways, yeah, you should go check that out. It sounds incredible. Yeah. Yeah. You're going to live out in that area? Uh, in the Appalachia? Yeah. Well, well, so my wife is, so she's like from South Carolina. And she came to Texas when she was younger. And then we met in college. And my family, when we first moved to the States, like my family moved to North Carolina in like 1694 or something crazy like that. And, and so we have some roots up there. Have you ever been to Gatlinburg, Tennessee? No. So the first name of Gatlinburg was Reagan town. And so that was where my, my family were one of the founders of that town. There's an old hotel there called Reagan Motel. So my family's originally from there. And then they moved down to Texas and started cattle wrestling in the late 1890s. But I don't know. Just drawn back up there. I always love vacationing there. And so my wife and I are like in the middle of moving right now. And so two days ago, we packed up these two U-Hauls, drove them to East Texas to my in-laws. And then we drove to Austin last night, got a hotel doing this. Tonight we drive back to East Texas. And then tomorrow we drive to North Carolina. Wow. Yeah. So what is the history in terms of a human occupation in that area? Man, the people sprouted out of the ground. Yeah, it's that old man. There are, that's something I'm really looking forward to getting into. And I'm kind of excited in a way to get out of Texas because it's hard to study Native American history in Texas because you got to travel so far and everything's so arid like, you know, Austin, this was an ancient Native American settlement here that we have built this city on top of. The Alamo in San Antonio was built on top of a Native American settlement. You know, all of our major cities are just a reskin of an ancient city. And in Texas, it's really hard. Like we have the galt site that's here in Austin that proves that Clovis first was wrong. I mean, maybe you're familiar with this. But up there, you're closer to mound country and, you know, where all the mound builders are, I'm a little bit north of that. But in North Carolina, it's one of the places that the Spaniard had a really hard time infiltrating because of the mountain ranges and because of how fierce the Native Americans were. So the archaeological projects up there are headed up by like two hillbillies that live in the country. And they're the coolest guys. They own this little department store called the Tiger store in Haysville, North Carolina. And they have dug up like Spanish armor under the ground and Spanish swords and all kinds of crazy stuff. And I've gone hiking out there and oh, we got, we looked this up. Jamie, can we please look up a Judah Coola Rock. It's one of the only megaliths in North America. And it's this gigantic megalithic stone that has the same sort of art style as all the Native American stuff that we've seen. And it's some kind of primordial map of Western North Carolina. It's massive, dude. You couldn't fit it in this room. It's called Judah Coola. If you just try to spell it in some way, you might find it. There you go. And there's an old photo of an archaeologist laying behind it. There you go. To the top left, that one or maybe the one that's colorized there. That one's really, really pretty. So nobody knows what this is. And the Native Americans who are asked, some of the stories about the early Native Americans who were asked how this got here, who moved it there, their stories are that giants place this and that giants used to live in this land and that they created these stones. And I have gone around when I was a little bit younger, I would go through the rain forest and like wandering up these hillsides and you'd find these huge stones laying there with all of these images carved into them. And of course, there's no funding that's out there. There's not even a police department out there. So it's nothing, no research is being done out there. But it's a fascinating place as old as time itself. And all of these people are from like a chapter before contact period. Wow. That's fascinating, man. It's just a very ancient, mysterious, mystical place. One of those places that kind of gives me the feeling that Peru gives me when I'm out there, that I'm in a very, very, very old place. And of course, you know, the Appalachian Mountains or the oldest mountain range in the world. Is there any theory as to the age of that? Well, I think when you go there, they attribute it to a culture that lived in the area between 100 AD and 1,080. But that's just totally guesswork. Jutakula and the Cherokee Indians. Yeah. Well, you know, the hard part about studying some stuff with Native Americans in the US is that there's a lot of like, you know, modern Native Americans, they're very prideful about their culture. And you know, a little bit of mythology gets mixed in. Like when you go, when I go visit the, I forget what exactly it's called. But there's a Native American village that still exists in this area of the country. And it's like operated and it's kind of a tour place where they take people through what the cities would have looked like or what the towns would have looked like in the middle of the rainforest. But the hard part is when I talk to the representatives there, which are Native American, you know, Cherokee people, they'll tell me, oh yeah, you know, the ancient people that were here, they used to be six foot five. They were very tall people or whatever. And there's no evidence behind that at all. And so it's hard to like, okay, we have Cherokee bodies. So are these, are these oral memories that are being passed down through time that come down to the Cherokee? And you know, as a, as like a, you know, a modern day American anthropologist do white brush off what they say and just be like, well, you know, they're, they're carrying on these myths about their people. They want to build it up. Or are they really holding on to something that's true because, um, man, I would love to talk to Graham about this. Okay. So you know, one of the biggest things that refuse, I know it sounds like I'm bouncing all over the place. One of the biggest things that, that they tried to use to refute, um, the Sphinx's age, you know, about the Sphinx that could date back to the time of, of Leo, but 10,500 years ago or 10,500 BC, 10,500 BC, is they say, well, there's no evidence that you could carry down the knowledge of constellations that far. You've heard this before, right? Like how do we know that people in 10,500 BC even recognize the constellation of Leo? And, and how is that knowledge carried down? Do there is evidence of this? Okay. The squared spiral. Have you seen this motif anywhere? It's, uh, we could, we could look it up, uh, Greek meander pattern, but you'll also see it in, you'll see it in the American Southwest. You'll see it out in the Mississippi and cultures. You'll see it in Mexico. You'll see it in South America. Peru. You'll see it in Greece. You'll see it in Egypt, Rome. This, yeah, this pattern. So, you know, a lot of times this, um, they say that this is like, uh, well, when people use the term swastika, the swastika is just two meandering patterns or squared spirals that are laid on top of each other. That's, that's what it is. Yeah. So it's a squared spiral, but when you take two of those and land on top of each other, it becomes a swastika. And you and I recognize where these meanders connect because of a certain recent culture that perverted this symbol and, and turned it into something evil. But this is an ancient symbol and it's found all over the world. It even dates back to Ukraine. You may be able to find this. There's an ivory bone handle in Ukraine from like 11,000 years ago that has the squared spiral that that's on it. So this is 11,000 years old found on every continent on the planet. Oh, yeah. So it's even found in pottery. You can see it in pottery in ancient China, ancient Japan. It's in Cambodia. It's all across the ancient world. I was asking, oh, oh, I know one that we could look up. Could you look up the temple of Miele in Mexico? It's a temple of Miele. And if we look at there, you'll see it all up and down. Now temple of Miele is a shamanic temple. It was like a, they think it was like a, like a mecha site that people would go to. It was built to last for all of eternity. And of all the megaliths in all of Mesoamerica or ancient Mexico and Central America, this site uses the largest stones. So each one of these lentils that you see, these is like one solid piece of volcanic stone, very, very hard stones. Okay, so you can see the squared spiral, right? Can you see the step pattern that leads up to them? And you can probably find another photo where you see the step pattern leading up to the spiral. So it's like, it's like you're walking up steps into a spiral and it's this loop that continues on forever. I have a ton of these photos on my phone. They're found all over Peru. There we go. Now this is not quite exactly it. But okay, so what this, what this really is, this step pattern in this motif of this spiral here is it's the big dipper and the night sky. You can go look at the big dipper and the big dipper changes over the course of the year. So if you look at it as though it's not a big dipper and you look at it as though it's a staircase to a spiral, that's exactly what ancient people are seeing the big dipper as and the big dipper is spinning in the night sky throughout the year. So this ancient symbol is... to a spiral, that's exactly what ancient people are seeing the big dipper has and the big dipper is spinning in the night sky throughout the year. So this ancient symbol is them documenting a constellation from for over 11,000 years human beings have been documenting a constellation. So if you're looking for the proof as to whether or not people 11,000 years ago were recognizing a lion in the night sky, boom, there you go. This is 11,000 years. Yeah, okay. So looking here. So it's a step up to a spiral, a step up to a spiral and dude, it's the big dipper. Just look at the big dipper in the future as though it's this constellation is the same thing. Is this a theory that it's a big dipper? Is this being corroborated? Is my theory. Your theory. This is my theory and like something I've been studying for a long time. But there are other archeologists who they're kind of have a passive interest in this and they have said, maybe it's the big dipper or something, but these aren't these then people if I were to go to them and be like, okay, well, you know this ivory bone handle and Ukraine goes back 11,000 years. So it's proof they've been like, okay, stop. You know what I mean? So this is my theory that I have been studying for a long time and everywhere I go in the Americas. I find that spiral pattern everywhere and I always ask people, what does this mean? When I'm in the Mediterranean, I'll ask people what does this mean? I'm going to go to Greece at the end of the year and I'm going to ask because it's all over Greek temples. And all I ever get from Greek archeologists is that it's a river, bullshit, it's not a river. And then in Latin America, I get a bit better of an explanation and maybe this is really it. They think that it's like the step through life and the rejuvenation of life, right? So it's like the big dipper has some kind of esoteric meaning with it. But I have been thinking about this and I think that the reason that throughout all these ancient cultures, you see this meander pattern in so many different orientations is it's documenting the flipping of the big dipper through the night sky throughout the day. And that's all, you know, I'm trying to explain something that's 11,000 years ago. What is the earliest evidence of the understanding or the procession of the equinoxes? God, I don't know. I don't know. That's getting beyond my level of knowledge with archivist, drawn to me. Some people... It's a rams theorized that Egyptians were aware of it. I mean, I don't doubt that they were there. Yeah, the vall, I think, believed that. I know for sure John Anthony West believed that. Yeah. Yeah, I don't know, man. I mean, the procession of the equinoxes, it takes at least what? 12 to 24, it's either 12 or it's 24,000 years to be able to... 12 to 4,000 years. The full cycle. If we wanted to investigate an ancient culture that's possible of being able to document this, it'd be worth looking into if the Maya were aware of it. Let's explain to people what it means. So what it means is that the earth as it spins, it doesn't spin perfectly. Like there's a pin on the top and the pin on the bottom and it spins like a globe. It spins in a wobble and that wobble is a 24,000 year cycle. The earliest understanding of the procession in the equinoxes, typically accredited to Greek astronomer, how do you say his name? Hipparchus. Oh, yeah, Hipparchus. Hipparchus. In the second century BCE, around 130 BCE. I bet you did it in Alexandria too. Hipparchus noticed the position of the equinoxes, the points where the celestial equator intersects with the elliptic. We're shifting westward over time relative to the fixed stars. He calculated this slow movement known as procession by comparing his own observations of star position. With earlier Babylonian and Greek records, particularly those of Temarchus and Aristelus. Aristelus. Aristelus. From the third century BCE, Hipparchus estimated the rate of procession to be about 1 degree every 100 years, which is remarkably close to the modern value, approximately 1 degree, every 71.6 years. There's no definitive evidence of earlier cultures fully understanding the procession as a systematic astronaut. astronomical phenomenon. But some scholars speculate the ancient civilizations like the Babylonians, Egyptians or Indians might have noticed relating patterns and star positions over long periods. Yeah, well, and then check this out. Hipparchus discovery detailed in his lost work, but referenced by Ptolemy, the fair and the fair over Alexandria in the almaigust, second century CE. So this is happening in the city of Alexandria. All this is being studied in Alexandria's library. Mark's earliest confirmed understanding of procession and scientific sense. Dude, that was lost in the burning of Alexandria's library. Yeah, how crazy is that? It's all crazy. It's so fascinating because it makes sense that that would be something that everyone would be studying because it's the most spectacular thing you could ever see. Yeah. Why would you just say, oh, it's just stars? Of course, you would, of course. There's so majestic. You would have to be transfixed. You know, something interesting that I was just reminded of is this meandering pattern. It continues in the ancient Mediterranean world. So Greece, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, until Alexandria's library is burned and stops after that. You see it on the, you see it on the monument of Augustus, which is dates to about 9 BC. But that's for his death. But Augustus would have seen Alexandria. He would have been familiar with these motifs. I believe after that in Rome, we don't see this motif anymore of the squared spiral. In Mesoamerica, in Mexico and Central America, this squared spiral motif stops with the burning of the Mayakodeses from Diego de Landa in like 1574. He gathered all of the writing in the Maya world together in the city of what is modern day Merida. And he burned it all up. And it was called multiple pyres. So imagine, let's say a pyre is at least from the floor to the ceiling stacked with codexes. Like, have you ever seen a sticky note that are connected on the side? That's how the Maya books looked. He burned all the history. Today, we only have three or four that exist. And one of them is like controversial, as to whether or not it's a forgery. So he destroyed all of the written history of the Mesoamerican world and like one fail swoop. And to give you an idea of just how much it was, when the Spaniards arrived in the Aztec world. So the Aztec were standing on the shoulders of giants being the Maya and all the other cultures. The Aztecs were producing 250,000 pieces of paper a year. It's something like that. It's an incredible amount of written knowledge and all of that knowledge is burned and gone. And so, you know, it just again, when archaeologists stand behind their opinion so strongly as to chastise other people for speculating about, you know, this could be this. It's like, it's silly because we're disconnected from the ancient world by a considerable margin. I mean, none of us really understand what's going on. I was having a conversation with Dr. Barnhart. We were at the Museum of Anthropology in Mexico and we're looking at all these Maya gods up on this mural. And everything in Mesoamerica, whether it's the Maya, the old Mexico Aztecs, Teotihucano, Zapatex, whatever. It's all very fierce and dark and scary, kind of scary to us. And we're looking up at it and he's like, you know, I've always wondered, like, where's the love in their religion? Like, you know, where are all the doves that you see like in Christian churches and stuff? And he was like, but you know, in reality, if we could speak to them, we would probably be so embarrassed and shocked at how wrong our ideas are about who these people were. And, you know, his attitude and his approach to the ancient world, I just love it because, you know, he just presents like the evidence that's available gives his idea of what he thinks the evidence means while also saying, you know, this is just my idea from this. We could be completely wrong and we probably are completely wrong. You know, think about, like, if you died in five thousand years from now, people started going through your belongings, what would they think of you? It probably wouldn't be a very good representation of you. It depends on who's writing the story, right? If CNN voted, it'd be terrible. It'd be pretty bad. It's really dependent upon who, again, is the gatekeeper of information. If you had a time machine and you could go and observe, undiscovered any point in history, like, you could put you in some time bubble where you could just, like, be in this invisible bubble where you could view it where you're not interacting, you're not, you just watch what time period and where. I'm not going to say Egypt. I feel like Egypt is such a, like, everyone says Egypt. I would say Egypt. I know, I know. If Egypt wasn't an option, but why would you want that to not be an option? If I gave you a religion choice, if it was a real thing, if there was real technology, if they had developed some sort of a time warp technology that allowed you to, in this controlled sphere, exist for a particular amount of time, like, you have three days in this area. You bring food and water, and you just... No one can hurt me. No one can catch you. No one can see you. You exist at a time warp inside of it, but you could observe all of it. It's kind of Egypt. Well, yeah. You don't have to figure out what time. Because if you got there and they had already built it, you're like, shit! Goddamn it. Yeah. Like, maybe you, like, you say, let me go 10,000 BC, and you go there and it's already there. Fuck. Fuck. You go back 20,000 BC. Yeah, I want you to only do it once. Like, fuck. You go back 30,000 BC. Maybe there's nothing. Like, man, Egypt is a crimped-ilocrim man. Yeah. It's the most monumental, beautiful, like, you know, when you try to imagine what it would have looked like. You know, if you've seen visual recreations of the Giza Plateau, you know, the valley temple must have been absolutely stunning. Okay. So one day when you go to Egypt, hopefully you go this year, when you go to the valley temple, that's the... For me, it's the best thing in all of Egypt. I think it's... I think it's more stunning what it must have looked like than even the pyramids themselves. The blocks are absolutely gigantic. Like, one block is bigger than this whole wall. And brought from 500 miles south in... in Azwahan. These are the ones with the cyclopian, strangely angled stones, like you see in Peru. And when you walk in, most people ignore it. But that floor is a... is a calcite white crystal floor. And so, imagine when it was polished and when it was finished off, it must have been gleaming. And at some point in time, there were these, uh, diarite, uh, coughra statues. Maybe you've seen them before. They're like, impossibly well made out of the hardest stone in Egypt. The hardest stone in Egypt. And it's this... this black diarite gleaming, polished statues. And the lentils that go above would have allowed when the sun, you know, reaches its, like, zenith in the sky in the day... in the middle of the day. It would have shot through these holes in the ceiling. And so, it would have illuminated the white floor. And you would have had the solid black statues that are shining in the... in the sun's light. And so, you're walking in and it's, like, glowing inside of the temple. And, and when you walk outside the front door of the temple, there's a dock. And it... and you can see the dock, like, slopes into the ground. So, the water isn't there anymore. The Nile is much further to the east now. But the Nile came straight up to the front step of the... of the valley temple. So, imagine you're like, you're going... you know, you have someone pushing your little boat along on a pike in, you know, in Egypt. And you're... you know, you're taking in, like, you know, you're taking in the nature around you. And, and like, the seabirds that are flying over you in the palm trees that are everywhere. And like, imagine the sound of the waters, you're coming up to the temple. And it's this huge temple. It's the... it's the largest building on the planet at the time. You know, probably other than the pyramids themselves. But... and then you step into it. And it's... it is the most sacred, most impressive thing that exists on the earth at that time. No matter if it was made in 2500 BC or if it was made in 10,000 BC, it's the most impressive building that exists in the world at that time. And what exactly was going on in these buildings? I don't know. This is kind of another, you know, hot take of mine is, man, I don't believe that, you know, when you sell these pantheons of these gods in the ancient world, I do not believe that ancient people are making all this shit up and building all these temples for these gods that never existed just to control the masses, whatever it is. I mean, it's an extensive amount of work all across the entire world, you know, the... the Maya are building temples for these gods, these beings that they're... that they're meeting. The temple of Luxor that you'll... that you'll go to see, you know, that the story goes, that Ammon Ho-Tep built this last chamber, which is made out of these huge... Ammon Ho-Tep III builds this last chamber, huge megalithic granite blocks to meet the god Ammon Ra. And I'm standing there inside the chamber looking around. He's the only person, supposedly, that's allowed in. That's the story that we know, how true that is, I don't know. But, you know, and I'm just thinking, man, either is it more likely that all of this is made up, or is it more likely that they went to the extent to do all this because it was all real? And they're really interacting with these beings. And the most... the most realistic way I can think of is by... is by being involved in, like, shamanic practices and hallucinogens and, like, you know, interacting with things that do not exist in our 3D plant. And that adds to the allure of, like, when I'm standing in the valley temple, I'm like, what the hell is actually going on in here at this time? So after going through all that, I had to say, Egypt. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Now, my second one would be, like, if I could be, like, okay, take me to the height of Amazonian culture. Just let me see just how amazing it is. Because, you know, it really seems like stone architecture comes out of the Amazon. Now, where Paul lives, it's all clay on the ground. But when you get halfway through the Amazon, you start reaching, like, granite and limestone bedrock. And that's on the eastern side. So you're in, like, Guyana, French Guyana, Brazil. And it's treacherous places to go through in the middle of the Amazon. But I think that that's where cities in the Amazon are going to be found one day. And it was towards the end of Oriana's expedition. So that's about where he would have been. And, man, I bet you there's stuff out there that would just amaze us. I think the Amazon is the origin. Shm, me personally. I think the Amazon is the origin of American, you know, pre-Columbian American, the height of their civilization. I think it's the origin of their religion and shamanic practices. I think it's spread out all the way up to Mexico. And, you know, later on, the ancient Americans have a corn god, which they call the May's god. But I think before that, they had this where Jaguar religion, where people are taking hallucinogens and psychedelics. And so I think that all the evidence points towards that the origin of civilization in the Americas begins in the Amazon and spreads out from there. And I would love if a time machine could pull back that canopy and show me what the actual height of that was like. It's just so interesting. It never stops being interesting. And it's one of those things. It's a mystery that will never truly be totally solved because it's not possible to go back in time. So we're always going to have this thing in our mind like I wonder. And it's such a fascinating inclination to sit and just wonder about the past. And to look where we are now on how ridiculous life today is. This was undeniable. A human's are fools to be particularly today. And I think one of the reasons why we're fools is we're denied these experiences that these people probably had. We've outlawed them just like they did in ancient Greece. Like they did. I'm sure throughout history and all these different cultures. Have you ever heard the, have you ever heard the natives in Papua New Guinea and the songs that they sing that like emanate through the jungle? Have you heard this before? When I study, I only study native people in the Americas. I got my hands full with that. I can't really start studying like, I'm fascinated by the people live on Sentinel Island. And akin to that are the people, the semi-contact people of Papua New Guinea. And when you listen to the songs that they sing, it reminds me so much of what I heard yesterday. And what I've known, but when Percy Foster says he hears the songs they sing, it reminds him of like, oh, this is an advanced culture. This is something that's being handed down through time. It's beautiful. It's timeless. And when you hear the sound of the Papua New Guinea people singing in the way they harmonize with each other, these people are so connected to the earth that it's the earth singing to you through them. Does that make sense? Can we hear that? Yeah. This may not be the one I'm talking about. It's beautiful though. There's one of, there's one of a man, he's right next to the camera and he's singing and you have all these people around him. And it's just like stunningly beautiful. Here it is. Here it is. It's got some extra love on it. Yeah. I think it's just on loop. Ten hours. Yeah. So ten hours. But you know, hearing that makes me like emotional hearing it because... Five grams and you listen to that. It's beautiful. Yeah. It's just, it's beautiful. And you look in, you look in his eyes and it's like, he is very innocent eyes. Yeah. You know, it's, it is the, it's the human embodiment of the planet itself. Is that guy that you're looking at and what you're hearing? And what's really fascinated by human cultures is the most satisfied, least anxious people. are subsistence livers. People that live off the land. It's so true. Have you ever seen the vice piece about this guy named Heinmo, Heinmo's Arctic Adventure? Yeah. There's a great bit, a great video piece from vice from back in the day. Vice guy to travel, where this journalist goes and lives with this guy who lives in the Arctic. And he's one of the last people that's allowed to live off the land. And he's a very intelligent guy who explains through the course of this, like, this is how people are supposed to be living. And he's essentially just hunting caribou and fishing. And he lives like in peace and harmony. And he never, he never wants to live in this city. Like this is a natural way for us. Does he have a little daughter with him or a little girl? And he like cuts up the fish and he hands it to her and they give each other like an Eskimo kiss. Have you seen, I don't believe that his daughter is full grown at the time. Okay, okay. Okay. But I'm sure there's many people living with this. But the point is that I think that if you look at modern society, we're so anxious and weird and depressed and all these things wrong with us. I think a lot of that is because A, we're disconnected from nature, especially if you're living in a city. I mean, there's no more insulation from nature than a skyscraper. I mean, you're completely removed from you. You've even covered the ground concrete. You're not interacting with nature at all. Like that's why everybody goes to Central Park. They look like little peas. Yeah, give me a little bit of nature, right? So you're disconnected from nature, which I think is a vitamin. I genuinely believe just like the sun gives you vitamin D. I think nature gives you some unmeasured vitamin that we just haven't figured out yet. And then we're removed from these ancient experiences that connected people to the spiritual world. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's so true. And having these conversations with my wife recently, you know, like all of our friends are sort of, you know, we're all kind of newlyweds. My wife and I are about to approach our two year and our relationship is interesting because it kind of mimics like ancient people where, you know, a man has got to, you know, ancient times the man would go off at a certain point periodically. He and all of his, he and all the other men of the village of the younger man would go off until they killed a big animal and they drag it back. And they'd be rewarded by the gratification of the women that they're there and then they would play their part in helping to feed everybody. And you have this like the woman like it Myers, the man, the man's helping take care of her. You have this. And then the men also get their time away to be manly and be masculine and brave. And now we exist in this world where before I was able to, you know, quit my job and pursue this full time, I was doing like marketing, you know, to just to make ends meet. And I'm like existing in this digital world that doesn't even exist. I produce ads for companies that don't even have a physical brick and mortar store. It's like all completely made up and I come home. I come home every single day and I had no like male role in my little family. Like my wife is going is in the middle of dental school. And so we're both going off and coming back and doing the same thing every day. And it's like this unnatural cycle. And you wonder why like people are so unhappy. And now that I've been traveling quite a lot, you know, I go off, you know, I go off, I travel, I'm able to, you know, I'll provide for us. I'm gone, I come back and our relationship is strong and it's intimate and romantic and she like, you know, admirers that kind of aspect about me. And I'm like, oh, this is kind of how this is a healthy, this is actually a healthy thing for our relationship. And it's just reminding me more and more of how this modern world is so dystopian and so sick and poisonous to our minds. We're operating in a made up realm. This, you know, it's just so much what we do is completely made up and unnatural. We should be living by a fresh body of water and you and I should be running off into the forest and killing something with our hands or with a bow and dragging it back and all the women are. Yes. You know, that's what it should, that's what life should be like. But it's unfortunately science fiction. I think you can live in this world and dabble in that world. Yeah, for sure. That's what I do. For sure. Yeah, why I've seen that. I was working expeditions. Those are like to me spiritual journeys. It sounds ridiculous. It sounds ridiculous. When I'm in the woods, like the real woods, when you're in the mountains in particular, because it's so unforgiving and so majestic, every part of me just goes, like, wow, here we are. Where are you at when you do that? Well, I really love Utah. I really love like the the Wasatch mountains. Yeah. I love that area. I'm scared of the northwest. My wife wants to take me to Montana and go hiking. I'm like, I'm not going hiking out. There's less. There's Chris. I don't belong out there. There's grizzly bears. I mean, those things, there's nothing you can do. I'm okay on the East Coast, which is just black bears. They're like your rabbits. But do you know, grizzly bear? Yeah. Have you seen the video of a guy who's up on top of this granite facing and he goes, he's like filming and he goes, there's a young grizzly bear down at the river below me and he's up on this granite face. And he was like, I'm going to scare him off and he goes, hey, bear, hey, bear. And the bear goes. And charges directly to him and knocks down all the little trees. And it comes up to the granite face and it can't reach him. But I'm like, yeah, dude, I would never want to go up there. I'm your food. You're food. You're a part of the chain and not the good part. No, you're not the hunter with the deer. No. There's an 800 pound super predator that can run 40 miles an hour. And he's headed right towards the river. Yeah. And if you're a good shot with a high-powered gun, you might be able to kill it, but you'll be mauled the death by the time it wanders off into the forest and you might be able to kill it. Yeah. You really, you need like a large cow, but rifle and shoot it in the head. Yeah. And a pistol, that's the other thing. If you have a nine millimeter pistol and you should a grizzly bear in the head, it's very likely he's going to bounce off of a skull, which is so scary. Oh, it's terrifying. Could you imagine that, because you imagine people trying to navigate into or migrate into the Americas and they have to deal with the short face bear and polar bears. Right. The short face bear, which makes a grizzly bear look very a poodle. It's, it's utterly insane, man. People lived in a gnarly place in the US. We had, we had American lions bigger than the place for the market. Exactly. We had elephants. We had woolly mammoths. We had camels here. We had gigantic horses. We had huge dire wolves. We had giant, giant, giant. Oh, there's a giant sloth caves in Nantahayla. And you can see them and they're like carved out. And it's cool because there's multiple layers of history there. So you have this, you have this megafauna ice age history of these huge giant sloth caves carved out in, you know, these prehistoric mountainsides. But the Cherokee used those caves to hide in to escape the trail of tears. Wow. Yeah. That's fascinating stuff up there, man. So you have like levels of history just in that one area of the country. If you go out there, you'll feel like you're in a primordial place that's, you know, kind of spiritual. I'm down. Yeah. I'll check it out. Yeah. Definitely not. Listen, thank you so much for being here. I really, really enjoy this conversation. And I think we could do a bunch more. So it's doing good. I feel like I could have talked to you for 10 more hours. I feel like we could do. Yeah. So tell everybody they want to get into more of your work, where it works to the go. Yeah. So everything I do is just under my name, Luke Caverns. You know, Caverns was just a name that like my wife and I came up with to use like a gnome or because of privacy. But my real last name is Reagan. And you know, I like I shared I have this family history and loosely connected to the presidential family. That's like a different branch of our family from Tennessee. And so I kind of want to do it for privacy, but like that's impossible. So I just, I've just run with it. And, but yeah, Luke Caverns, you can find, you can find everything I do under that. And you know, I for a long time, I thought maybe I'd specialize in one area, but man, I'm interested in, in, in the ancient history of the entire world. And I'm just always going to embrace that and explore the, explore the ancient world on foot. And yeah. I'm glad you're out there, man. I really appreciate it. Yeah. Thank you for being here. Thank you. All right.