So the current debate over AI artificial intelligence is about whether the technology will become sentient and Autonomous and enslave us all and of course that'll probably happen But in the meantime we thought it'd be interesting revisiting the original debate about AI Which is about how it affects work What are the rest of us going to do for a living when machines can do it for us? And there's nobody who's thought more deeply about this and about work in general and its centrality Do you have a dignity then Mike Rowe and we are as always honored to have an institute like thank you for coming on First of all you win the desk It's what are you kidding? I mean How old is this I don't know it's ironwood and it's actually it's funny the the person who got this I have asked him to go run it down because I Am like the only right wing in the world who loved Julia butterfly Hill Well, who lived in a redwood to keep it. I just think trees are really important And I think being surrounded by wood brings a residence to your life What happened after the hurricane down here because I know I know that was a big deal and I know you love trees And I know that couldn't have been great. Yes, but most of the trees in Florida are fake trees actually they're not real There I don't think a palm tree is actually a tree. I mean a tree is a white pine a tree is a Sequoia a tree is you know all the various hardwoods Oak beach Locust locust exactly Cut some locusts of summer anyway Sorry, chop your own wood. It'll warm you to what yes, that's exactly three times because it's dakit and then split it So what the AI is so like seven years ago I remember talking to you things about seven years ago about what AI was going to do to working-class America to truck drivers the most common job for high school educated men And you'll have thoughts about that, but the conversations progressed so dramatically since then right? And so is the technology right so where are you? I'm thinking about that So there was a time when the big conversation released in my lane anyway It was really more about robotics and tech right the robots are going to come and they're gonna displace a lot of blue collar jobs And how do we stop that? How do we think about that? And I remember you and I talked about the Luddite rebellion Yes, we talked about endorsing it actually yes, right? And it's like and and and the disruption theories and this idea that Real replacement is is going to happen and it almost never happens as I understand it You know, I've seen it in our industry too, you know, there's a lot of talk about You know what was going to happen when what was gonna happen in newspapers when film came along what was gonna happen to film when TV came Well, it was gonna happen to music and DVDs and I mean None of it really goes away, but it all ships. It's all impacted. Yes, so I was struck By the fact that all of a sudden we weren't talking about the impact of Robots on blue collar jobs, but the impact of AI on white collar jobs, right? That's what interested me and which I enjoyed Well, I mean sorry, I'm a bad person, but look it's it it is super creepy I mean, I got a link from a buddy who said hey man not for nothing But I went on to one of these sites and I said narrate for me in the style of Mike Rowe These two paragraphs, right? And he sent me a link to this and basically it was two paragraphs from an old episode of Deadlice catch and I hit play and I listened to me Now had I not known it was not me. I would have thought well That's something I narrated, you know for my figures tell the different couldn't tell what I listened for it I heard some things that maybe go ah maybe maybe not quite but that was two months ago Which might as well be two years ago or 20 years ago? So the speed with which artificial intelligence or something about Moore's law something fast faster and faster so I I Part of me wants to say Don't forget the lesson from the lot I don't free it's not going to completely Upend everything of us it does and I don't know because this does feel different I don't know I had a motorcycle once with a crack and the intake manifold that I didn't see and it made it obviously Run Lane and I grant so great faster and faster and faster and faster until literally this spark plug burned a hole through the piston I use it yeah as a pen holder on my desk today But there's something about speed and acceleration that has a natural limit doesn't it well? I mean Einstein said right you Can stand this close to another person and then this close and half it and half it and half it and never ever stop Having it which my brain doesn't know understand because it seems like surely truly you're gonna Collide and then be on the other side of each other. Yes. He's like no. No. That doesn't really work or at least have a sexual encounter with the person Look here's how jacked up it is for me. I my entire career is actually based on AI Early on in dirty jobs There was this big conversation at the network when they were like look this show is It was a nightmare for them because it was rating really really well But it was off-brand Dirty jobs was not supposed to be the show that people went to discovery to love now It was that those were still the days of adenborough and shock who's though and Jane good all right Yes, it was to those of me a smart aleck looking under rocks making poop shows that that's not supposed to be that I'm going No, so they're like can you smarten it up a little bit? And I said well, I've been looking at some science type Jobs and they're like like what I'm like well We I'd like to take a deep dive into AI and they're like that's great That's great if you can find dirty jobs into AI We were golden now did they think I was talking about artificial insemination? Probably not Probably not Did you do that episode? Four days later I was at the circle x ranch Somewhere outside of Houston with my arm up to my shoulder inside a couple of dozen cows taking instructions from a cowboy Name Steve who was walking me through the process of Artificial insemitating the cows I also had a remarkable encounter with a bull called Hunsucker commando and the process whereby the sperm is extracted from this minotaur right and then put back into these unsuspecting Bovines giving us basically a Brahman bull and an Angus cow. Could you bring us me? The point is We could do without getting specific. Did you go through that entire process? Extraction is oh extraction. Oh, yeah. No, I gathered I had a styrofoam cup. There were probes There was insertion into the bull light currents stimulated the prostate But white gold flew through the air I captured as much of it as I could and I put the whole thing on the air a week later And I got called to the principles You did a question was you promised us a show on Artificial intelligence that I said did I? Then we have this big conversation about science and the moral of the story is There's more science than artificial insemination Then there is an AI or at least as much and in a much deeper much more meaningful way We are so disconnected from our food We're disconnected from our energy and dirty jobs on the surface was just a Romp who was exploding toilets and misadventures and artificial or animal husband or whatever it was but in reality it was a pretty thoughtful look what keeps us connected and What we've become disconnected from and so ultimately the show stayed on the air and that episode aired to ridiculous ratings by the way, which is why I violated every other barnyard creature known to man ratings gold But the thing is there's no McDonald's there's no Carl's Jr. There's no fast food. There's no slow food There's no meat industries. We understand it without the other AI. Yes, so I that's got a long way of saying I'm most interested to see how artificial intelligence and Artificial insemination are going to somehow hopefully come together But so how does know that such a such a smart point? How does it how does this quantum increase in computing power? Which is really what artificial does just bastard computation? How does that affect the real economy? Like the actual physical stuff that keeps us alive. Well, I don't know But I do think that what's going on in the real economy and what's going on in the in the real country is this This unraveling of connectivity people And I put myself in this in this group we've become Really disconnected from some very primary things. Yes. I commented on your desk right away. It's primal It's why I love it. It looks like what it is. Yes, you know and and I don't know it's to To reconnect with basic things is is to be around fundamental things. I like what you've done with the place Oh, I like to sniff it, you know I do if you're gonna sell t-shirts do me a favor and put that on it The thing I don't like about the digital experiences it doesn't smell like anything because it's not real so it's like on weed Yeah, it smells like on weed itself a trade Yeah, you're right, but anyway, so helping To be reconnect to where our food comes from to where energy comes from to what our what our history is and to do it with humor That was the goal of that show today and not to sound too high-minded, but it's it's one of the goals of of my foundation and You know, I don't really have permission to talk about AI. That's not really my lane. I don't necessarily white know What I'm doing But on a personal level when somebody sends you a link That sounds so much like you you can't tell the difference Then then you you you start to connect to it because it gets personal So I think what I think what's going to happen is this stuff is going to stop being either femoral Theoretical and people are gonna find real real real personal stuff with regard to AI I think look when you go on Twitter and there's a video of you praising Hitler. It's not really you deep fake Come on that's gonna happen right that's gonna happen and and and porn You know, or Is on the leading edge of every new tech all the time What is that? Hey, it's Tucker Carlson the internet is crowded with interesting things that don't really matter on TCN We attempt to bring you interesting things that actually do matter and a lot of them interviews long form and short videos documentaries you can find all of it on tucker Carlson com and we hope you will