All right, three two one. What's up Nathan Crock. How you doing man? I'm doing well. Thank you for having me forever since I've seen you. We went to high school together graduate in 2006 like I was telling you before we started recording for some reason you and I were in a bunch of the same classes I have no idea why because I was way dumber than you and The one thing that sticks out to me was that you were showing me some diagrams of how you have planned on putting your brain into a Cyborg one day. Yeah, and I never forgot about that. Yeah, well unfortunately I did as does my non-sensical ideas I dream big and do outlandish things and you sure this isn't the Cyborg version of you here right now and you're just not telling us. Of course not. Okay Completely normal All right, I believe you. That's incredible man. So I had to look you up and I'm glad that you Agreed to come on this super cool. Yeah, my pleasure I apologize in advance. I've been a little sick. I can't really imagine what I sound like in the microphone probably like so glorious They're like a kidnapper Filter right Bring the briefcase and the money to the booth to the bridge by midnight. Yeah, we could put some effects on a sambalto to make me yourself So what is it so for those people out there who may not know? And I actually don't know how to say it myself, but what exactly do you do? So I do two things I do research and machine learning which is colloquially referred to as artificial intelligence We can talk maybe about the distinction between those two things and the second is I work I direct the new side labs which is an R&D division of a machine learning company in Tallahassee so we have a lot of government contracts contracts with big businesses agencies and We offer some very common machine learning services and our job in the labs division is to ensure that all the services that we are offering are cutting edge We look up to latest research check out the papers go into the code and make sure that we're able to keep things as Impressive and useful as possible to our customers What kind of things do you do there like to sum it down? Sure, what are you guys researching on and doing there? Yeah, so for example One of the contracts that we work on is with nine one one emergency phone calls So that's a very big industry as I'm sure we can all imagine and they have thousands of calls a day Monitoring these calls is very difficult and often they're not able to monitor more than one percent or less of the phone calls that actually come through For quality assurance So what we're doing is we take all of the calls and we train a speech-to-text engine So we take the audio transcripts and we the audio calls and we transcribe it to text Okay, then once we have all the text we use natural language processing techniques to analyze What's going on emotion sentiment keywords names addresses? What's going on and we can use this to filter and flag potential dangerous calls? Maybe maybe somebody calls and says hey, I feel like I'm gonna kill myself Right the telecommunications. Oh, okay. Well go ahead You know something outlandish and a call like that should be monitored and that telecommunications be flagged So right the services we offer allow them to monitor their calls more efficiently and also improve training for example We can identify target words Maybe telecommunicator uses a certain word and there's always a spike and maybe anger fear or something in the caller And we can I let the agency know that these certain words are probably not best to be used for calls of this type and So that's just one of the projects that we work on. Wow. What what is the purpose of this company? I mean like what's your what's the goal? Like what are you trying to develop like I understand like you guys are analyzing the calls The behavior the people that are calling in But like what is the like the long term goal? Sure, so I mean the people that come together We would call ourselves a social entrepreneurship Renewers as opposed we all have some sort of outlandish idealistic notions of good and trying to impose that on everybody else Whether they agree with us or not as I think everybody actually does which we will probably get into when we start talking about what is Intelligence and learning and so we try to take on projects that are consistent with our visions and ambitions of trying to improve Things for the economy to do good with machine learning. Okay, so essentially With 911 calls down the road you think that Maybe humans won't be doing that or we've entertained those ideas That's further down the road We are working on what we call a language model and the field of machine learning where we take all these transcripts and we have a certain Algorithm or engine which looks at all the text and starts learning the intrinsic properties of what 911 domain phone calls are like And we can actually synthesize new speech with language models like that and Idealistically one would dream that down in the future we could potentially Replace telecommunications with agents. That's obviously a very saucy topic But yeah, the short term goal is perhaps a training simulator. Okay, to help the telecommunications get used to what certain colors might sound like Maybe we can simulate Homicide calls or and there even I mean you get you wouldn't believe the kind of things that we listen to in these 911 Yeah, it's like sometimes we'll just get some old ladies. She's like well My back hurts so I need an ambulance here immediately Yeah, all kinds in the time to get your job. I'll just sit. Yeah, I'm sure you get it all yeah, so So I mean the short term goal would be perhaps a training simulator and a long term idealistic goals would be Eating and putting telecommunication making them be a bit more automated right So I mean just going back to high school you've obviously been Extremely passionate about this for a long time. What what was it that initially got you interested in all this stuff? What made you what turned you into this person you are right now? Yeah, that's kind of a long and tumultuous road back I can probably summarize it a little bit more poetically than it probably was that we often do in media You know so again being like this social entrepreneur I've always had this again Unreasonable desirable desire to just do good for you or other reason that it just makes me happy and so when we're young and idealistic Everybody's like a world peace what a great novel idea that is and then as you grow up It usually just becomes a laughing point because such a thing is the often nonsensical and imaginary But when I was young I had convinced myself that the reason we don't obtain peace is because individuals don't understand one another and When I mean understand I don't mean in the sense of like you listen to me and you hear me I mean in the sense of like you feel what I feel and such in the sense that if I killed somebody To truly understand me you would have to replay The feelings decisions and the actions that I did such that you would have literally killed the person too There's no deeper understanding than that so my ambitions were I'm gonna go into neuroscience come up with a way to map Memories and then replay them and other people's minds so that they can learn other people's feelings again These big idealistic outlandish dreams. I love that shit. So that was where I started when what time is that? How are you when you start thinking like that that was probably school elementary school? No, that was probably a High school. I mean shortly after high school perhaps. Yeah, you know in high school We don't really know who we are or what we want we're trying to figure things out in life Yeah, your friends teach you what life is your parents teach you what life is Yeah, that's a messy mind field of disasters. Yeah, you used to be a boxer too, right? Yeah, another one of those young you're not doing anymore I do it from time to time. It's good to stay healthy It's good to feel like you can protect yourself in your loved ones. Yeah, I used to coach FSU's boxing team So really all our school pretty stuffs fucking awesome and coach a little bit when I can really you still do that You're doing that anymore or just dabble in it I mean we used to own a boxing gym So when we approached FSU's team We had the renegade boxing gym for a long time in fact I'm participating in this average race on Sunday with one of the old trainers from Renegade boxing and our team name for this average race is you know renegade boxing teams So that's also that an nostalgia there little be fun dude and a doubt but I want to try one of those one day We should try one. Yeah, I would die. Do we can make it? I think you guys got it the warrior dash is the way to go right so check this out the warrior dash It's short muddy messy as barbed wire and fire You run through this thing. You have a lot of fun You laugh you get messy you get dirty Everybody's usually pretty fit when they go out there in the first place Yeah, yeah, and then you cross the finish line and everybody's screaming as soon as you cross the finish line They hand you like a big chalice of beer you get like a big Viking helmet and a huge chicken leg And everybody else is around you just like drenched and usually pretty fit and pretty often pretty sexy Yeah, just got a drenalins and beer and meat and it's a pretty great experience That sounds very awesome. That one's called the warrior dash. Yeah, we just have to check that out Definitely checking it out that whole getting into the box and things started when I was this was actually a middle school thing Right so one of my big inspirations was Leonardo da Vinci and he is known as the Renaissance man Right so I'm like that's me I want to be the modern day Renaissance man That's gonna be my big goal and so I tried to do as much as I could You know I did combat it took me a martial arts boxing. Yeah, yeah dance play music study languages Sciences much as I could to experience as much life as possible only to realize that in this over populated world of Specialization the notion of a modern day Renaissance man is just isn't really achievable any longer The amount of time necessary to become a true master of anyone discipline is a lifetime For sure. Yeah, so that was trying to do a bunch of different try to do it all. Yeah It's a good experience a little bit of everything. Yeah, and so I'm I might have Psychologically convinced myself that instead of being a master of one thing I'm a master of being mediocre at many things. That's all right. Yeah, right? I like it. Yeah, I'm mastering the title Oh my god speaking of stretching your stuff I just tried not eating for three days and that was like the worst experience in my life Good for you. I didn't I should have done it with other people who were doing the same thing, but I Was around people that were just gorging every day and it was basically like torturing myself But I'll try it was like a healthy thing. I was trying to be healthy. You know, I mean trying to clean out my my body My cells and yeah, and I give you a little sympathy to people doing a lint and Ramadan It's that only a fast. Yeah, right for sure. He was gonna go 10 days I was like I give you about four maybe five tops and maybe about three. I made it 72 hours You ever tried that honestly? I have and not more than a few days ago I was telling my girlfriend that I was gonna try and go seven days because I just see feeding too much crap and then there's the eggnog and then there's the beer and then I get gassy And then I'm just miserable and I just want to like cleanse myself and so I've psychologically convinced myself that fasting It's somehow the way to do that right. I don't know. Yeah, it's like the rage right now Everyone's talking. It's like the new thing to talk about and do so you have done it before I have many days Well, I did it back when I was in college when my friend was doing the lint thing for yeah Catholicism and I just did it with him for a week one week seven days What do you do what do you do all these drink lots of water that's in? Yeah, but you can't be around other people that are eating right You can if you have discipline I did not have enough of it So I often just avoided people when they were eating going out or something like that, but yeah, it was nice I mean it kind of changes your the first few days. It's like oh, I got this This is great, you know You know, you know people who like to endure the the suffering a little bit of like yeah and do the hardships You know, yeah, turmoil and then that terminal starts to like Start to screw with your psychology a little bit Everybody likes to think that they can endure hardships But the reality is is that it actually becomes like an intellectual war inside your mind Yeah, it's not as easy as just I'm not gonna do it because your mind is like convincing you that it's okay to do it Well, it's unhealthy for me to not do it. I need to eat or else I'm gonna kill myself And I don't want to kill myself. This is just a game right you play these games with yourself and yeah It becomes very difficult. Yeah, I learned a lot when I did it the hard thing for me was thinking about like having this many days left Like I'm like I'm only a one-tenth of the way through I'm only you know two-thirds of the way through I'm not even close to halfway through and I got to go Five more days like that made it impossible for me But if I could have just thought about it like I'm just gonna go today without eating wake up the next day Brand new day. I'm just gonna go today without eating like if I could have done that every day If I could have somehow tricked myself, I think they would have been way easier. Did you nail it? There's a book by Stephen King called the long walk. It's a great book Basically just about enduring hardship. Yeah, and in that book I and from a friend of mine I learned the value very valuable lesson when you're like running marathon's half marathon's training Yeah, is that and this just translates to everything in life as you just say split one foot in front of the other right All I gotta do I just gotta put my foot one foot in front of the other all right I'm here now. I just gotta put one foot in front of the other and everything just becomes so easy then you turn around you wake up You're 40 and you built great wall chime. It's amazing. It's amazing, man. It's really is the the stuff It's just scary to think about like having to take a thousand steps and try to like look at the top of the mountain I have to get there. Holy shit. I'm gonna die. I said like one foot in front of the other. It's a lot easier. Thanks a lot easier So what's up with this AI tell me a little bit about some stuff. I don't know AI. What is what's coming to an end man? What is a super digital intelligence? Yeah, so a lot of buzzwords float around they often get misinterpreted by a lot of people Super intelligence digital intelligence is super intelligence digital medium But in general super intelligence is just any form of intelligence whatever that means we'll probably need to define in a moment that So surpasses humans and vast regard oftentimes so You know, let's actually take a moment and talk about what is intelligence right? And like just curious like what do you guys how would you guys define intelligence if somebody asked you? I would say it's just trial and error of failing or not failing and then kind of adding those up to Knowing which path you're gonna take next right the saying like if a brand new baby crawls off the couch and hits its face on the ground The first time chances are the next time it's on the edge of the couch It's not gonna keep crawling and fall off the couch. Mm-hmm, right? So that's just like a level of knowledge Maybe or that's one of the keywords that that is used in the machine learning definition. Okay Yeah, you're sort of revolving around the same principle There is no academic like a hundred percent definition or rather there are many there's no accepted definition But a common theme among all of them is there's two pieces to intelligence one is a fundamental requirement to acquire Information you have to somehow just ingest Information and then two is you need to have some functional ability to act on that information and interact with the world that your Intelligence is embedded in be digital or biological so One thing that I like to sort of interpret that is by saying The mind itself is embodied and then the body is embedded So let's just take the notion of the brain for a moment and outside the brain There's this complete universe of information We have absolutely no idea what the vastness of that information is because our brain all of our senses are just making tiny Infant decimal approximations to this vast amount of information that's out there as an analogy the electro magnetic spectrum You know the you know radio waves x-rays gamma rays visible light ultraviolet right near all this whole spectrum We can only see an absolutely teensy wingsy little sliver of that and there's so much more information out there That's just literally not going into our brain All right, so so what we say is that the little bit of information that does come into the brain though We have to internalize it create an internal model of that information and then be able to interact and act on that knowledge in a intelligent way and how How do people determine how do you determine how do people choose or do they not choose what gets input into that? What pieces of information are input into them is that just like It's just the you right now you're getting all kinds of information The light that's hitting you the sounds that are coming into your ears the feel of the table I mean every sensory medium is just ingesting information all day along 100% of the time right you have no choice Okay, yeah, well, I mean obviously you have an alleged perceived choice We'll get into this whole free-wilthing probably eventually, but Allegedly you move yourself to another environment to change the stimulus that's presented to your system, but wow yeah So I've always thought to myself never really talked about it, but like for instance conversations like this That get recorded and uploaded to the internet Hundreds millions of hours every day is that not just fucking training some crazy AI that's gonna be able to download everything Every bit of knowledge that humans have ever known in like two seconds It's a fun thing to think about I mean as a couple of hurdles along the way the first and the most staggering is The need and the requirement to aggregate that information right so I mean as you know You get all these files you put them on computers you record from this microphone through the wire You have it here locally, but as you say this hundreds thousands of hours of video well for one entity to be able to or entity Intelligent system to be able to ingest that knowledge all of that information must somehow be available to it to ingest in the very precise Medium that it needs for it to be ingested and that's a very very difficult hurdle to overcome Right Wow. Yeah, so I mean for example you might have heard about a lot of the facial recognition image recognition Etc. Yeah for the longest time these image recognition systems could only operate on images of a very specific resolution They just didn't have an ability to generalize to different sized images So now you say oh well there's all these pictures out there on the internet Yeah, but only those that are exactly whatever 127 by 324 pixels can this one system ingest All right, and so over time we learned about this handicap and we generalized the different techniques that allow us to you know examine different resolution images, but you know basically transducing Information that's out there be a digital or physics or whatever it is into some system and then aggregating it is a very very complicated System let alone then learning on that information and being able to interact on it just ingesting is a huge problem that we still Having a very hard time grappling with wow and you in general Do you have more of an optimistic view of the future of this artificial intelligence or do you have more of a Concerned view kind of like versus the Elon Musk's outlook, you know He's very you know pessimistic about it very cautious about it and then like people like Mark Zuckerberg who are like You know, why would you be scared of it? This is great. This is helping us. Yeah, so there's nothing to be afraid of Yeah, there's there's an underlying theme in a lot of the way that I approach all these problems and that is to truly understand something Be neither for nor against it and then the truth will be laid bare before you so I do the best I can to not really have overwhelmingly strong opinions about things because that just limits the amount of information that I'll be able to ingest and to Understand for it, you know, there's some really outlandish examples that can sort of demonstrate this You know, let's say that somebody's walking down the sidewalk and They take you know a little knife and they and they stab an old lady and then You know, what is that? Well, what happened? Is it good is it bad? Why you know people like to analyze these things and try to throw labels on it But the reality is is if you zoom out enough it isn't either good nor bad it it merely is it just happened She's gonna without medical attention probably fall over and die, you know This is just things but let's zoom out a moment and say oh well What are some ways to interpret it? Well if I didn't know anything and I just thought it happened from the other sidewalk I'd be like this is horrible. How could this person do this? You took the life of an old lady, but little did I know there was information Unavailable to me that she had bombs on her chest and was about to blow up the whole city and some guy just saved hundreds and thousands of lives Okay, right, I see see how the ability to interpret this information is just you know intrinsically subjective And that becomes very uncomfortable for a lot of people so when I think about the questions, you know about is it good or is it bad? I think it's both and it's neither depending on certain assumptions that people have about what is essentially right or wrong You can make an objective framework and then start arguing well This is good or this is bad But if you change those assumptions now you have a different objective framework and now you can argue whether it's good or bad there So I try to be flexible to entertain different people's opinions about what is right or wrong and then we can really explore the possibilities Right, I mean, I don't really have it. I just kind of like I don't have an opinion myself I don't really know enough about it, but I assume like you know Substantially more than the average person does about the future. Sure. That's a good question You know have any kind of emotional like like reaction to it. I mean I've been so happy motions. I'm not a sideboard. Okay, we're trying to make sure I don't know. I'm not to ask your girlfriend to confirm that We're gonna create a machine that scans your face figures out Forest hasn't developed that yet But I mean no no no feelings towards you know What could happen what what may not happen like? You're not weighing towards one or the other like what are your what are your thoughts? It's a great question and if I'm I'll just be entirely honest I Feel all of them right. I mean, yeah, and I do the best I can as a scientist to sort of Take in the feeling that I feel analyze why I feel it look at the repercussions of that feeling then I take another feeling Look at these and analyze it and try and get a whole picture. You know for example I'm excited AI is an amazing phenomenon. I mean how it helps us understand ourselves at such a deeper level is very difficult to communicate To people who haven't really been immersed in it for a long time You know as Neil deGrasse Tyson says like scientifically literate people just see the world differently Well, I would take that a step further and say machine learning or artificial intelligence literate people just see them Cellars and humans differently. So that's an exciting thing. You know We might be able to share this things these things we discover But of course everybody has many fears and you know sufficiently advanced technologies indistinguishable from magic and that warrants fear and caution Yeah, and you know we need to be careful and make sure that we have a lot of checks and balances to make sure that things don't get out of control We can talk about those things right very saucy topics. Yeah, yeah, I feel it one day It's just gonna be just like the terminator and everything is gonna just be robots and we're all done Let's do a thought experiment. Yeah, so let's say that I am an ardent environmentalist and I love the earth More than anything. Okay. That's all I want So again, you know we talk about these values my objective values are the preservation of nature and in the earth So I developed some amazing artificial intelligence system That's gonna solve all the world's problems global warmates And tell me how to fix it and tell me what to do Okay, and this thing starts learning it collects all this data learns about people and it decides well I think the earth would be a lot better if we just got rid of all the people right so it goes and does that So the question is is that good or is it should right? That's what it was supposed to do and that's the person who is environment is interested in the environment I should theoretically say well This is consistent with my values and it's achieving my goals and my ambitions So that's that's the problem with right and wrong is it's only subject It's only relative to your subjective value system and so people talk about well if what if robots come and take over and kill all the planets Well, or all the people will provided that we are all interested in self preservation. That's an awful thing. You know clearly right I happen to agree. I'm I like living living is good. Don. Yeah, it's not as good So you know, I'm I'm on that bandwagon as well But it's just not as easy. I just something as quite as easy as is often advertised. No, it's definitely very complex I mean the same thing with with self-driving cars, right? Like we had you train the fun like the values like how the car has to avoid hitting Something getting into a car accident like I think force was telling me that One of the new I think it was Tesla or someone they were they were saying that they were training the cars to avoid Primarily avoid hitting other cars meaning that if it had the car has to decide between hitting another car or hitting a pedestrian Yeah, how do you? How do you do that? How does a human do that right and The answer is that there is no answer once again And this is the thing that everybody hates and this is what I love about it so much because it makes us question these very important things that we all take for granted humans have an amazing inclination to just be enamored with our own ideas and to just reaffirm our own convictions and Something like this just forces us out of our comfort zone makes us ask these really tough questions Yeah, how do you give a machine a robot morals you can't do that right? I mean you have to you have to give them every possible angle It's a very difficult question. It's just I'm gonna start off with an example of perhaps why and then talk about just a potential Resolution which is obviously not an answer. There's no one but I'm trying to give a stab at it All right, so for example one of the biggest handicaps that we've been facing in the self-driving car things is that the cars are Good they're too good in fact the Many of the accidents that have been taking places with self-driving cars are just slow-speed rear-end fender benders Why do you think that is? Because the self-driving cars don't break the law and so they don't speed right? humans on the other hand do and so the self-driving cars forced to make a decision I need to merge onto this interstate But all the cars are flying behind me at 75 and I'm not gonna go a fashion 65. How do I do it safely and many times it can't and So there is the there's these big issues that it's faced with is how do you deal with? As soon as you tell the car well the only way to navigate that safely is to break the law Right where does that stop? Right, right so so there it is. You got to ask yourself to really understand When it's okay is you have to decide when it's okay to break the law? So in an analogy that I like to give for this is something that again a lot of people aren't really a fan of but laws are more like guidelines Right, it's not something that we should follow for the sake of the law It's more like here's a description of the shared values in the shared fiction of the people that I have chosen to voluntarily Live with so if I'm gonna live with these people. I have a responsibility to respect the shared value system of these people That being said, it's just a suggestion. I'm not gonna stop at a stop sign if I'm being chased by zombies, right? It's not like this hard and fast law that you just absolutely cannot break right so what you would want to say is how do we teach AI morals You give it the same value system as the average people in your society because that is what we've defined in general as what's right or right in wrong right Yeah, you can see the problems with that right away, right? There's a lot of people who have some convictions about certain myths because not myths as soon as a self-driving car runs over an old lady They're gonna try to say no more self-driving cars. We got a regular band of self-driving cars. They're killing old ladies now But a human would have done the same thing Potentially, or you look at the statistics and you find that humans are killing far more people than such driving cars are right right on On average like you know per the volume. I mean obviously for sure there's far more people driving than cars So you don't want to look at that statistic you want to look at the percentage of cars that are actually hitting People and self-driving cars so far have been phenomenal there too good is the problem So we have to somehow teach them to be worse to be better teach him to break the law, right? Just like we do. I know just like we do teaching to be as broken as we are Wow, man, that's that's crazy how far that seems cool indeed. Have you do you have one of those cars? No, I don't not yet once it gets a little more mainstream. What one though? I don't know I like motorcycles. I don't know what we get me too. I'm gonna get a motorcycle Yeah, I've been saving up for a motorcycle. What do you got? I have a 2015 Yamaha FZ07. Oh, okay. I'm like looking like hard on the staff bikes. Yeah, it's got like those those yellow candied rims Oh, yeah, I don't know why I bought it. It's really not my style. I'm oftentimes more conservative, but maybe I'm gonna make life crisis I don't know Pull up to the campus on your on your whole life Pop an wheelie to the parking lot. Yeah, professor Crock is here bitches. I remember back in high school I had I had a 1987 Corvette coupe Over the summer high school and there was The good old days man remember the intersection where there's the gas station right across from the parking lot that a little intersection Okay, yeah, yeah, of course everybody knows you gotta go to the circle. Okay after school always Yeah, I pulled out there, you know because everybody from school is like at that intersection or at circle K Or at the corner so that's where just that's where life happens. I don't be noticed. You got to be there right there So I was like hey, I'm gonna be noticed and so I rolled down my window sort of blaring. Oh, is it? Give me five I'm doing some donuts in the middle of the intersection. Yeah, like such a hoopel head I don't know what I was thinking of it. I was a little young living life. I got a reckless driving ticket So you did from that. Yeah, that paid that didn't work out What I deserved of course, but it was still a good memory honestly. I'm probably still do it again That's awesome. You got to break the loss sometimes and live life a little bit. Yeah, yeah shelf driver car and it would have never did that No, no, never had the volume down. Yeah, and sheer in here. Oh, yeah Wow, man, that's incredible What about have you have you? Dabbled in like video games like virtual reality and and like Simulated reality and anything like that or yeah, it's interesting you mentioned that so The lab that I work in at Flutter State University Used to be called the visualization laboratory. Uh-huh is run by doctor It was run by a Gordon or Dr Gordon or L'orlocker who's my advisor. He's the chairman of the Department of Scientific Computing He teaches the introduction to game and simulator design course Wow So in the visualization lab we have all kinds of tools. We got the Oculus Rift We got the HoloLens we got the the neuron the mobile trackers we got we got all kinds of good stuff Wow, yeah have you ever played Fortnite Fortnite? No, but I watched your podcast with one of the world's best for Fortnite players. Yeah, T-Foo. Yeah How cool is that he's a local kid no way from Fortnite Fortnite. Uh, no, but I watched your podcast with one of the world's best Fortnite players. Yeah, T-Foo. Yeah, his name is... He's a local kid. No way. From right here, I think he's a real... How outlandish is that? He's a local kid. 17-year-old millionaire. Wow. Why you video games? Yeah, cancel the short. It's insane, man. That's what we were talking about earlier. You'll be a renaissance man, or you get extremely fucking good at something like that. and all those different paths or... Now, there's more right than wrong than the others. Right. It's a different life that kind of sadly, for me, I'm often sort of met with sadness. Really? All the facets of life that I'm just never going to experience, right? Yeah. Like, I'm never going to be a guy who just like surf some of the beaches of Hawaii. I won't know like the emotional psychological phenomenon that sort of overcomes you when that's who you are. And I'm never going to be a devout religious person who goes and just preaches what he believes in 100%. I mean, there's so much life that I'm just never going to get to experience. And when you think of that, it's kind of sad sometimes. Why won't you experience it? You can go surf in Hawaii. Yeah, but I mean, what I mean is like a lifetime of that. If I go do a lifetime of it. Yeah. So for example, have you traveled before? Of course. Have me to international or something like that. Yeah. You go and you meet these people and you see what it's like, and it's cool and all. Right? And you come back and you're like, oh my god, that was the best thing ever. But we really have no idea. We have such a short, and this is where machine learning comes in again, right? We have a short exposure to information, and that allows us to create a very ill and informed what we call prior opinion about what it's actually like. Because we're trying to take this information and reconcile it with our world view that we learned over here with our Western values. And so we're taking what we think they're experiencing and fitting it into what we understand life to be. But if you were over there and you were raised there, you would see life so much differently. It's just, it's very hard to describe. I mean, the epitome of it is when you think about inter religions, right? We all have all humans come from the same cast, 99.98 something percent similar DNA. Yet just in the right environment, the right circumstances and the right exposure, you can be raised to be, you know, Buddhist, Catholic, Jewish, all these different religions that are just exposed to you from a very young age and it just totally changes your worldview. Yeah. So there's just infinitely many lives that we're never going to be able to experience. This is what we've got. Let me just make the best of it. Right. But sometimes it's sad to just think about what we'll never see. What do you think we live different lives like in different dimensions? What are you? Are you really just our greatest, are we in a simulation? You know, interestingly, the answer to both of those questions is the same. There it does not exist enough evidence either way to actually make a concrete decision. We have to do what most people do, which is what we have to do as a human and that's just choose to believe based on what's consistent with our values and what we've been taught and what we've been exposed to. So are we in a simulation? Maybe. Life would be the same whether we were, whether we weren't interestingly. And am I religious? I don't think I'm religious. I'd say that I don't really have enough evidence either way. Some people are like devout atheists. I think it's oftentimes maybe as dangerous to say that there is no God as it is to say that there is one because nobody can actually prove it either way. They just choose to believe it because it's consistent with their values and their worldview. Right. And you often overthink to the point where you are like, wow, like you were saying before, you're like, I wish I could have, you know, spend my life surfing on the beaches of Hawaii or climbing Machu Picchu or doing this and that. I mean, instead of having like that versus like having like the narrow-minded, like the narrow tunnel vision of just going down one path and sticking to it, like similar to like the video game kid. Yeah. I was never trying to do anything else. Maybe he thought about it, but just stuck down one path from when you were young kids, and you got older, got lucky, hit the jackpot. People say, oh, that kid's so lucky or whatever. But like someone like you who was blessed and cursed to be so frickin' smart that you think about all these different scenarios that you could have done. Is that, does that make you kind of like, is that what you said? It makes you sad? It makes you sad? It makes you sad sometimes. But you know, as I said a little earlier, I try to be consistent with this worldview and that is that it's neither right nor wrong. I don't regret it. This is my choice. That was his choice. If I would have lived a life-light, well, choice. I don't have too much of a choice, we're just sort of born where we're born. And then we like to have pride in that as if we somehow had choice over our nation of birth or something like that. But we live the life we live when we make the best of it. You acknowledge the lives of others. Try and internalize it as much as you can. See their worldview. But we can't. Unless I finish my invention and make that mind machine where we can put experiences in different people's minds. I think there's an episode of Black Mirror that's like that. Yeah. I appreciate that. If you watch that show. I've seen some of it. Yeah. I don't know if you remember something. And you could see people's memories. Yeah, yeah, yeah. There's also one in Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. They got that gun at the end. Remember, I think that was the answer to the secret of life for something like that. And it was just huge. Here's a hiker's Guide to the Galaxy. Yeah, I remember that movie, but I don't remember. I don't remember what the what the raccoon and shit. No, that's a Guardian by the way. That's the galaxy. Oh, what was it by the way? Yeah, that's what I was thinking of. They're a high-endored. Well, this is the other one called Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. Yeah, and then at the very end, there's the press. the gun. I don't remember what it's called, but they make a joke out of it, but basically it's like now men know what women are thinking because the women shoot you and suddenly you know what she's thinking is that sort of how your invention will work? You know I thought a lot about it and there's a lot of really dangerous pitfalls to go into and not only just philosophical but also physiological, like the neuroscience behind it. As I started studying neuroscience over the years I worked at the Max Planck Florida Institute for neuroscience for many years and learned a lot about how all this stuff works and it's just we are so incredibly far away from something like that. Really? Yeah. Would it be more of a gun or would it be more of like a electric chair you sit in, like a thing goes over your head and you strap into it? What would it look like in your mind? Yeah, I mean when I dreamed it up in my nonsense or cool, you know, I'd do a stupid thing. It would be something akin to a headset that uses something like magnetic fields to stimulate certain regions and certain neural pathways but the problem is the following is that every human being can be presented with the exact same stimulus theoretically which they can't write because just different angles and everything but just theoretically they're presented with the exact same stimulus and they'll represent that stimulus internally in completely different ways. All right so the idea of me somehow mapping the experience that you had learning it and then somehow making someone else experience it, I would have to know their entire mapping of their brain and somehow which neural pathways and spatial temporal patterns represent different feelings and experiences and activate them in some crazy order. I mean it's really just a fairy tale right now but you know you got to dream about this stuff sometimes to work towards the fun stuff. Yeah exactly. I was going to say that. It's crazy. So deep my mind is being blown every like 15 seconds and I'm trying to follow along. People want to try to figure out how to live longer and live forever. Yeah. So I'm sure there's people out there researching and all that stuff and I couldn't imagine how far it's really gone already. Do you think we're that far out from something like that? Well there's I guess two main approaches to something like that you know at least from what people like to talk about. One is the notion of just like putting your brain into something else and that's only a good idea in the short term because the brain is still biological and physiological and that will decay over time as well. So it's not like you can just keep putting your brain into a new body and the brain is just right. So the brain is a punk of meat also right? Yeah. He's going to die just like everything else right. And where are we? How far away away from that? I think very recently there was this very controversial research that or operation that somebody's been trying to take place where they're going to transplant one guy's head onto another body. Oh yeah. I heard about that. Yeah. I don't think it has happened yet and I don't really know how much truth there is behind something like that but that would be an example of where you're not necessarily putting somebody's brain into another body but you're putting someone's head onto another body and so I really don't know anything about medicine so I can't speculate on that but you know you just want to know how reasonable it is that's you know that's where that's at but the other option is uploading the brain into a digital medium where it should allegedly persist well beyond the constraints of the biological system. Then there's no there's no meat carcass that you have to deal with at your digital right? Yes. Yes. Well, we'll describe. Meat bag. Yeah. What was that would they call that? The meat bags that were trapped in for our whole lives. Yeah. We're incredibly far away from anything like that even being remotely possible. Really? Yeah. I mean what we can do is measure some patterns and neural pathways and then like make some you know very very weak predictions about what somebody's thinking or doing before they do it based off of you know patterns that are taking place. For example, there was another experiment where they had two I don't know if I'm going to cite this correctly but they had two mice or rats hamsters and like that on on very far away from one another opposite side of the planet for all I know and there there was an electrode in the brain of one and it was navigating a maze and while it was navigating the maze it was sending the signals that it was experiencing in its brain to the other mouse rat hamster wherever it was but that one was not traveling through the maze and the goal was to find some cheese so the first one you know got stuck and then eventually found some cheese and then they just let the other one loose in the exact same maze just duplicated and it went straight to the cheese. So there is something. You didn't hit any of the roadblocks along the way because he learned the the route based on the neural activity that was going on in his counterpart. Yeah. So what that's something they implant into these rats. What? How does that work? Yeah. That's a good question. I mean so the fundamental premise of all this is that you're measuring neural activity, right? So you have it was called an electrode that gets very close to soma, a cell body. Sometimes it punctures it. Maybe it's in you know the axon of the dendrite to some part of the neuron itself and then as that neuron activates this electrode measures the voltage changes as it takes place. This is some physical like you could tell when you say the electrode they put it that's something like yeah physical. Yeah. So they put in there. Okay. Exactly. The shoe like a syringe in there and do their head or something or what it was like a microchip. Yeah. Sometimes I mean there's a lot of different techniques but okay the general premise is always the following. Get access to the brain stick a needle in it. Okay. And so I mean whether that needle punctures the cell or it's just right next to it and measuring small voltage fluctuations you know just near the periphery of the cell body or whether it's actually inside the cell body all modifies the results you have to clean up and denoise that stuff but that's the idea of recording the activity of one brain and then the idea of then sort of imposing that on the brain of another. I don't know the science behind how that was done. So how do they do they take it out of the first whatever the rat or whatever it is and put it in the next one or they just record it right. So every time the neuron fires and then they just upload or just digitally just digitally. So it's basically an electrical current. It's measuring voltage changes and so each one has one. Yeah. It's not all the neurons obviously that being in impossible. There's way too many neurons. There's more neurons in the brain than there are I don't know trees in one of the largest forests in the world. I mean it's absurd but you that's fucking crazy. Yeah that's crazy to think about. It's pretty exciting. It's fascinating. It's fascinating to me. I'm torn in. I mean I get excited about it sometimes and I can empathize with the fears and I don't feel like either way is right or wrong. We would be better off sort of embracing both and finding a compromise and find the best for everyone. But what do I know? What do you think about plasticity? This plasticity does that mean that you can basically retrain your brain to do things that it was like opposite of what it was originally trained to do. Like when you were developed as a young kid, when your brain develops when you're young and you learn like you're set. Like you have certain pathways in your brain and you have a certain map of the way you see and the way you take take an input right? This plasticity does that mean that you're able to change that stuff? Like for instance you're able to change the way that you interact with all the elements and all everything in the world. Explain that to me. I never really wanted to know what it was. Okay I was right. Yeah you nailed it right on the bug and you missed your calling as a nurse. Okay I knew I had something. I knew I had something in me right now. You were hyped there it is. And so now you're talking my language like this is sort of the core of my research that I'm working on and this revolves around the concept of representation learning right? Okay. So the very first thing that happens as I said is that information needs to be ingested. You know you get some electromagnetic wave of a photon. It hits a photo receptive cell in the back of your retina. That wave gets transduced into electrical signal which then passes through some of the cells and then goes to the optical nerve to the back of the brain. Okay so how does this wave get represented internally? Like what's going on with that? Well the idea of behind plasticity is that you have one neuron. This is the soma cell body. You have what's called the axon which is where it sends signals down the down the line and you have what is called the dendrites where it aggregates all the information from everything that it's listening to. So what plasticity says is that one of the dendrites for example if it is listening to activity from another neuron say from this you know electromagnetic wave that it just received that it just experienced the strength between these two is able to change. Right and so what does that mean and how is that useful? Well what that means is that as we start seeing sensory information over and over and over again internally in the brain our ability to process it starts getting accustomed to that sensory input and we start recognizing that sensory input and we start finding patterns in that sensory input and this is one of the patreon. Right anticipating it exactly. This is one of the key observations behind you know one of the deepest parts of machine learning in my opinion which is representation learning and so here's the example for that. Let's say that I showed you a bicycle and I said Danny what is this thing? What would you say? That's the thing you sit on and you do wheelies on. There you go. Here you go. Get to school on it. There you go. You might say it's a bicycle. Right and then I would go. How do you know it's a bicycle? And then you'd say because it has two wheels and handlebars. Well motorcycle has two wheels and handlebars and a motor so it's a motor bicycle. There you go. All right so the idea is though is that we can keep asking these questions and they get more and refined as to why do we call this thing what it is. Start with maybe a coffee mug. Here's another example. Okay what is this? It's a coffee mug. Right. You know well it has a handle. Well so it's a beer mug. Right. Well it's short. Okay well so it's a teacup. Well you just keep asking these questions and it turns out that there are these very very subtle features of things that allow us to distinguish and and to send big debate between them. And so the question is how do we represent those features internally? And that's an active area of research. Machine learning artificial intelligence. I have a hypothesis that it revolves around some of the fundamental concepts. Old neuroscience that's sort of been forgotten in modern day research which is called, Hebbian plasticity. And so we can show that locally all these individual neurons that are making these local Hebbian, Hebbian. Hebbian plasticity. Donald Hebb. Okay he's the guy. He's the guy. He's like hey neurons that fire together wire together. That's his big catch phrase. And so we call it Hebbian plasticity. And yeah so the idea is that all of these neurons locally start changing their behavior completely ignorant of everything else that's going on around them. And somehow which I'm trying to show in my research we get a larger aggregate order that arises from this local activity. And the example that I like to give to this is humans. We all just exist on our own and we're all independent and selfish and we make decisions on our own self-interest. Yet somehow we have these magnificent shared fictions like corporations and religions and governments and nations. And we just create these amazing concepts. All from our just individual needs is spontaneous order that arises chaotically. It's very beautiful. And we see this in nature all of the time and I contend that the brain does the same thing. I'm gonna have to re-watch this like 10, 15 times over the culture. That's not good. Yeah I need to learn to say it more clearly. So if I say something that's not clear, you know give me a hard time about it because it's my job. No it's not you. It's just so many different words that are not normally in my vocabulary. And that's my fault. I need to do that. I listen to every day. But I need some to not know. It's not your fault. You're accustomed to it. It's not. It's the plasticity. But I like it because I'm learning. I'm definitely learning. Pickin' up little gems along the way for sure. Well I gotta go on a little die tribe now that you're just mentioning that. You know when you were saying I'm using a bunch of little terms that you don't understand and it's your fault. Here's the reality right is that communication is another one of these spontaneous order things and it is just fascinating. Let's just take a moment and just appreciate the majesty of communication. Okay. And turn only in this just massive net of you know so many neurons. I have some concept or some idea somehow. And then what I'm going to do is I'm going to somehow turn this signal into a pattern of neural activity that oscillates the vocal chords in my throat. That's going to make slight little pressure changes and the molecules in the air. These are then going to travel to you and move little hairs in your ears which is then going to create a neural signal which goes to a certain part in the brain where you then interpret the language and then somehow put all these words together and represent that idea. So I'm literally taking some crazy idea in my brain, transducing it into just waves through the air and then recreating it in your brain. Like that's just phenomenal right? Which makes me do the same thing, create things that go on my face which project back into your eyeballs and make you feel a different kind of way and it just goes back and forth right? Dude that's you hit on a very important thing and that's feedback during communication. Some people there's a lot of psychological disorders where they just don't have that capacity where they just like talk and they're not even aware of what people are or how they're interpreting what they say. But to what you said right? Think about how much you know just sheer majesty goes into the ability of me to communicate some idea to you right? The fact that I'm taking the effort to do that means that I'm trying to put my idea from my brain into yours if I which means I have the responsibility to choose all of the words and to communicate the idea from your prior and your perspective as best as possible. It's just foolish of me to just speak in my own world and my own little vacuum chamber and expect you to understand me right? So I have a responsibility to communicate as effectively and carefully as possible. Otherwise why am I even talking? I just want to hear myself talk that's not someone I want to be. I know a few people who like to do that. Yeah we're doing a normal podcast episode. Yeah think you're nailing it pretty good. I mean you got to keep it on a certain level but it's just my brain's working at super fast speeds right now to retain all the difference between too much. He's a four-cylinder. Yeah I'm running on four. He's right now. It's funny man there's like there's a guy that that we do a show I do a show with on on our YouTube channel right? He's a real estate dude. Big fat New York Jew and he's worth hundreds of millions of dollars. One of the richest dudes I've ever met and you consider him it's a really fucking successful right? Sure. I follow him around for the past six years documenting you know you're in there what he does making little vignettes and putting on YouTube and people fucking love it. People just go crazy over it. They're dashing into it with it. Yeah. This big and he is no offense to Ben if you're watching this. He'll ever watch it. He is in your videos. He is literally not the ignorance is a bad thing. I don't think ignorance is a bad thing but he is the most one of the most ignorant narrow-minded motherfuckers I've ever met that. But he's so fucking rich and successful at real estate. And people think that his opinions are so they put his opinions so high above everybody else just because of that one fact that he's a real estate man. There's a lot of interesting things that you brought up there. I mean the first one is something that I'm rather passionate about trying to oppose and that's the far to commonly committed fallacy which is the appeal to authority. So as you said so many people just respect what he says as if he has some sort of an authority figure knows what's right and what's wrong. And that's one of the lowest forms of reasoning. There's no real internal judgment that's being made. They're not really reconciling his information with their own internal model. They're just like taking it as truth. And far too many humans in my opinion do that. And I think we as a society would benefit if more people took a bit more responsibility and discipline for what they consider to be true or not true. And the other thing that's really interesting is yeah he's a big obnoxious kind of guy and honestly that's great. And the reason is because we need all kinds. The whole world needs all kinds. And there's one thing that's you know we've learned in science and that's the vast majority of things on average behave what we behave as what we call like a Gaussian distribution. And basically this looks like a little bell. And what that means is the majority of people are right here in the middle and it's high because that's where all the people are. And as you taper off to the other ends there's fewer and fewer people out there. But if those people weren't there this thing wouldn't be a Gaussian. And it would start to become very very narrow and it would start to become very very pointy and everybody would be all the same. And the problem when everybody's the same is that people can't change. And so we intrinsically need people like that to adapt and grow. And and I think as long as we have a tolerant mindset as we said before nobody's right or wrong we observe reconcile with our world model and make the best of it you know so it sounds like an interesting guy and I'd probably enjoy January yeah yeah yeah yeah man we should have had him out here tonight. It's an interesting thing like like we were talking about before though the communication part of it like you guys a really good communicator. And and being able to being able to you know influence people and make them think a certain way even though it may not be true. Well let's talk about that for a moment. So at first you say he's very brash and he says what he wants and that people just listened to him because of his his power and his money. Right. Does he actually observe who he's communicating to and communicate in a way effective for them to understand or just use his platform and his power to convince people. He definitely conform to who he's communicating to. Then indeed he sounds like a very good communicator yeah. Yeah. And I mean it's it's yeah it just blows my mind I mean it's a lot it's a very similar to how like Donald Trump can communicate to people how he can communicate to all the people who voted for him. You know he knows how to communicate to his audience you know what I mean to get what he wants. And and this guy can do the same thing you know depending on who he's talking to like like he can be whoever he wants whatever he wants. Just not like an edge case sociopath. Yeah yeah. And it's to get what he wants you know. I mean whether it's buying a car or a house he's going to talk to that person and he's going to get that he's going to get what he wants for the price that he wants. Yeah. You know he goes to get a car he's going to be the guy up and the guy's not going to sell it for price but at the end of the beating the ear beating this guy receives he will get the car as a price he wants it. That's interesting. That's interesting. Social media too man like the communication through social media that people can people can see something and take it their own way and put their own put their own story behind it and it makes them feel a certain kind of way and it may not be the truth. Yeah. What we were talking about right before right before we started recording. Yeah we were talking about that a little bit early about social media in the comments and what did you say you did with that? Yeah so it's it's pretty devastating to our social structure and our ability to communicate with one another. On a lot of ways it also has many strengths as everything does to unilaterally label anything as good or bad as often evidence that somebody doesn't really know exactly what they're talking about but from the perspective of you know listening to individuals and respecting them it's a pretty terrible medium and it's causing a lot of problems and the reason is it's pretty simple. Well nothing's really simple. But it's because there's no repercussions for their actions and it really comes down to what you were saying before. When I say something to you I see your face and I get feedback from what I say and that tempers what I'm going to say and modifies with the next words that I'm going to choose etc like that communication medium that we have from face to face interaction is very very very different than me just having my own self righteous thoughts and just don't you know slamming my hands around like a monkey trying to just vomit my my half thought ideas right. So it's teaching us very bad communication skills you know as I demonstrated earlier I'm kind of perhaps illogical enamored with an ocean of communication and social media is not really at least in the human level not a very good medium for us to communicate but again there's all kinds of other very interesting things that it's enabled us to do for example we have been able to observe trends in data based off of certain people from certain regions and they say certain things yeah maybe they're saying completely you know angry aggressive vitriol and they're just like spewing stuff but we can still find passions and truths and opinions and we can look at these all globally locally regionally and we can start understanding better a lot of the social problems that we've been facing you know unfortunately we have a lot of issues with engender and race etc and we can explore these a lot better with the medium of social social media so it's got a strength and sweetness of course as everything does yeah I mean the commenters on these videos that can be can be pretty brutal these people are pretty ruthless and I mean unfortunately I think in the long run that usually just looks where it looks bad on them but I mean the reality is I mean maybe ten people read their comments and then right nobody cares anymore because everybody knows there's just no real there's no real information or knowledge in the comments nowadays right and so if those of you who are thinking about just writing nonsense please take a little more responsibility in your and communicating your ideas yeah real may get hot here you know each other what happened I think forced is digitally turning the AC up because I see keep seeing it come on and it goes up like one degree one degree and I think he's at home watching us turn in the AC up I'll turn the heat on it please breaking us on I think so I keep seeing that thing pop up and get hotter yeah he's funny he got really really but hurt he was on one of the first part not one of the first but he was a few podcasts ago he was he was talking to a buddy jack a friend of who was he was very active on YouTube about trying to educate people on like the red tide going on in Florida like basically he was being very vocal and talking a lot about like the politics behind the people that were responsible for creating the cause and effect of red tide with like the sugar cane the sugar cane fields and all the you know all the toxins and all the pesticides going into like a kochobee and causing the red tide then we started getting into like eating and dieting and forest is like he doesn't know anything about that and forest would be like what why can't I go to McDonald's and veganism you know I mean he's like well you got to eat healthy you know the jack he's like you got to eat healthy you got to care about the environment and forest is you know he's like what I could it's cheaper to buy a dollar she's for a dollar and save money and that makes me and then people on the comments were just basically crucified yeah and it went on in part he won't come on the podcast anymore thanks guys well that's unfortunate and I'll be honest I think that's one of the problems with social media is people get very very passionate about their ideas as I shared before I mean human is this incredible inclination we just love our own ideas yeah and especially from the safety of our own laptop in our home right we of course yeah you are the authority of all that is knowledge right no consequences but the reality is is that forest isn't entirely wrong and the problem is is that here's a great example that I'm a fan it's I don't remember his name is a great economist who writes about this stuff all the time and here's the example so let's say that there's a park and it's beautiful park and people like to walk through it okay so right now our society has this very large leaning towards preserving society or I'm sorry preserving nature in parks and in the environment so we all have a very strong bias towards environmentalism okay but I know let's say somebody else comes along and he says actually you know what I'd like to knock down this park and put a parking garage on here so that I can park my car right and then we go pull well we have a decision to make here we have somebody who wants to take down the park and put a parking garage and somebody who wants to just enjoy the beauty of nature and walk through the park and here's the problem is once again we talked about earlier there's no there's no notion of like an intrinsic right or wrong and so the problem is that oftentimes people from that environmental perspective feel as though they have like a moral high ground where they say no preserving nature is the right thing to do but you ask why why is it the right thing to do you just choose that it's the right thing to do because it makes you feel good well I want to save the earth but why well because it's fulfilling well the reality is the following this person's desire to take down the park and put a parking garage is equally as valid as the individual who wants to preserve the parking or who wants to preserve the park and so here's where the the real truth comes from is the person who wants to preserve the park as well you can't take is valid as the individual who wants to preserve the parking or who wants to preserve the park. And so here's where the real truth comes from is the person who wants to preserve the park says, well, you can't take down the park because that is irreversible. Once you take it down, you can never get it back. And they're true. They're right there and there's a lot of truth behind that. However, they overlook the fact that there's something else that is equally irreversible. And that is time. Every single day that this person does not get to build their parking garage, they're going to have a day of convenience taken away from them. We have this sort of internal desire to say, oh, well, you want convenience over me wanting to save the earth. So you're wrong, and I'm right. There's no reason for that. That's just an opinion once again. When the right philosophy would be the following, both people are equally right. So what we should do is build some environmentally sustainable parking garage or something that satisfies everybody, instead of just being polarized and bickering, coming from some moral high ground, we just realize that everyone's right and trying to find a medium that satisfies everyone's desires is very easy. We're only looking at it from that perspective at least. But wouldn't you say that the person that wanted the park is trying to look out for the earth? That's that's an everyone's that's an everybody's interest, right? Because everyone lives on the earth and we want the earth to last longer and we all want to live longer. Right? Isn't that something that's a common value everyone wants to live longer at everyone wants the earth to be around or maybe are you arguing that this person doesn't care about the earth as far as their life? Yeah, I would argue, I mean, there's it's complicated. Yeah, there's there's two things. I mean, one, the notion of self preservation is once again, just an intrinsic desire. It isn't right or wrong. As I said before, somebody wants environmentalism that turns out that saving the earth is is best done by killing everybody. Well, where do you draw the line? Right. So true. Right. So I mean, you bring up a good point. I mean, it is pretty complicated, but I think that as long as we're able to find a happy medium where everybody is cognizant of the desires and wants of everyone else. And as long as we realize that deep down, whatever we think or we feel is not intrinsically right or wrong, it just builds us up to be naturally tolerant of others. And I like to sort of, I'm going to reemphasize the significance of that was just an example. Okay. The difference between being sort of objectively subjectively opinionated, you know, based on what you think and feel versus objectively opinionated, which is complete right and wrong, is the difference between 99% and 100 percent. What does that mean? That's a small little pedantic detail Nathan. No, it's not. The difference between 99% and 100% is the difference between somebody being very passionate about a religion and trying to share it with others, but having conversations and then being an extremist who no longer needs to have discussions because they have the truth, it's 100%. Their only responsibility now is to just pound the truth into the rest of the world because there is no room for being wrong. That's the very thin line that creates a very dangerous society situation in society. So, and that even shows itself in this notion of just environmentalism wanting a parking garage or not, as soon as one person is convinced that they're right, they're already wrong. And a lot of people, I think, could benefit from just realizing how little we actually know and how absolute our own convictions really are. How about you get into some serious, tell your guy to like to into a serious political debate with like a family member or a friend when I was younger. Yeah, it was not. Not more. No, I mean, because you just avoid them. I mean, you got it all. I welcome that would be like sport for you. I feel like no, I welcome it. And the reason is just because I see it as an opportunity to champion what I'm so excited and passionate about. as tolerance and listening to them and accepting them as being different, but sharing an equally valid alternative view. And as the more people we have doing that, the better our situation is going to become. I mean, we are more polarized now than we've ever been, half lead to blame for social media, by the way. And I think what we really need is just people to realize how little we actually know. There's this thing called the Dunning Kruger effect. You guys might have heard of it. It's a psychological phenomenon that says the less people know, the more they think they know. And, right. You know, we're plagued with that in via social media. The less people know, I mean, they go ahead and they Google one or two websites. I mean, I fall and pray to this too. We all do, right? Where I re one or two things. I'm like, oh, I see. So this is how it is. So no, you're not right, because this thing said this thing, which said this thing. And we're just perpetuating the problem. When the reality is, is the more that you know, the more you know, you don't know. And I find that when I'm around like academics who dedicate their life to mastering something, they're just incredibly humble about their knowledge because they see how much they don't know. Right. You know, and when somebody doesn't know how much they don't know, that's the Dunning Kruger effect. They can't measure their own incompetence. Right. So they're stock here thinking they know a lot because they don't know enough to know that they don't know a lot. It's a very curious phenomenon. Yeah. No, no, I'm definitely familiar with that. I didn't know that actual name of it, but no, knowing that you don't know a lot is smart or that's that's whatever whatever the way to learn less the best way to learn more right to know that you don't know everything. So you're saying I'm smart because I know less than you guys, but I know that I know less. You haven't you don't know you don't. So you're you're done. What if I do? There's a great quote. I don't remember the book that it's from, but it's exactly that, you know, this person and I both don't know anything, but I know that I don't know anything. Therefore, I'm smarter than he is. Yeah, there's a quote in the book I can't recall. I'm sure somebody in the internet and yeah, that's a great quote. And you're exactly right. Knowing that that you don't know is one of the wisest things that can be done. And what I'm so passionate about is that machine learning and artificial intelligence, studying that just gives rise to all of these just tolerant ideologies because you start understanding what is intelligence, what is learning, what is memory. And we're all just prayed to the sensory information that we receive. We make these biased opinions based off of something we can't really control. You understand the learning process up. People make decisions and I just think that's why I'm so excited about us learning more is because I hope that myself and others who know this stuff can come share these things that we've learned from machine learning. And it's my hope that as the message spreads, people might become more tolerant. And maybe before I'm able to invent the machine where we actually truly understand one another, we can just get a lot closer by being more tolerant and more standing over the shores among us. Definitely. It's telling such a hippie dude. Who do you know? I felt that though. Who did you like? Did you have anybody in your life either now or in your younger years, like when you were in high school or whatever throughout your life? People that you looked up to that you kind of like trying to model yourself after people influences like, who are your biggest influences? This is kind of embarrassing. One of them was Leonardo da Vinci. He read I was very young and just sort of enamored with his notion of absolute knowledge knowing so many things. So I pursued that. And the other, his name is Vash the stampede. And yeah, who's Vash the stampede? Yeah, he's the best man. He's who ever wants you to aspire to be like, never heard of him. Yeah, we had to look him up here. This might be an appropriate look up. Yeah, but yeah, but Instagram. How do you say Vash? Yeah, there he is. He's popular man. Okay. There he is. Look at this guy. The anime. Yeah, I don't know. It's 12 or 13 years old. And this anime, I mean, I don't know. People like to again have very strong priors about things such as anime being right or wrong. But this one particular anime is is surprisingly deep. And they explore very, very, very deep like philosophical issues. And this was one of those things that made me have this sort of irrational illogical affinity for just doing good and doing right things. So he's like this super essentially. He's just this super powerful guy has amazing abilities. But all he wants is to just live in peace and be happy. But there's this other guy who wants him to suffer. And so he always tries to do bad things to him. And as a consequence, everyone around him is always getting hurt. And so it's just this whole video about this one, this whole anime series about one guy, just with this heart of gold, just always trying to do good things and help people save the day with his cool powers. But all the while suffering happens inevitably. And you know, it tackles a lot of the philosophical ideas of what's right and what's wrong. How do you feel about things and it is this beautiful show. That's super cool. That's wild. When did that show? Cartoons, man. When did that show? Yeah. That was a long time ago. It wasn't really. Yeah. I just thought 2014 on there somewhere. I've seen I've seen this thing probably. I mean, it's like 26 episodes. It's short and sweet. You could watch it. And I mean, if you did a little weekend binge watching, you could watch it in two weekends. Really? Yeah. And it's just phenomenal. I've watched the whole series probably a good five or six times shared with a lot of my friends. Everyone who's ever seen it has just been enamored with it. Really? I was just like, I was just like, that out. I think it was on. It was on Cartoon Network. Was it on his super old man? I mean, this was 1980. Something I think was going to come out. Oh, really? So I caught a little later. My friend is. How old are you? I'm 30. You're 30. Right. Yeah. My friend was an anime buff. And so he's one who introduced it to me. I was visiting him. Excuse me. And Virginia. And he was just watching. I watched it there and just it starts off slow. Okay. Got to build up. Yeah. Amazing. It comes like everything characters. But it's a great show. All you guys who like it, you know, say like and how great this show is. I know how many of you think it sounds super cool. Or how much you hated on here? You need both. You need both. You need both. You need both. You need both. And you balance. We need the Gaussian Gaussian Gaussian Gaussian. Yeah. So Frederick Gauss is a mathematician. It's a fun little fable. I don't think it's true. But so allegedly when he was in grade school that teacher punished everybody and said, okay, I want you to all to add up the numbers from one to 100. And so they're all sitting there at their desks just like trying to do this thing. And then within like a minute or two, he comes up and gives the answer five hundred or five thousand fifty. And then the teacher's just like blown away. And it turns out that allegedly he invented one of the summation formulas for arithmetic, arithmetic series. And you know, just just as a kid, we'll come up with that. And it's an arithmetic series. You just add a bunch of things together. And so yeah, you add up one plus two plus three plus four plus five plus six. Oh, okay. And so that whole sum is equal to a small little formula n times n minus one over two. And so allegedly he just discovered that formula when he was a little kid. And then went on, I think the problem was much harder than that. But anyways, it's a fun little story. And he went on to do many other great mathematics things such as grade on the Gaussian distribution, which is pretty much the foundation of all probable probability theory and statistics and a lot of about machine learning. So Frederick Gauss is a cool guy. Wow. That's amazing, man. Crazy. When are you going to have something named after you like these guys soon? Or do you have something already? Nothing. Not yet. I don't know about all that stuff. What about Tesla? Nikolai, is that was an Tesla? Tesla. The force was also telling me that him and Thomas Edison, I believe. Have you know, they were both similar. But Thomas Edison was more about like being known for doing stuff or like being known for inventing known about being more famous. And I think it was Bell. Was it Bell? It was like, we should double check that. But I thought it was the person who invented the light bulb. But basically he was telling me that Tesla invented something basically the neuron or whatever to a bat. Like he basically invented the primal function of a battery. Right. Not an actual battery, but like the primal function or however a battery operates. Like he somehow created the concept for it. Right. And it never got invented or it never came to fruition. But whoever made the light bulb, whether it was Edison or Bell. No, Edison made the light bulb. He made the light bulb. But the big famous, you know, argument or struggle was between Tesla and Alexander Graham Bell. Oh really? So Alexander Graham Bell was like this big, hey, you probably find it there. He was the big business guy. He was your friend from New York basically like Alexander Graham Bell. Okay. He's like trying to monopolize electricity, making it available to people in his biggest flaw was that he was a champion of the direct current. And so direct current has a huge problem. It's not able to propagate very far in the signal to K is very quickly. Okay. And Nikola Tesla, yeah, there you go. And Nikola Tesla, he was all about just making things free. He was going to make Wi-Fi free for the world. And he was just sort of idealist that just didn't really fit into the capital of structure that America was coming up in. And as a consequence, he sort of aided in, I think, ended up like killing himself for something because he was really struggling with it. But he was the one who was pioneering the alternating current. And that's what he's doing. Oh, the AC is what Graham Bell wants. Right. And he did the AC. Yeah. And AC is what we use today. And it's been phenomenal allows signals to travel much, much further without losing as much power. So we can get these power lines for miles and miles and miles. What do you think? I mean, was Tesla, did he have some sort of form of autism or aspergers where he didn't, was it like a very inclusive, couldn't communicate? Is that is that right? I read a book on Tesla and it was by Margaret something. It was like a biography. And I couldn't tell whether she was just like overly enamored with him and was sort of sensationalizing the stories or what it was sort of like a fictional retelling perhaps. Yeah. But she would describe him as being a person who would come and sit at dinner. And he would separate all of his peas to one side of the plate and put his cup here and his silverware perfectly straight like this ridiculous sort of, yes, demonstrating autistic type tendencies or just like obsession with details, sets of compulsive, etc. So she did describe him that way. So if we want to take that as evidence or truth, then I would say yes. Right. Yeah. I find that fact. I just, for some reason, I personally find that fascinating how like certain people who become, you know, turn into something like Nikolai Tesla who is so successful in one field like that. I always like am interested in their brain and like like the autistic asperger side of people. I mean, I know people who have that and they're just like they get so focused on one thing. It's like, you know, you have no choice to become the best in the world at this one little thing. And when it comes to having a conversation with somebody on the side of the road or relative, it's like you can't say two or three words to their 50 words. And it's not only the dedication, but oftentimes, you know, autistic people have a disproportionately large amount of neural capacity dedicated to that one thing. So, you know, while we use all of our brain for all of these things, oftentimes people with autism, they use a significantly larger portion of the brain for one specific task. And that's why they've been, you know, associated with doing cool things like synergism where they like see and feel colors and senses, always senses mixed together. And you know, when somebody hears numbers, they like, the numbers have personalities to them and they like see and they have colors, etc. Which is, I agree, it's entirely fascinating. But it's actually an interesting little nugget of truth under that. And that is, you know, the difference between mediocrity and greatness is just discipline, honestly. They have a little bit of a leg up because they have, you know, allegedly a larger computational resources available perhaps. But, you know, you take two people of varying skill. One person's dedicated all the time. The other one's not. You already know who's gonna be more successful. It's really what it comes down to. How would you define discipline? Like, what, what creates discipline? What is discipline? I'm sort of an, I like discipline. I like enduring hardships and no, that's what I would call it. I would call the willingness to endure hardships. Right. Yeah. To subject to endure hardships. And what makes somebody good at discipline? Practice. Practice. It's literally, it's just learned. It comes with confidence and time and confidence filled by a few string of successes. You just do it over and over and over again. And then you start to associate the positive benefits of that enduring hardships. And you start, it's like a drug. You become addicted to it. Runners, runners experience this kind of a thing. You know, you first go running for the first few weeks. And your body's like, what the hell are you doing to me, man? Oh, this is more comfortable. And you don't want to go. The fucking fasting. Yeah. But after a while, your body's like, oh, wait, I feel real good. I'm getting a lot of endorphins. Like, this is good. You keep doing this. And you're incentivized to do it more. So, I'm just practice man. It's everything. What's something that I mean, can you be an example of something that you taught yourself to be disciplined? I mean, is there a difference between teaching yourself to be disciplined at a certain thing or general discipline? I don't think so. And so, for example, I've tried to make a bunch of my lifestyle choices revolve around training my discipline. So, I would take cold showers. For example, something that's not really a joy, I'll sleep on the floor instead of a bed, you know, things that it really, I sleep a lot every day. I'm doing more. I have a broken nose. She doesn't like sleep in the floor. She kind of sleeps on. We have a happy meeting with sleep on a bean bag bed. So, she's the other way in the morning. I don't know. I don't know a bed. So, why is this discipline? It's just a small little thing. You just sleep on the floor. You wake up in the morning and feel refreshed. And I don't know. It's just part of training that mental discipline. So, there's no reason. Like, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. It's discipline. I understand. But what's the benefit of what's the physical benefit? Is it good for you? It has been observed that usually it's pretty good for your back, etc. If you're willing to do it. Because that sounds like it would hurt. That's what I was trying to say. I mean, I don't really know the science behind it to be honest. But I mean, you can find evidence supporting whatever your ideas are. Right. But so, you found enough evidence that you think that you think it's good. Maybe not. I'll be honest. I got to confess. I don't. But, here's the idea. Trying to see if it's good. I'm just doing it because it's hard. All right, look. So, you climb a mountain. You're just doing it because it's fucking hard. You don't know if it's good or bad for you. It's simply discipline. It's just, I'll tell you why. I'll get that ad app. And I was in graduate school. I was coaching, a boxing jam. You had the coaching evenings. I did research from like eight to five and then a coach from five to nine. And then I go back to work some more and do some more things. And I was in the lab until two, three o'clock every night. And then I had to get up early in the morning and do it again. And one day, I was like, why do I I always have to go home? Like, why do I go home? It's a bed. That's really the only reason. It's like such a ball and chain. Like a shackle. Like, you know what? I'm just going to go to sleep right here. You just roll the chair out and usually on the floor. It was such a liberating feeling. Like, you can just, whenever you get tired, think about it. Like when you're tired, you're like, yeah, I got to go home now. Like, why? You know, because you feel like that's where you have to go. Right. For some people, that's fine. But I enjoyed the liberating feeling and the discipline of, you know, sleeping on the, the floor. It was worth it for me. But here's an example. Like, let's say you climb a mountain. Why do you do it? It's fun. It's cool. Whatever. But you get to the top. It was really hard. And then you go back down. And now you experience something else in your life. That's hard. And what do you say to yourself? You're like, I climbed a mountain. I think I can handle this. You know? That's why. You just, you just put a success right there. And this builds confidence. You now have a landmark, a flag to compare the rest of your, well, how's your challenges to, you know? So if you can challenge yourself to do something that's really hard and you can overcome it, then, and you can do that. Doing multiple things, then you'll have the confidence to know if you come to another bridge that you think is going to be hard to cross. You'll have the confidence to do it. And you know, you can do it because you've done other things and you know it'll be easier. Yeah. And what's interesting is it becomes less and that builds just general discipline across all exactly. And once you have the general discipline is no longer a choice. It's who you are. Right. So there's a quote. I think Benjamin Franklin, maybe he says, you know, greatness isn't born. Greatness is learned. Every single day when you're faced with a decision, you say, what would a great person do now? And then you do that until the day comes where you no longer ask yourself what a great person does. You just do what comes natural as being a great person. And so that's kind of how you think about discipline. You endure all these hardships, etc. And that's just like your mind. That's who you are. Someone asks you to do something and it's hard. You don't think that it's hard because you're just like, oh, easy. I've done that. I do this stuff all the time. You know? Yeah. That's fucking fascinating. Man. But wow, why the beanbag? Why the beanbag? I'm curious. I wonder why the beanbag because we, all right, so the reason is because I slipped on the floor and I didn't have a bed and I would always have like family people come visit. And I needed something for that. I got this big beanbag that zips into a bed when you lay it out. Okay. I saw the beanbags. I used to have, I bought two really big ass beanbags in my apartment in St. Pete. They are. They are. They're awesome. It was too big. It's a lot of things. Yeah. All right. So there we go. It makes a lot more sense now. That's cool. What are some of the other things that you've taught yourself? Discipline and other things. Well, that stopped doing it recently. Well, no, it's still halfway there, but I would set my watch to a different time and wear it upside down. Right. So I just every time I want to tell the time, I have to do like a little mental arithmetic real quick and like talk the time backwards and it's just little things. It's a strength in your mind. You brush your teeth with your left hand instead of your right hand. Get your brain used to doing different things. Take a different route to school or work each day. You know, just always expose your brain to new things. You're not like stuck in a rut. Wow. That's interesting. That's fucking awesome. I love that. I'm going to try some of these things. Yeah, I just have so many ideas and stuff that's crazy. Yeah, I mean, if it works for you, man. Yeah. Let me know how that works out. I want to get lost on the way to work. Get fired from my job. I'm trying to tell the time. I'm brushing my teeth while I'm driving to work on a new route. And I'm like trying to do it all at once. The tops pull me over there. Like, why are you brushing your teeth with your left hand? And where are you going? I don't know where I'm going. I'm just trying a new route to work. I might try it. Wow, man. Yeah. That's incredible. I mean, I think if you think hard about your life, you probably subject yourselves to some hardships unconsciously. Yeah. You know, I mean, in the common day to day things that you do, there's something that you want enough that you voluntarily put yourself through hardship to get it. And once you identify those things, you can just exercise them a little bit more. And you say, well, yeah, I was going to do this thing that was hard. Now I'm going to do that thing and then do five pushups every time before I do it. Just what a small little thing has challenges of, you know? For me, it's like, I personally, I feel like I've always tried to found like find what makes up some days when I wake up and I go through a day and I feel fucking great full energy, happy talking to people like super energetic. And then the next day, I'm just pissed off in a bad mood. I feel tired, slow. I want to figure out like what makes me like the first day. And not like the other day. So I like constantly tried to figure out like what patterns, you know, what path I took that one day and what I can replicate to make that thing happen again. And I feel like I've never been able to figure it out. Well, there's a great idea. And there's a lot of truth behind that. I think that there do exist some general norms, which are good ideas, but besides drugs. It took a systems biology course. And it's the notion of like studying the whole body as a system. And each component is communicating with other components via, you know, DNA, you have transcriptions, etc. Messengers and proteins all communicating. And you try and model this phenomenon to see how things happen. And for example, one of the phenomena that we studied is like the sleep wake cycle is a certain part in the brain. And that sleep wake cycle gets trained and tuned to the amount of light that we're presented with, which is why we're trained to get tired at night and stay awake during the day. Right? And the idea is that there is just so much going on. You're just not going to figure it out, man. This is like randomness. There's just hormone random changes. The weather changes. You can't control that. And for whatever reason, some bacteria or something flares up, but not enough to make you sick, but just enough to like make some hormonal response like stuff you can't see, just anything. Exactly. Now there's a few good rules of thumb. Eat healthy and exercise and sleep. But that also that also pisses me off to you because there's this one guy I know who's extremely fat and overweight and doesn't take care I know he doesn't give as much sleep as I do. And I know he doesn't do it. He doesn't exercise. He doesn't go to the gym. And he's always got 10 times more energy than I do. And I'm like, why am I tired? I went to the gym 10 times this week. All I ate was broccoli. And you have 10 times more energy than me. Why is it genetic to like, you know, just to drive he has to get that money. It's discipline, man. I don't know. Yeah. There's a lot of truth behind that. I mean, there's just discipline. Is there just a genetic disposition? Maybe. Yeah. Who knows, man? I wanted to ask like, what are some cool projects or things you've worked on? Like, so what are some of the coolest stuff you've worked on or seen or like, or whatever, something like that? Something like that. Let me think about that one. That's a little tricky. So can you narrow it down from me a little bit? Like, I don't know. Like you said, so you were working on the 911 calling thing or whatever. You know, whatever that is, program or whatever. So like, what are some of the things you've done over all these years? Like really cool projects or things you guys came up with or like, what are some of the things that stick out in your mind? Some of the fun, the more fun and exciting things. So, I mean, unfortunately, the majority of my research is kind of like more theoretical and philosophical. So it has been to apply to some more like, you know, what is learning, what is memory, etc. But you're going to get roasted for that question, by the way. That's right. So maybe it's maybe it's things like you figured out or algorithm or whatever it is. But in business, you got to apply and nobody's going to pay me a certain room and think, right. Let's go for the government and they don't even do that much anymore either with grants or so. We got a business and we have things. So I can tell you about some of the stuff, some of the other things that we've done there. So in addition, something else that we're exploring right now. Let's see what's cool. All right. So the Department of Transportation is very interested in safety and maintenance of the roads, highways, bridges, etc. So there are some civil engineers who have just myriad of all kinds of data on this. They have speed bump sensors on the highways, which measure the width of the axles, the speed of the cars, whether there's a trailer or not, all kinds of things. And one thing that you might have heard, there was a bridge that actually fell recently and there was a lot of deaths and injuries and there was a crack, like a full two-inch crack in the bridge a few days before that people weren't observing. So they had this big new initiative where they had to take drones and the drones are flying around these bridges and just taking pictures of all these things and monitoring, you know what the bridge looks like. But now they've got hundreds and thousands of pictures and what are they going to do to sit here and watch these videos all day every single day. So we develop machine learning algorithms and techniques which will isolate and detect where there are cracks or damages and the degree of the cracks is as degree one, two, three, four, five, etc. And that can save lives and that's really boring thing, isn't it? No, that's actually very fascinating because I work in construction. So that kind of hits a certain spot that makes some sense to me. But like how do you come up with something? How do you implement? You just code some sort of program that learns this thing and... Yeah, so I mean most machine learning algorithms have, they all follow the same formula, okay? You have a whole bunch of data. You pass it through some for the sake of this conversation, a black box on our own network and it makes a prediction. Then what you do is you take a look at this prediction and you say whether it was right or wrong or rather how far away it was from what you wanted it to do. Then you do the most complicated thing and all of machine learning essentially and that's you calculate the error rather. You use an algorithm called back propagation and that finds how you change the black box such that if you present that same image or piece of information to it again, the output will be closer to what you want. And that's it. So you give it something, it makes a mistake, you go, eh, you made a mistake, do it a little bit better this way, present the same thing and it'll do it better. So with those images, we just show it all the images and it's just, it doesn't know anything at first. It's like a baby. Just touch and things and guessing making all kinds of mistakes and we just form it little by little. Well, this was wrong, this was right. And then it starts learning those features that we talked about. What are the features of a crack? It starts learning to extract those features that define what a crack is and now it's presented with an image is able to identify cracks. Man, that's so crazy. It's cool. Like it just thinks for itself, it's just, oh, that's so crazy. Well, no, that's actually a really important part, right? So these things that do really cool stuff, they are super narrow. Like, you know, you go to a Bank of America ATM and you put your check-in and it scans it for you automatically and detects, you know, it seems super cool. That's all that thing can do. That thing's not going to go outside and learn to play basketball or do your taxes, right? I mean, that's the notion of transfer learning and that's like one of the holy grails of AI that we've been exploring and we're very far away from really understanding that wholesomely. So these, and that's one of the things that I'd like to just sort of share with people is, you know, it's okay to be afraid of, you know, AI and it's what it can do in the future. But just remember, we're really far away from any sort of terminator things happening and for the very far future, as far as I'm aware, anytime we're doing any research with any AI that has the potential to do scary things, you just unplug the ethernet cable. Okay. So if it ever goes rampant or does something amazing, all you got to do is unplug the computer, right? But as soon as you have a plugged into the internet, then allegedly I agree with the concerns that are there, right? If something's like self replicating, it gets into the internet, that can be really dangerous, no doubt. But that's why we just exercise a little bit of discipline and we're doing it and unplug the ethernet whenever you're doing, you know, advanced AI research, no big deal. Did you hear about the Facebook was creating that a new AI, I think it was for customer support that was supposed to talk to Facebook users and try to like be, act as support for Facebook. And it was like an AI. And I believe there was two different AI's and they created their own language. And really glad you brought that up. So that's like again one of the problems in AI sensationalism. They didn't invent their own language and it was advertised that way and it was nothing even remotely that cool. So really. Yeah. So that's one of the, but that's one of the problems is what are you going to do? I mean, you're consumer and you're supposed to trust that people giving us news and that's one of the problems. Right. And this genius forest over here, he's the one who told me they created their own language. I was like blown away by it. The news are kind of cool to talk about. I remember all the news are news that say that. Yeah. And they're defense in his defense. Right. I mean, what are you supposed to do? You're not a machine learning expert. You're not going to like go and read the papers and the reports and look into what it meant. So you're saying that they did not create two AI's did not create their own language. Define their own language, right? I mean, we feel like they're in there like conspiring against mankind and humanity and they advertise it that way for a click bait, you know. But what actually happened then? All right. So the details I don't exactly remember it was a little ahead of go. They're in there like conspiring against mankind and humanity and they advertise it that way for clickbait. But what actually happened then? So the details I don't exactly remember, it was a little bit ago. But in a nutshell, I mean, the idea was basically that they were sending signals back and forth in a certain way that it seemed as though the responses were predictable. So it sends a certain signal and then it interprets it in response in a way that there was structure and meaning behind the things going back and forth. It's not like we discovered what they were saying and they were conspiring and they have their own language. They just found patterns in the signals that they're sending back and forth with each other. Just as much as the image acquisition thing I described you earlier is going to find patterns in what defines a crack. They're just doing what they're programmed to do, find patterns in the sensory input. That's all any intelligent system does. But were they initially programmed or expected to communicate in any form with each other? I don't know the details of the full experiment, so I would have to exercise some academic strength here in right. I would not say what I don't know. Either way, it's still pretty interesting to find out that they were communicating in a way that they didn't expect them to. And it was AI, but who knows? It could have just been clickbait headlines. Yeah, I would for now I would caution that as being clickbait headlines. And unfortunately for the unforeseeable future, we all have to just suffer from that because we're not all experts in everything. You see someone who knows, eating a piece of chocolate, and makes you healthier, and drinking a glass of wine. You see all these studies which are based off of poor statistics which then some, I think, oh man, I remember who was like Al Roker or someone. He was like on some news thing, it was super embarrassing. He's like, well yeah, you know, I think what the thing is nowadays is you just find whatever scientific publication supports your own beliefs. Yeah. And I was like, that is the exact opposite of what science is supposed to be. You don't just cherry-pick evidence to support your own convictions. It's the exact opposite. Scientifically-minded people change their own convictions based on the evidence. You don't just go find evidence to make you feel good about what you're on. Right. All right. Yeah, yeah. So what are you going to do when the people who are advertising the news think that way? It's crazy. It's unfortunate. I think there will ever be a shift in like, in general population understanding. It's kind of starting to keep championing these ideas, advertising, just many people as we can. And maybe people also are thinking differently. I think you should be president. You think, oh yeah, hell yeah. I'd vote. I would never want that much responsibility to help me out. But it would be good. Maybe you can clone yourself. I already have a clone. I'm not a cyborg. You're thought about cloning? Yeah, of course that's funny. Then I can make an army of me and take over the world if anyone wants to do that, right? For sure. Yeah. I mean, there's lots of fun entertaining things that can happen with cloning. What about Elon Musk's neural net? I figured what it's called. But basically he talks about on a phone, you're only output as your two thumbs. And with this net, I figured what the exact word of for it is. Yeah, I heard about it. And it's like over your brain or whatever. And basically you like live in Facebook or live in social media. Super suspicious of it. It sounds like a great idea. And I am super happy. What is it called again? Neuralink. Neuralink. Neuralink. Neuralink. I'm really happy that he's, someone's got to start doing it no doubt. And it's a great idea. And we'll get there eventually, right? Yeah. But, you know, because this is the fundamental technology behind that is very similar to what I was sharing with you before about putting ideas on someone else's brain. You have to know where to send the stimulus. You have to learn patterns in the electromagnetic waves that happens with people think. Map these to some sort of functional output. Like it's an incredibly difficult, complicated task. Yeah. But we can do it. We've done all of it. We went to the moon. We can do all kinds of hard things. So I like that he's doing it. But I don't think that's going to be happening anytime soon. You don't seem to be, you don't strike me as a big fan of Elon Musk. I think he's doing really good things for the world. And I am very supportive of his missions and his ambitions. I've just read a little bit about him. He doesn't really intelligent things. Like he surrounds himself with experts. He knows what he doesn't know. And he surrounds himself with experts. And he's well informed because he's humble. And I respect that. However, but this is the case with pretty much anything. Because I think there's hundreds and thousands of people who can do his job better. And most of his position is just luck. And I think, but that's the case with most everything in life. I mean, people who are where they are think about what their true qualities are such as your friend who's really wealthy. You know, I don't think there's any really distinct characteristics that make one person shine phenomenally more than other people. There's hundreds and thousands of people with the exact same characteristics. But their life circumstances were such that they were born in Africa. And for whatever reason, they just can't come here and be awesome and champ and take over these things. Right. So, and when I look at him, I think he's great and I like what he's doing. But I just, I'm sort of against, I guess, sort of the idealization that people have sort of made him to be like, oh, he's the big savior of the future kind of thing. Right. Because I think that handicaps ourselves, it makes you feel like you can't do it or something. He's just a guy who works hard, surrounds himself by experts and got really lucky. And anybody else can do that too. Yeah. But I still think what he's doing is great and I respect him. You know, I have nothing bad to say. I just, yeah. Yeah. Do you ever think that you'll be as world renowned as Elon Musk? I don't think so. Yeah. And I like, I don't know. I just like simple things. Like sometimes I just think about like going out to just like a little farm or a small little village somewhere and just helping people teach in math and some school and just like laughing with people and loving and feeling life a little bit. But then sometimes I wake up and I'm just like I want to go climb a mountain conquer the world. Right. I love to find those right for us. But I'm not a hundred percent driven and just ambitious to step over people and change the world. That's not me. I'm a little more of just a, I don't know like try gun like Vash stampede. That's my guy. That's my hero. That's the kind of guy I want to be. He just wants to live a happy life and make up this better. And that's kind of what I want to do. You know, so I don't know if it happens. I'd be cool. I'll embrace it to try and help the world in whatever way. But I'm not really working for anything like that. You know, yeah. It's not my ambitions. That's cool. Man, that's really interesting. What do you guys want to do? It's a good question. It's a good question. I don't know what I always kind of wanted to do the same thing about like my only skill has ever been kind of like, you know, making videos with my friends when I was a little when I was younger in high school. I did what I remember. I ran around. I ran around. I was scared more than the video camera. I was downed with what you've done here. Man, it's really impressive. It impresses me even because I've known Danny since back then. It's like, I knew him. I'm impressed that he did. I'm really autistic people who stuck with the same thing since this is all I ever known. I was on that path. I had so much momentum. It's like, why God? Go in the other room. It's beautiful. Man, it's working for you. Right. He found the part he was good at. He wasn't always the best BMX or skateboarder, but he was the best at filming everybody and putting it together and editing the videos together. And it just, it worked out good. And it's transitioned more into making it look cool to actually providing valuable context. Very good. Yeah. Because you got a way to decide. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I like that. You mentioned this right at the end because I struggle with it sometimes because I have friends out at Facebook and Google and they're like, hey, then you got to come out here and you'll be challenged and you'll grow so much more and you'll really thrive out here. And I have absolutely no doubt. I mean, I've been out there. I went to the Google Brain Project. I've met some of the astounding Google Brain Project. Yeah. So it's a research group at Google that does AI. Okay. And I'll come in there with them and talk about them. My research there research and these people are astounding. They think in ways that's amazing. And I love it. But I think the notion of success is a little bit conflated in our world with just status and prestige. Right? Because for me, success is just watching others grow and succeed. I like to teach. I like to share what I'm passionate about. I like to just help others. And so for me, if I want to a small little village and just saw some people's lives flourish and watch them be really happy, that'd be success for me. And so that's why I like what you're doing is whether you learn one thing or many things, you're happy with what you're doing. You're making a difference for some people. And is there any other way to really define success other than that? Yeah. Well, I mean, it also has a lot to do with your early life too. I mean, how you were developed as a young kid, what you were put up against growing up. I mean, did you grow up with siblings or anything like that? Or were you an only child? I had two siblings. I was the youngest. I think that had anything to do with how you turned out, like with what you wanted to do, like learning science or getting, learning all this stuff, like being better than your siblings' competitiveness. Like a lot of times, like how people grow up, I feel like that has a lot to do with how they end up with the path they take. There's a lot of psychological research behind children and where they fit in. And you know, there's correlation between being the middle child and being the troublemaker and then being the youngest and then needing attention and then being the oldest. And then, you know, being somewhat altruistic sometimes because you have to help the younger siblings. So there's all kinds of like little interesting correlations. None of them are absolute or anything. But I would say that that evidence is enough to say absolutely. You're bringing the number of siblings you have in your position among them is going to significantly modify who you become. And what you determine is success, right? Absolutely. Absolutely. Well, anything else we should cover? I mean, we've been on there for like an hour and almost two hours now. Almost. Yeah. That was close to this was a good. This was good. And I think this is like one who stuck through it with this. This is one of the best discussions I think we've ever had. Yeah. I can't rate rewatch this a couple times. I'm going to watch it a hundred times. Definitely, man. I'm really honored and grateful for the opportunity to share what I love. I'm very passionate about this stuff and it's nice to be able to have a, you know, a platform and a microphone to share what I love. Absolutely. Yeah. I would love to have you on here again, you know, eventually. the next time you're down here. Yeah. Share with us some cool shit you're working on down the line or some new shit that's going on. 2019 is lining up to be very busy year for us. We have a lot of content on the line. So it's awesome. Really. Yeah. And everybody, new side labs, new side is a company in Tallahassee. If you're looking for any data science or machine learning services, if you'd like to get insight as a service as we call it, please reach out to Nathan at newside.co or Google and contact your guys here. We'd love to offer some services. Awesome. Awesome. Thank you, brother. Yeah, my pleasure, man. It's good to call you a friend. All right, Nathan. Thanks, buddy.