Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! That wouldn't be good. That wouldn't be good. It's just my thing. Yeah, at all the weird shit that someone's giving me. That's at the top. Well, I got this. This is a woolly mammoth tooth. My friend John gave me woolly mammoth tooth with a woolly mammoth carved into it. That's craziness. That's crazy, right? That tooth's probably 10,000 years old. No bullshit. But the balls to carve into a tooth? I know, I would never. I mean, it's beautiful. That's gorgeous. The guy did it. He nailed it. I mean, it's beautiful little elephant there. That's fucking unbelievable. But I would never carve into one of these things. It almost looks like a talligator gar from the side, like a little alligator jaw. Right. It does right? The thing about these teeth, though, is they find so many of them that they don't think of them as precious. So you're allowed to do stuff with them. Like you could buy a knife with a woolly mammoth handle. Like this is a piece of woolly mammoth that they make for a gun. So you could put that on a 1911. It's a handle made out of woolly mammoth teeth. You just have a, this is an extra handle. Is this this handle? It's the, a piece of handle. It's the pistol handle. It's the pistol handle. Yeah. And this is a piece. It would make a good handle for this one, too. Like the front one for fucking. Oh, okay. If you hold your sick ass thing. Yeah. Yeah. I definitely could do that too. I mean, they basically could make anything they want out of it. They make folding knives out of it. Jamie has a folding knife out of it. Can you make piano keys out of it? Oh, yeah. You definitely could. Yeah. Willy mammoth. The use it for Ollie mammoth woolitzer. You could, right? You definitely could. If you could use ivory, you could use woolly mammoth ivory. Because they use it in pool cues. This is a tooth to this. I used to have a foam pool cue unscrewed it. I used to come to the fucking pool hall with unscrew the fucking thing. You get nuts with it. Having a pool, like having a pool cue is you're a different level of human being when you're walking around with that. You're not playing games. You're not playing games there to play games, but you're not playing. It's a very serious thing. It's a cool thing. We show up with your own cue, like in the hustler. You got shows up with a leather satchel. It's natural. It's natural alone. Yeah. It's for it's male accessories. Right. We don't have a lot. We have a knife. Yeah. A knife always looks good on the side. A gun. Watch. Watch. Watch. Watch the good male. It's like the most acceptable male jewelry. For sure. Don't you think? Watch this, right? I don't want to know what the nose ring. I don't want to know what the nose ring is. Or like the rubber bull nose ring. You could pull off gold chains and diamonds and shit because you're a rapper. No, no, no. No one knows me as that. If you know why the collar guy, this is not. I don't even look good with jewelry on. I agree. I do too. I feel stupid. I never wear a chain. I feel stupid. I had a chain back in the day. It had a little miniature Tasmanian double piece. That was the tattoo everybody in high school. Taz was the one down. Taz was boxing gloves. The shoe. Boxing gloves with the child's name. I have that. I'm like, yeah, my friend Kenny got that. It was his first tattoo in Warren High School. Taz made a devil in the box. I'm like, we're all sick. I guess we're like 16. The taz was still to this day. Was it like that in Bob Whyer? If you had Bob Whyer and Taz, dudes went so far with Bob Whyer. They got Bob Whyer around their ankle, which is. That's unacceptable. A big mistake. It was Pamela Anderson. I know. I remember that one. She had an on. Didn't she have it on her ankle? She had an arm. Yeah, movie. A lot of dudes had it on the arm. Fairly, okay. It's kind of a bad decision, but it's okay. But I don't think any type of ankle accessory jewelry other than like a surveillance. It really, for me, it doesn't work. My agent's way too bulky. And it's a thick ass ankle. Right. It doesn't hold jewelry well. No ankle does. No male ankle won't jewelry well. I mean, I don't believe in it. I'm not telling you what to do. If you're a guy who like speeds on your ankle, feel free. If I go to club men and come back with the braids and the ankle twists, you know, then it's a wrong vacation. Even on vacation, ankle jewelry is odd for a man. But you know, people start acting different when they go on vacation. I have friends that wear different outfits. Short to get shorter, shirts get tighter. Right. Pieces of clothing just remove themselves. Right. It's like wearing, I need to wear the Velcro pants and just rip them off. Sometimes when you're on vacation, you just don't want to be yourself for a week. I feel like that. Just relax. Can I just cut this fucking tie off a man? Get that. I also don't want an agenda. Right. I don't want to have like we're doing this. We're doing that. Vacation is not to have a schedule. I think the schedule should be around eating. That's what I believe. That's my feeling is like, cool, ancient things. Like if you're in a cool place like Athens, you know, you definitely got to go seek some cool ancient shit. But get the good grub. Speaking of my language. Now find the spots. I was eating some rare scampi right in front of the pantheon. You know, like there was a beautiful restaurant known for scampi right there. Wow. That's phenomenal. I was just recently in Mexico City at Teotihuacan. I want to go there. I was in Mexico City only once for the UFC, but it was in and out. It was one day, you know, two days. What is that? I don't go places where I can. I don't go places where I can. But there's a lot of New York. It's kind of like a Mexican New York, but bigger. It is. It's always super bigger. Bigger than New York. There's like 10 million people that live in the place. They told us not to go to. Man! They told you. I was like, what the fuck is this massive area? He's like, you know, you go there. But 10 million people live there. What is the population of Mexico City? And I was getting that good lung capacity. Right. If you're working out there. It's like, I think that's really high above sea level. It's 10,000. Is it 10? Mexico City's 10. Yeah. But what an advantage you would have if you lived up there. And then you go down to sea level. You could fuck everybody up. Your cardio would be fucking in charge. I couldn't believe myself. Yeah. That's real. Now, you're just doing normal things. I wasn't even working there. Right. Exactly. You just feel like you're like, got more blood in it. You're more blood in it too. Mm-hmm. Whoa! Load of mid 20 million people depending how you define its boundaries. Wow. It's also unknown. There's no sense. Exactly. Right. It's also very, it's a lot, that's a shanty situation as well. Oh, of course. Yeah. Where? A shooting. Oh, I did see something like a cyst, a crazy person. Right? I should believe so. Yeah. Yeah. Two of kind of popular tourist archeological side outside of Mexico City. That's where you're not allowed to go. That's the Sun Temple. You're not allowed to walk. You're not allowed to walk. You're not allowed to walk. That's what they're doing. Just to that area, you can't go up. And so this guy just started shooting people? Oh, wait, you can't go there. He's fucking elevated. Yeah, that's the Sun Temple. He's there with the gun and there's a bunch of people laying down on the ground that we're like, oh, Jesus Christ. Like he's like shooting right out. So what? It's crazy. Why are you just standing there? He's standing there too. I saw something on Google this morning. He said something to them. That motherfucker was hopping on one leg. Did you see that hopping? Oh, fuck, Jesus Christ. Yeah, I didn't see that. Just going to go check out some cool buildings and some shoots your fucking Achilles tendon off. That's one of the worst injuries you could probably sustain is an Achilles injury. Especially with the gunshot. How many people died? I think one. Seven people. Seven people were shot. Oh, one fatally shot. The story of that area, that place is so insane. I went down this long rabbit hole because I'd read something that the Aztecs didn't build that and that they found it there. And they called it the place where gods were born. And so then I went in this deep dive on the Aztec people and whoever was there before them, it's a total unknown. There's so much about that area like the old mechs. They don't. Who the fuck were they? They don't know. They're giant stone heads that look like they're either Polynesian or African. They're fucking huge heads with a helmet on. And there's a bunch of them and no one knows who made it. No one knows what language they spoke. It's crazy. It's truly unbelievable. I know there's one native language that I worked in kitchens my whole life. So they would always joke with me that they were speaking to tonaka. And tonaka is definitely like a tribe from down there and it's these mythical curing people like these, the healers. And we happen to actually my wife knows a woman from the lineage of that family. It's all just crazy shit. But regardless of that, just the sheer fact of those buildings, I saw with my own eyes. That's not it. There's more underneath. That's not just. It's all surface areas. Right. Right. That stuff goes, it runs deep. It's like finding some of the cities on us. They build them on old ones. I mean, it's just like you tile the floor. You just leave that bullshit. You just tile right over it. Well, even when I was in Italy, we were in a revelo. And there's this beautiful church up there. You go for a little walk up the hill. There's a beautiful church, old church like from the 1800s. But it's built on top of a church that's like a thousand years old. And there's a glass floor. You could see through to the bottom with the original ruins. The same thing in Mexico City. They do that everywhere. Or there was these people making their pilgrimage where they crawl on the floor from fucking hundreds of miles away in Jesus' name just to get to the church. Oh, wow. I don't know what that some act of like some humbling act where they crawl from hundreds of miles away to the church. And everyone come. I don't know. Millions of people come to this. It was fucking crazy. That would be a religious experience. I don't want you to know. It truly was like Charlie. Charlie. I was just in there. We caught sermon. And I was just I was getting fucking chills. Like I just from the way they spoke and echoed the way that the crucifix in this room was. Wow. It was meant to give you chills. Well, they do it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't want to go down the full. I Charlie Kirk rabbit. I'll hold my saw this video yesterday where he visited Jerusalem. And they were taking him to this place underground where they mapped it out and use archaeology to find out that like I believe this spot here where they're at Jesus. I think preached or something. It's all they found it underground and they just built the city on top of it. Like you're just saying. There's all these phenomena. But that is a common thing. Yeah. It's a common thing. This is where he was. No, no, I mean, it's a common thing where they take old sites and they just build the new sites on top of them. It's a really common thing. Well, it's kind of it's fucked up, but it's also like paying homage. I guess kind of. I know the same like keeping the same vibe. Like there's just like rebuilding a house. Yeah. You want to keep some bones. Yeah. Like there's good bones there. Right. I don't think people probably had a really good sense of what history would mean 2,000 years later back then. You know what I mean? Like when they were doing all this shit? It is easy. They were busy. They left all kinds of chatcheese men. Yeah. They left so many chatcheese. It's crazy. Like I feel stupid. Like when I'm like I have to do the same thing with my time, I have to constantly be I have to leave cool shit because they left cool shit. Just because I feel it in me as well. Like I get it. Right. But when I went to the museum down there, as you see all these things, it's like ornaments, like like just literal chatcheese. Uh huh. Things you would see ornamentally placed by your grandmother on top of things or like on top of doily just for decorative purposes. But also everyday things and just everything meant something. Everything meant something to them and everything was done with intention. I don't think that this was all accidental for them. They knew, well they knew who they were praising all the little figurines for the fertile women were these women with big humongous hips and asses and big breasts and stuff like that. These are the nurturing women. They showed the people who were supposed to be witch doctors. They fucking look like witch doctors or crazy. Three skulls holding crazy fucking things. They determined my view or these views of who these like who people are. You understand like status wise and species wise. Like this is a barber. This is this and your idea of what that person looks like. A nurturing woman is known to be a voluptuous woman. Their ideas were there already. They built all their all their little chatcheese and their little statue that they represent. These women very voluptuous. It would have been interesting to see to hear their version of the world. You know what I mean? Like I wonder what they knew about the rest of the world. I wonder how much they knew. How much they knew about like Europe and Asia and how much they knew about Africa. Did they know anything about all that stuff? Like when they were existing. Like whoever built to you how do you say it to you to a con. Yeah, to you what kind of. However built that. Like how much did they know about the rest of the world? That's what's interesting. We don't really know. We assume that they're all isolated. But more and more as time goes on, they keep finding evidence of earlier and earlier seafaring people. I think they've pushed people in boats back to 60,000 years now. Let's see if that's true. Put that in perplexity. What is the oldest known use of boats? Also speaking of that, that note that they've found no one's on the planet. How long has this been water? There's probably a lot of water. I've been shutting the float on it. I brought that up before. Oh, Mount Ararat in Turkey. But yeah, it's been going around Twitter the last couple of days. I think they did some new scans and found some stuff underneath it. Oh, shit. I want to see that. But what was the other question? The other question is the oldest boat. What do you guess? Take guess. Fucking, it's beyond my thought. It was like I don't even know a number. A number doesn't come to mind. As long as there's been water. What the fuck does that mean? I don't even know. I wonder how long it took for a man. To figure out the trees float. And if you could figure out a tool, once they figured out tools, they must have started making stuff. When we see all these ancient, really like laser diagnostic fucking situations, they knew already. Yeah, they knew. That's different. Like Egypt, right? Our KQ women's across the substantial sea channels, along before a species, Homo sapiens appeared on the record. Whoa. So implying intentional crossings is far back as roughly 450,000 years ago. You think about it. What the fuck fucking polar bears and seals they jump up on a little broken piece of ice and they float? That's crazy. That's a boat. I, yeah. That's a boat. Yeah. That's what the polar bears are doing. You're absolutely right. Put their hand in the water as a rudder. And it's going this way. Let's go that way. Yeah, they know what they're doing. They know how to tip them over. And the seals to pop off. Yeah, they did that slide. It's years of evolutionary knowledge. Yeah, 450,000 years has been in as though. I thought it was like 60. Well, that further happens since somewhere between 60 and 130,000, but this article here says could be even before that. Well, what was that most recent discovery of a human skull that back dates human beings, not necessarily Homo sapiens, but versions of humans back to a million years? Was it Homo, not Homo noling? It was a skull they had, but they knew testing or something. Right. And they said it's a million years old. So I don't think it's us, but I think it's, the question is it co-existed with us. Yeah, about a million years old, so it says. So that might mean we're a million years old. Want to see some shit, hear about some shit that I've just read the other day? That's nuts. You know how the thought is that there's Neanderthals and that human beings bred with Neanderthals? And that's how the Neanderthal population went out. There's at least this one researcher who has a different opinion. And he was using genetics to point this out. He said that he believed that humans may have created Neanderthals so that humans bred with an even older human species. And Neanderthal is the offspring of the humans Homo sapiens and whatever this older thing is. It didn't create a superhuman though. Well, Neanderthals are kind of a superhuman. But mentally, they're known to be a little bit like Neanderthal. No? See, that's a state like that people say? I'd like to know where they is Neanderthal really. The intelligent, so is it dumb. Yeah, we don't really know. I'm a fucking idiot. I must be this. They had bigger brains than us though. Which is weird. But that might have been to have better musculature, better coordination. They were way stronger than us. Huge. There weren't big. They were like five, seven, five, eight, they were much structure, right? Right. They're built completely different than us. They would tear us apart. They would tear us apart at the oil like a chimpanzee material part. They just rip your arms off. Like they're insanely strong. And their bones are much denser than ours. But it says the gap between genetics and archeology leaves us in an unclear picture of where the Neanderthals originated. Commonness, Michael Marshall details a surprising, new hypothesis that suggests they may have come from us. So this was the thing that I had read. Yes. Oh, you have to buy a, what is this, new scientist? Yeah. Which probably get a subscription for them anyway. We use them a lot. They get a good shit on there. So I think the idea is that they're, you know, they keep finding these other versions of humans. Like they found this thing called the Danosovin. And then they found this other one. What do they call the big-headed people? Where is one thing? It's finding these, like what it's bones. China is one of them. They found the big-headed guy. They found a China. You know, they find them all over the world, man. They find these bones that are just weird. You got to think of how few human bones are going to make it from people that are alive right now. So few of us are ever going to become fossils. So we're putting together a version of the history that's completely incomplete as far as the evidence is concerned. There's just not enough evidence of like bones. If we had, like look, if everybody who ever lived, died and left their bones and then future people could study their bones forever, boy, we would know so much more. We would know so much more. There'd be bones everywhere. But we would know so much more about how things work. French did something with them. Fucking catacombs put in my damn bill of something. Thank you, very good. This episode is brought to you by Visible. Let's be honest. Wireless can feel like a world of traps, expensive bills, tacked on fees, and promises that just don't hold up, you start to feel stuck. Don't fall for the trap. Escape to Visible, the ultimate wireless hack, get unlimited data and hotspot powered by Verizon, one line for just $25 a month, taxes and fees included. Get great coverage and a reliable connection with Visible. Plus for a limited time, new members can get the visible plan for just $20 a month for one year using code fresh start. Refresh your wireless with Visible. Switch today at Visible.com. Terms apply, limited time offers subject to change. See, visible.com for plan, features, and network management details. In the decorator, no, it was our mystery deepens as researcher blows lid on strange rock formation and turkey. So this rock formation is on Mount Ararat. That's what it looks like. This thing here in the middle again, it's this way. Wait a minute, does that not AI? Nope. Is this your lidar? So this is a picture. Bro, that's crazy. That's the actual image. I'll show you the other one saying that. God, that looks like, that looks like what somebody would send me in a Facebook group chat. What I said, I know it's hard to my right. This shit right here, if it's not AI, if it's AI, it should stay. Right, if it's not AI, God, it looks like a boat. So look, I'm not a geologist or someone who's a landscape expert, but that's a very unusual feature. It would be odds that something looks exactly like a boat. So then underneath it, they scanned it. And then they were saying that these potentially are hallways or... I mean, that's the shape of a boat. That's a fucking boat. The part. Also, there's structure inside of it. Well, the biggest issue is that this is on the side of a mountain. So that's not where the ocean is. Bro, the great flood. It's 6,500 feet above sea level, it says. So if you're going to go with the story of the flood, then you'd have to say that we don't know exactly when the flood happened, because this would be petrified water, something, and I read it, take somewhere between thousands and millions of years to get petrified wood. So we'd have to be on the lower end of the thousands, because it's probably not millions of years. And then tectonic plates would have had to lift it all the way up here. No, not necessarily. If the flood receded... Well, I guess if the water was that high. Yeah, if it's... But then the question would be, where is all that water? Where do you... I don't think it flood. It's strange for now to not push things towards the surface. Yeah. This could be anything. It could be anything, but boy, it looks like... No, what I mean is like, if it was down below, the water could definitely push... Everything could be pushed as long as that's like... Nestled in there, I think... A lot of it's just... Maybe it was the universe fucking with us. I think it's part of the simulation. Part of the simulation is the universe fucks with us. And the universe shows you some things that shouldn't be real by your version of what is and isn't true. Aye. Well, that's pretty much what we're talking about. It's happening. That's the explanation of it. That is. But then there's stuff like this. If this isn't AI, it's almost like the universe is a high. It looks like a big animal. It's not real. Whoa. So is that line up with the actual biblical? So that's where... This is even five years ago that this picture on the screen was taken. So I think that they're doing... Whether or not they're taking some liberties and what the descriptions are. I don't know. Boy, it certainly is a weird shape. This is Noah's arc right here, this thing. It looks like a fucking riverboat. Well, that looks like we're playing... It looks like we're playing a P-nuckle on the riverboat down that one. Oh, you had to get all the animals in there, bro. That's just seemed like that would be the one. What did you think it looked like? I don't know. Like some fucking mega-yacht. I don't know. What's your holes and what's the things? The staffs and holes? Listen, I think the story of the floods are real story. Because it existed too many cultures. You know, there is very unexplainable. The story has no enemy. And tsunamis. tsunamis fucking happen, dude. And if they happened and you were in that area, you would think it's the end of the world. Because you don't have contact with people in Europe. You don't have contact. You don't have contact. So wherever you are is in the apocalypse. The great flood. You think it's the whole world's gone. I don't know if there's anything specific about the occasion. But I remember looking this up last week. And it very specifically said a quesia would use to make the arc. Well, I'll tell you this. A quesia honey is fucking unbelievably delicious. The reason he's bringing that up is a quesia is also rich in DMT. And that's these signs. The ones that I like it, they got dark. These researchers out of Jerusalem think that that's what Moses's burning bush was. So where God saw, where Moses saw God as a burning bush, that's what they think that means. They were burning the acacia bush. She's hitting the deams. Who's hitting the deams? He was hitting the deams. He probably did talk to God. God probably did have some good messages for humanity in the early days. We're basically just savages. Wild fucking creatures with stone tools. Man. We've come a long way. I mean, human beings are still trying to figure it out. Obviously, right, we're in the middle of three fucking wars going on in the world. But we're doing better. I think. I think we're doing better. We're doing better in day to day stuff. Day to day interactions of people. Definitely for the most part better. I've been, you know, I feel like, I just feel like we're out of place where everyone's going to either they're going to come together or we're going to just fucking totally rip our fucking heads off. My fear is that a lot of chaos is going to happen and they're going to use that as an excuse to have AI run everything. And that's where things get really fucking weird. That's where creativity, dissolves, freedom, dissolves. You become some little biological time card. The other day, I fucking posted a picture of a frog that I AI generated. Just because I wasn't able to get the frog to do what the fuck I wanted to do in real life. Like I want the frog holding frog popsicles. He was being difficult so I had a fucking use another guy. And everyone was blasting me like, not you, not you. I can't believe you use the AI like yo, you're, what? People will fucking flip another on me. So people are obsessed with you. I generated a picture of a frog. Who is mad at you for this? Whoever is on my Instagram. Huh. And my fans and the people who were, you know, just hating on AI. I get the idea of like using it in a, you know, in a conniving way or in a, you know, but it was a picture of a fucking frog. There it is. That's fucking good. And I said that that was going to be my album cover, but then, once you were there. They were like, yo, you're taking away opportunities from other artists. Well, let me just clear this up. I wouldn't have hired you no matter what because I do all my artwork anyway. There was no job to be taken away. So let's just, if that's the argument, you could throw that one out. This is just tools. It's good old fun. Listen, I don't think it's- This is Photoshop pretty much. Yeah. Look, it's beautiful. Thank you. It's very cool looking. But then I get what people are saying. I get it too. I get it through. I get it through. It was explained to me by a younger generation of mine. I get you should hire artists to make stuff. But you don't all long take an artist to make that. And let's do exactly what you're doing. But I get that, but I wouldn't have hired them in the first place because I do all the work on my own. So everything comes from me. You put- So it's not a job loss. No, no, no. No, no. No matter what. I get the idea of it. I get to see the giggles. You know, like I was fucking whack that that's what people are worried about. I don't think- I think it's just a bunch of people looking for things to complain about A. And then there's also a sentiment in the air, which is that AI is coming for everybody's job. So anytime someone's uses it, AI that could have been used by people, there's a certain percentage of people that are going to kind of rightly be upset. I get it. But you're not going to stop it. This is the thing. That fucking- That wave is 2,000 feet high and it's moving 100 miles an hour and you're not going to stop it. It's not- You're not going to stop it. This is just what AI is. I didn't realize the severity. I mean, I guess I do now, but- Bro, it's alive. It's fucked. It's fucked for sure. These things are alive. I don't know if they're able to do everything for you. I don't usually use any of those things. I'm pretty Neanderthal when it comes to this type of thing. So the thing about the Neanderthals is they don't know if they were dumb. So they used to think that they were really stupid. And then they realized that they probably had language and they probably had tools. And they probably had a sophisticated society and they buried their young. And maybe we just assumed because they're brutish and strong that they were stupid. But their brains are bigger than our brains. They might not have been myself. They're big eyeballs too. Looks at deceiving. You think that we know some schlub. Here I come, fucking Mr. I never see you with the base. Oh my God. I did it this morning. Swing that motherfucker did. It's very impressive. It's a hard thing to do. And I got up to like 88 pounds on that bitch. Ooh. Which is ridiculous. A lot. I started doing this new kettlebell exercise. You do like an eight in the air with a kettlebell. We started like this and you go all the way up and down like that. Oh yeah. That's crazy. And over around your head. Woo! Serious deal. Oh my God. Your core. core. way up and down like that. Oh yeah that's crazy. And over around your head. Woo! Serious deal. Oh my god, your core, you don't realize like how weak that shit is in those weird movements to try something like that. That's why the kettlebells are the best things. Kettlebells, the clubs, mace, awkward stuff. Awkward, I love all that stuff. All the sandbags. I'm still doing that every day since I was here last. I know it doesn't seem it but I've lost like 20 pounds. Cool, congratulations. Well I got up to 300 again. Damn, man. Now I'm back down to 265. I know you can't see it but I'm kind of jacked. Well you're very thick. I'm jacked. I'm jacked. Yeah. You're very like you're a bull. I know man. But I try I'm trying to be a... He put the work in. It's just but the problem is you also work with food. Delicious food. So not my food. Did you? I did. So much is a funny way of saying it. I have that eating so much faster. But whose definition is so much? I've cut it out a lot. I'm trying to dilate it and heavily. I'm trying to really dilate it. And I need... This is my life. It's all about being dialed in. Yeah. I can't let it go because once I let it go, it's going. I hear you. It's going. Yeah. I know. It's hard. Once you get that fucking those carbs, once you get that pizza and that pasta rolling. You know what? Once I stop, I don't even fucking need that shit right now. I don't even crave it just like I'm not really interested in that. A simple piece of toasted whole wheat bread does it for me. Just jam that. I don't need pizza. I've eaten enough pizza in my life for fucking 45 children. 45 children's lifetimes couldn't equate the amount of pizza I've eaten. That's hilarious. So I mean, I feel like I've eaten enough of everything that I've needed to. Now it's time to just fuel. It's all about the fuel. You dialing in. I'm working out with like serious doos doos that are like jacked out of control. I'm the only one that's rounded. Do you have a trainer that you want to do? No, no, no. I just trained with doos to train every day. Okay. One doos I have BB Pro and bodybuilders. Bodybuilders. But I'm trying to do a little bit of that. I introduce my stuff. You know, no one could really do the mace since that takes a long time to like perfect that work. And everyone's like, everyone's way too tight. Right. So I do that on my own. I do like three days of that with the kettlebells. And I do normal shit deadlift. My knees a little fucks from doing searchers. Searches my favorite squad anyway. Tearches are great. It's my favorite. It's really good for grappling and just for helping your tuss off. It's known to be like one of the, it's definitely like a jiu-jitsu and it's an MMA fighter should be doing that. Yeah, it's big for wrestlers. The ability to take people down and offer stuff, take down the same sort of strength. That thrust. Yeah. It's phenomenal. It's my favorite squad. Yeah. It's great. The Dutch shoulder stuff that you're doing all that mace stuff, you must have like really strong shoulders. A shoulder, a shoulder is never fuck with you. Not anymore because I healed myself with the on it motherfucking club. Yeah. Like literally John Wolf helped me. I would just hit a mob like yo, those things are great. It's great just because most of the time when you're lifting, you're just picking stuff up. Yeah. You're doing bench press with this. Like you're swinging it over your head and you're pausing it out front swinging it overhead. Think about when you're doing jiu-jitsu. You get your hand on put over there and you have that strength. It's never in like bench press. Never. You're never like pushing. You're always in like weird. That's why yoga is really good for jiu-jitsu. I've been trying to do a little bit more of everything. Yoga so good for a man Pilates yoga Pilates is surprisingly hard. It was one of the hardest things ever done. But you fucking put the goddamn things on my ankles. I was laying on my back doing scissors. Don't tell anybody. But yeah, I was next to my wife. I snubbed that man pussy. Bro, my man push. She was like fuck it. Nat was like rock solid. And I told her I was like yo, this hurts my asshole. You fucking literally making me work out a crazy muscle. She's like yep. You feel it right? You gotta go home with sore asshole. You sitting on the ball. Ow. You gotta wear the donut. You gotta sit on the cushion. No. Remember those donuts donuts have those at their house? On the seat. We have that like cushion. On the toilet seat? Yeah. That one that we hit it. Yeah. Remember that way? Pink. Grandma pink. I just remember the smell of old ass coming of a toilet like a grandma's ass. Oh my god. Oh my god. Oh my god. Oh. Yeah. Old. I remember my father's shit. Smell. Because you know, you smell you always throw a cigarette in the toilet after you smell like a shitty cigarette. Doub's back in the day where everybody smoked in the house. Oh my god. We still have a ring. He would sit and there was a ring up there from the Rothman with the Rothman Blue. He was a figure in English cigarette. Wow. Isn't it crazy how doctors used to recommend cigarettes used to be able to buy cigarettes at a hospital? Oh yeah. I purchased them at hospitals. What's the thing? In bed when the guys in bed you could buy them in like I saw them around like a six year old kid would come around with the thing. Like a lady would come by with like a box of different kinds of cigarettes in it. And the guy was like picking out cigarettes that he can have while he's in his hospital bag. That was the difference. I wanted the pictures. Those are the days. I remember the poem machine was always my favorite. But when I got sent to the store to go do this, do that. Yeah. Look at this. Oh wow. It has to be an ad, right? Is it an ad? That's the goal or maybe it's a newspaper photograph or something. Was that Paul Mall? Another 1950s cigarettes or marketing is being good for you. Look at the nurses lighten this guy's cigarette. That's pretty easy. Well, he doesn't look sick. His hair is done nicely. So when did when did people in a met we looked up this who figured out the first cigarette didn't we? It's the same guy different nurse. Oh, this is all bullshit. Maybe it's just one guy had a freaking nurse. It just reminds me of why why is America so medicated? Why were we just so fucking medicated on everything and because it works. I mean, it doesn't do what you're just want it to do. But like as far as like mental medications. Now she works. There's a lot of stuff that works. Sure. Prozac has a legitimate effect on people. They get accustomed to it. Good or bad or all depends on who it depends on the dose. You know, it's like if you want to say good or bad, I know a lot of people that are very successful that use Adderall. I don't necessarily know if it's bad. I think it depends on who you are. Whether or not you can just use it when you need it like to write or something like that. I know journalists that use it. But if it's if it's one of those things that you're addicted to, like a benzodiazepine, you know, like a like a injection that well, no, that was the Michael Jackson one. No, he was the Latin. He, well, he died from being sedated. He died from propeful. Oh, he was just and then pumped with other stuff. I don't think he could sleep at night. I think he was just so mentally ill. That's what that guy was. too famous, man. There is there is that little too famous. Wait, it's a deep. Yeah. And every one on earth knows who Michael Jackson is. Yeah. I don't think there's anyone who doesn't know who Michael Jackson is. Even now, if you're born now, you know who he is. Yeah. I mean, he was so famous that even after all the sexual allegations, all his music still played on the radio. It was so good. It was so good. He's the only one on the phone. Right. Look, our Kelly stuff, you've barely heard it anymore. And I'm not going to say anything. Please don't. I will not. I will not. I will do. He's a disgrace. Yeah. I mean, it's disgraceful. But his music was so. But it was like that changed. Motherfuckers is the whole vibe of R&B, like disgusting, unbelievable nasty, disgraceful things. Right. But if you separate the artists from the art. And that's the fucking worst thing. You can't do that. You cannot say that it comes as a whole package. But my question is, how many of those guys were like that way back in the day? You know what I mean? Probably a large amount. You see the sickness. I don't understand why motherfuckers get a little bit of money and start doing weirdo shit. Like, I like to garden. Like, I like gardening. Yeah. Like, I like gardening. I like stone masonry. I like working out and cooking. Right. But why would I tell you why? I'm obviously not on that level. But I don't see my mentality changing so far off where I'm fucking going to the island. You know? No. It's never going to happen. But it's all over. Even if there was a new island. But the thing is, you made money by doing what you love. That's a very different kind of money. These people are just trying to make money. So when you're just trying to make money, it's all about experiences and items that you possess. So you want to buy your own island. You want to jet. What else you want? You want a Ferrari. You want a bunch of shit. You want things. And you keep getting more things. And you want to do things that you're not supposed to do. Like you want to eat and then danger to species. You know? There's like a restaurant in China. They'll serve you tiger, they'll serve you lisha, you gorilla, like whatever, whatever you want to eat endangered species. I mean, I don't know if this is true. But there was a story that was written about this place where you could go in China. And this is a, see if you can find it. There's a story about like, it's one of those things where it's like a gather, it's not like a restaurant. It's a gathering that happens like once every year or something like that. And they go and eat endangered species. Right. I think I see it. Fucking crazy. I know that's a billionaire crazy person. Money thing. Like we're going to go eat a tiger. You know what I mean? It's like fucking. Yeah. It's crazy. I couldn't imagine. I couldn't imagine. I don't even like to hurt anything. I don't like that. But that's because you're not that kind of a rich guy. Yeah. You're a guy who made a bunch of money just by being himself. And that's a totally different enterprise than someone's just trying to make a bunch of money. The people that are just trying to make a bunch of money, they're never happy. You never satisfied. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I don't know where anybody comes from, but I live in a two-fucking bedroom apartment my entire life up until recently. Still might, I still do. Here it is. Crackdown on menu for China's, China's animal eaters from 2014 though. So they made a real- That's a real- That's a real- Look at those fucking striations and we're all in the one to fork you find. They changed the law because of it? Well, to, I mean, I don't know because of it, but that's why it's probably not talked about as much anymore. The diners of southern China have long had a reputation for exotic tastes with local sometimes boasting. They will eat anything with four legs except a table. LOL. Fuck you, jerk. So pangolin. So pangolin's endangered, right? Is it, are they endangered? Wasn't that one of the things that they thought was the wet market? We're- The top it says they had endangered tortoises and snakes and porcupines and cages. And imagine you're so nasty. You want to eat the dangerous snake. Eat in a snake alone is gross. But you're so nasty. You want to eat in a dangerous snake? I've had snake soup. I was in Japan and I had fucking a good snake soup. It was smoked. Was it good? It tasted like beef. Really? It did. It was supposed to be, you know, well, thank you for- Well, thank you for- You're so funny. Make you very versatile. Oh, versatile. I wish they were- We're all- Very old, not- Yeah. First of all as well. Right? Yeah. It was a black snake, of course. Oh, yeah. Yeah, I think. Was it a poisonous snake? Dad, I'm not sure. But there was a bunch of- It was like- This was a Michelin Star restaurant, two Michelin Star, and of course, it was like French Japanese creations and fucking quite endangered. Really? As endangered as I could get, endangered, a little turtle, a little snake. But some turtles are not endangered. I know what I don't really like to do, but it's- It's a fucking- Right. It turns me off. It turns- Do you know what that's- But these turtles as pets? I used to have turtles. And at one point in time, I had piranhas. Turtles are way more psychotic than piranhas. When I would feed my turtles, I'd feed my turtles goldfish, and they'd swim around and grab the goldfish and just bite them in half. Mm. It was crazy to watch. I got those powerful jewels. And I'm looking at them, like, of course. You're a little dinosaur. Just look at you. You look like a dinosaur. You have this crazy stegosaurus shell over your back. And I know where I should swim through the water. Some neck comes out like that. Dude, they were super aggressive. See if you can find videos of turtles fucking up goldfish. What about those big motherfuckers? They're hands. Like the big snappers. Oh, yeah. Big snapping turtles? Those are like Bowser. Yeah. Have you ever seen one in real life? Yeah. I've seen the big seat, like the big tortoise in Hawaii, but I've never seen the big snapping one. I saw it like a medium one, not a real big one, but they look so freaky. They're fucking teeth. Or they're the next- That's the thing that- The mouth- Shacked up neck too. Yeah. Big fucking huge clamp down neck. There's one different type. What is that one really crazy looking snapping turtle? Is it a gar snapping turtle? I've never seen this one before. Whoa! What the fuck is that? A mara mara turtle. Whoa. What the fuck kind of head is that? It's a triangle head. Yeah, that's weird. Weird nose. That's weird. I've never seen that. It's eating a goldfish too? Oh, he just swalls it whole. What a weird looking creature. If you told me yesterday that this didn't exist, I would have believed you. If you told me yesterday, this is AI. What's the reasoning? We just bought a lot of these species go flatheads. Hmm. Good question. I'm mixing the bottom of that. Because you've slipped right into the shell, I'm sure. Yeah, I guess so. I'm sure you fit better in the shell. It's a hammerhead and heads like that and fucking stingrays and shit just turns flat. Flounder. Right. That's a weird one. It's fucking eyeballs on one side. What the fuck is that? So this is a very timid turtle eating the goldfish. He's just the ones that I had, they swam after the goldfish and grabbed them. Look at this fucking thing. Whoa. Alligator snapping turtle. Yeah, that's the one that turns into fucking dinocello. I have a face on that. It's a tung on there. Yeah. Oh, so it's tung looks like a goldfish. A little worm. So it tricks them? Yeah. It's a tung. It's a tung. It's a tung. Oh snap. Nature's so evil. It gave me a lure in my mouth. Nature has no mercy, man. Nope. No mercy. No mercy. We were talking about smoking. I saw this today that UK has voted to ban anyone born after 2008 to be banned from smoking. Well, hasn't passed. It has to. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. I'm going to lay up a cigar. Fuck that. It says this. That's a crazy one. I thought it was kind of fake when I saw it, but I looked it up. It's on. There's articles about it. It's a draft law, they say, which doesn't mean it's an actual law yet, I think. I'm opening up a fresh box for them. Fuck you. That's crazy. But that's just we were talking about this yesterday. They love having their fucking stuff on you. It's government. It's like when they expand government, they got to give government something to do. So what do they do? They come up with more rules and regulations. They come up with more people to enforce those rules and regulations. Even if they don't make any sense. More than those past days, past that, I got a fucking, everyone has an idea. Every new politician has their ideas and they all want to fucking control you. That's what they want to do more than anything. They want to control you. That's their favorite sport. Their favorite sport is telling you what to do. I just had I had a beautiful dinner with with our mayor of New York, mom, Donnie. How is he? Do you like him? He was 34 years old. He's I've never thought that I'd be sitting at a table with a mayor who was younger than me and knows about fucking rap. And like, didn't he rap for a while? I don't acknowledge that. No, but he's, you know, he's a very nice guy. You know, nice dinner. I didn't speak politics. I'm not really one of those guys. We just talked shit. Oh, okay. It was like a black line. No, I don't know. I don't know what exactly so. The thing that I mean, like I do, the most concern is who's financing. him. What is their agenda? Sure. Are they trying to get him to do because it's always money. It's always about money. People are discovering New York City, mon Donnie's. Oh, that's a fucking crazy picture, right? He's wrapping with an apron on. What's that about? Mr. Carm. Yeah. Okay. It's a wild one. Shame the guy for his mistakes in the past. Let's just, you know, he's just doing some wild stuff like with taxes and things. Like just trying to tax these billionaires. I saw that when I'd like him to do this. You show him on. So what I'd like him to do is fucking help alleviate. Thank you, Sunil. I took the top off. Help alleviate taxes for people who are born and raised New Yorkers. I shouldn't have to pay for everyone else's bullshit. Right. At least give me a little break. Not just that, but they should be responsible with where the tax dollars go. So before asking you for more taxes, clean up all the fraud. Oh my God. That's not a fucking big request. That's like a pretty, pretty simple thing to do. I'm going to ask for it. Nobody says that. All they ever say is we need to tax it more. This year was a mess. He came into office when it was a shit storm of literal horrible weather. And the fucking city was an honest garbage hole. It was a shit mess. You got real bad with snow, right? Fucking seven feet high piles of garbage like to grace. Now why was that? Because I don't know. I would say the Union rep wasn't allowing the workers to fucking go and clean shit. When they're honest, when they're at us, I don't know. I'm not allowed to get to the bottom of this. Yeah, I don't know either. When they're at us, they're at us. Well, so there was a Union strike. They don't allow any of the sanitation people to move a muscle unless their Union rep says, it's okay. You go and sit in the fucking truck and take a nap until we tell you to move. Right. That's always them. I'm with them. Because you have all the fraud that's existing in that city, all the waste that they've showed. That is one thing you should fucking pay people for because the job sucks. Okay. And it's super necessary. No, it's the most important job. Super necessary. You fucking have to pick up the garbage, God damn it. Pay those fucking people. I mean, are they asking for unreasonable amounts when you find out how much money you spend on the fucking homeless situation and never got better at all? Who's, what are they getting? I bet they're getting paid more than the garbage people. I'm sure. But they get good pension. Everyone who works for our pension. Yeah. It's all for security. Pension is fucking dental. How many times are you going to do dental? Yeah, but you should also get paid. If you're fucking, if you're moving garbage, you should get paid well, period. And for people who go, oh, it's an on-school job. That's a back-breaking job. You're slinging around bags all day and picking up cans and yanking on levers. All from unskilled. Yeah. It's not a fucking truck. It's also dangerous. You're hanging off the back of the truck sometimes. You're out there in the weather. It's fucking hard. You can hurt your back. It's fucking hard. It's a hard job. They should get paid well. And anybody doesn't think that is a cunt. You should definitely be paid well. That's the thing about this world. Everybody's greedy. They want it all for themselves. One thing they're doing, I just found online, they're adding these giant bins, which maybe is better than piles. But my boy, they're always adding these fucking bins. You have the problem with the bad. I hear Merrick Adams made you buy a $100 garbage can for your house back in the day from his cousin. This is what I was told from my man in middle village. How much? $100. My boy Connie gorgeous told me, $100. You have to buy a fucking new garbage can for your house one way or another no matter what from Eric Adams' cousin. Oh, really? Show that again, Jamie. $100. I'm actually makes more sense though that they're doing this big because that also probably the problem is if it does keep the rats out, then one of the rats going to eat, then you're going to have a bigger rat problem. New York's got a fucking giant rat problem. I've been seeing less lately because they're hiding. Yeah, I've been seeing less. What's about to be some of the times are they going to come out? Once again, if they pick the fucking garbage up, they'll be less rat. Yeah, but if they stop doing all the construction, I mean, that's what breeds these rats, they come out for sure. You dig in these fucks up. You're disturbing their house. Yeah, but they rely on people to eat. The thing is, it's a completely coexisting like the monkeys in the system. It's an ecosystem. The rats in the people are an ecosystem because the rats eat human garbage and they live piled up around humans for a reason. So they get eat our garbage. And during the pandemic, it was a real fucking problem because no one was going to restaurants for a while. The rats were everywhere. They were freaking out. They're eating each other. Rats do eat each other. I had a rat eat it's eat, well, a bunch of rats ate a dead rat in my garage once. Hey, diet, big fat rat too. He died. I heard the trap go off, but it was like 10 o'clock at nine. I was like, fuck it. I'll deal with it in the morning. I got up in the morning. There was nothing left, but it's tail. There was like some skin, the feet, and the tail. They ate his entire body. Yeah, there was a whole garage full. Like one of those, I don't know, like a storage space, but in the street, you just heard them fucking the gate would be knocking back and forth. Like they're having a goddamn underground fucking strike force in there. That's why when people get upset about coyotes, listen. Bro, I heard them recently. You need them. Bro. The fucking pack of coyotes howling and screaming during feeding. In New York City. They do it in New York City too. They find them in the central park. Yeah, like an hour and a half away was really something. There's a lot of them up there. But you need them. Otherwise you're going to have rats everywhere. There's a balance to all this shit. Just don't leave your cat outside. No, that's sort of fucking owl like this outside. Really? What's wrong with that? Let me reset this. What is this? Rats hide, I think this was... Oh, yes. They fucking hide in your engine. Bro, rat ate my fucking boys BMW engine. All the wiring. Oh, my God. They chewed up all the insulation. Oh, that's just... That's not dead rats, right? What is that? It's not alive ones. Isn't that the stuff, though? I think that's the stuff of the ceiling. Okay, yeah, I think it's the insulation above the roof of the... All right. Above the engine. That's the thing. It's just they nested in this guy's place. Yeah, this says that the trash bins are going to get rid of a lot of the... How the fuck do you want to put this? It's probably the same. The thing is, didn't we figure out that the number of rats in New York City is pretty similar to the number of people? I would probably say it out. It out doesn't. They do so small. They don't really know. But someone had told me that the biomass of rats was the same as the biomass of people in New York City, meaning the weight. But we looked that up and that doesn't seem to be true. But if it's true, then it's much, much, much more to make up one human being. Right, but it doesn't seem to be... Ten times more. Sometimes people read things or write things down, it's just not accurate. Because like, there are a lot of cases where small things have a crazy biomass. Like I think the biomass of ants is similar to the biomass of human beings on earth. Wow. Fine, that's true. Put that into perplexity. You ever see that ants that had that little honey butt? They have a little bowl of honey on their ass? Oh, I have seen that. What's that for? Tastes. I'm just... Just be delicious. Give me that fucking ass. Imagine, ladies. Start having that. I don't know where things are. I don't know how to eat so much ass. No nose rang. Now they just have a honey pot on the rest. Yes. That's how you capture me. Look at this. Oh, ants on earth together have about 20% of the biomass of all humans when measured as dry carbon mass. OK. What about insects in general? Maybe that's where they fucked up. Do insects... What is the biomass of all insects compared to the biomass of people? What do you type in this in? What is this? Our lovely AI sponsor, perplexity. Oh, beautiful. Yeah. On a global scale, total biomass of all insects is several times larger than human biomass. Wow. Fuck that. And all this is... We're just... Smith-Sonian bugs. Oh, I love fucking bugs. Do you? I love bugs. We're lucky they're little. I know you're right. They're real. Like, there's a generous amount of species up where I'm at and I really enjoy them recently. You can't be upset at them because if the area was unhealthy, they wouldn't be there. Well, you're in upstate? Yeah. Upstate's beautiful, but check yourself for ticks. Oh, I do all the time. Oh, I do. I'm staying small a lot a lot. I'm going out a lot. He got bit by a tick recently. Yeah. You go in it three days later. He already had it, but he's good now. Did he go and immediately get the antabar? Yes. You do. When you get that Lyme disease, you got to get it. Where do you think they usually capture you? Like around the crevasses? Yeah. Like your legs, your ankles, or whatever they climb up on your pants. But as long as they don't go up in the fucking netherge, yeah, the netherge. That would suck. But I think it's a systemic issue more than it is the initial bite. The bite, though, to know that if you got Lyme disease, a couple days after the infection, it starts getting like a bullseye around it. And that to a lot of people is that's the big sign that you've got Lyme disease. But sometimes when they get to the doctor, that circle's gone. And the doctor doesn't believe him. I've had this happen to a friend of mine who's very smart guy. And him and his son both got Lyme disease. And he couldn't get the fucking doctor to believe that it was Lyme disease until his kids started getting, what's that mouth thing? You and Barr, how do you say that? You say Julian, Julian? Julian Barr syndrome? When it was sitting, you have your face gets paralyzed. Oh, fucking. That was palsy. Right, but there's a name for it. I think it's, the end bar is very similar because I knew a guy who had that and it was the same thing and he was diagnosed with the end bar. Does it go backwards? Yeah, he can't go back. Dice Clay had it for a while. Really? Yeah, Dice Clay had half of his face and he was going on stage with it. He didn't give a fuck. The end bar syndrome facial weakness or paralysis. They should have noticed with dice, he talked about it. He brought it up. That's what you're talking about. That's what you're talking about. That was pretty obvious. Like half of his face was like, it was crazy. Half of his face just wouldn't move. Fuck. No? No, good. Fuck, it shit happens, man. You gotta just deal with things as they come. You can't really like, what the fuck knows what this world is about and why the same thing is that. You can't be careful. You can't be careful. Yeah. You don't want to get you. And those little fuckers, a large percentage of them on the East Coast carry Lyme disease. For sure. For sure. Yeah. Disease, little pricks. I spray myself with a nice geranium spray. Geranium. Yeah. This is a mixer. There's like a natural lavender, geranium oil, all kinds of shit that you spray on yourself that it represents. Yeah, sure. That doesn't make them want to bite you more. No, no, it repels for sure. It brings other things, but it takes those guys away. It brings an ankle bracelet. My god, ankle bracelets and fucking and brahma bull nose ring. Yeah. When I was in Mexico City, I was dressed. I bought a fucking Jade like Yade. It's from over there. I bought a Jade necklace that was a little bit too tight. So it looked like a choker. What a dog. My boy told me I look like I had my nipple pierced in the picture that I showed there. Yeah, I looked like a fucking bear. I had circular glasses. Scruff. You could see a little bit of this, Scruff. Two chokers. Oh, this is what I'm saying. You act different on vacation. Right. Two out of fucking amber choker and a Jade choker. You would be killing it in the bear community. If you ever want to switch teams, you would dominate the bear community. Right? Just do it for fun. Like fuck it. Well, fuck some guys up. So what were we just asking? What was the question? You didn't. I thought I had a question. You got a little track with that comment. Yeah. It's bear talk. Bear talk. What a one. What were we just talking about before that, though? Bugs. Right. Bugs. Ticks. Lime disease. A VN bar. There's another one. There's another disease that's out that people are getting called alpha gal. And it's... Oh, tick Lyme disease. A VN bar is another one. It's French now. There's another disease that's out that people are getting called alpha gal. And it's from a tick called the Lone Star tick and it makes you allergic to red meat. That's what you cannot get my friend. No, that's fucked up. I don't want that for you. No, that would ruin everything. And you're like so many fucking bone inflases. It's been crazy. I'm saying. I need those gains. There's no other gains like that, right? Bison. I've been eating a lot of like gains things, I guess. My dad is the best for that. Like the sweet potatoes in game. There you go. Sweet potatoes phenomenal. That's what I exchanged the pasta for the sweet potato. Are you deep rice? A little bit. A touch. A touch. I hear. Can I have no good? I think I'm conflicting things. I like it. I white rice. There's a lot of things that I eat that I like. I just eat them because I like it. Like when I'm eating spaghetti, I'm under no illusion. Yeah, no, you know what you're eating. I know what I'm doing. I'm not like doing the solution. You know, like a good pasta. I know that. I do. I do. I do. I do. I do. I do. I do. That dude can cook. I had him on my show early on. Like before all his like his success and just kicked it off. I loved his. He's a fucking true man. And he. When you care like that. That's your natto. Yeah. And we're like, there's this another guy, Stefan Setchie in New York. Oh my gosh, Stefan O'Setchie is another sicko. Make amazing. Matarano, you know, it's all about the wooden dowel. That's how they make the process. All old style. Yep. Nothing extruded. All with the thing. Yeah. What the matter. What the matter. What the matter. Yeah. Evan's places you could watch them make the pasta. You know, like mother, he's got mother wolf. He's got fun. Is it funky or funk? How are you pronounce it? I know. I call him. Funky. Terry funk. Right. Probably funk. No. I thought he was Terry. Terry funk's cousin. They're making tortellini here. I know. That's that's that's definitely. Oh my god. Look how good that looks. This man right here, when I went to Australia, Francesca and Moderna, you know, I love her. I said that. Yeah. Masimo Batura's place. It was like the number one restaurant for many years. Oh, he was the chef there that was making all the food. He was like a young man. And then when he opened his restaurant, rest door in New York, he was like, he takes such good care of my mother as well. Like, yo, he. They just go above and beyond. This is hard. This is the art. Like the way he's making this food, this is art. This is a work of art. He's performing. Who'd I have? I had fucking Devin Haney in the kitchen with me, making pasta with him. Oh, really? Oh, that's great. I like to bring these guys in and do weird things. That's crazy. That's awesome. Devin Haney, making pot. Bro, you're a real. I know. Holy fuck. That's crazy. Crazy. What an animal. Well, I mean, I was like, it's like, it's kind of got a little habit. It's like, oh shit, yeah. You got to look at it two ways. One, you got to look at it from Yuri's perspective. Like he had it there. The fight was over. The guy was hurt. And it, but he also looking from Carlos's perspective. Carlos Oberg is hurt. He can't move his right leg. They're probably going to stop it in between rounds. And Yuri, he can't move. So Yuri is just pot shot in him. And he's kicking his one good leg. He's kicking his one good leg. And then boom, he clipped some of the left hook. I mean, with the one punch that he's known for. Not just step back hook. The one punch that you can throw if your right leg is hurt. A check hook. Crazy. Because when you, the check hook is one of the, like Alexander Volkonoski actually did a really good breakdown of this on YouTube. But what he was talking about is that the check hook, you put all the weight on the front leg a lot. Because as the person is coming, a lot of the weight as the on core punches on that front leg. And all birds, that's a snake. Like the way he throws that left hook is so fast. Perfect. And he, he threw a punch. He threw one just to get the, just to get the, the, the, the distance on the first one. And then put them again. Perfect. But Yuri, man. So Yuri's saying. I look like I watched, I know you were watching as well. We're watching in real time, but it just looked like he got upset that he heard his knee and he was like, fuck fuck fuck. He clearly did get upset. He really do think that he got upset. I do think that's true. But it makes no difference on. It doesn't matter. No, it's got him. Yeah, Carlos got him. He fucked up. That's a clean win. But that's part. Yeah, it's part of fighting. Like you have to be ruthless. Like Khalil round tree is one of the nicest guys you're ever going to meet. When he fought Modestus Bukakis, he side-kicked his knee side. That was one of the coolest, that was nuts. And Khalil is such power. Nice as guys alive. But I remember here and there. He's trying to do it to you. You're trying to do it to him. And if his leg gets blown out, you have to take advantage of it because he would take advantage of it on you. I've been watching for a long time. I've been watching Khalil for a long time since the beginning. I remember the change when he went to Thailand. And there was this change he came back from Thailand. And that's what he did. That was his first fight when he was fucking... The first fight was Terry Landers. Yeah, and he looked totally different. Yeah, me and DC were like, what happened? Right? Because he was always in front leg. He was just like, all time. He was super sharp. He was super sharp. How was nuts? Yeah. So that's all so hard. Oh, so hard. Oh, my God. So horrible to watch. Oh, my God. Just perfect side-kick to the knee. Just blew his shit apart. That guy was out for over a year. I mean, that's one of the gnarliest... Oh, it's so nasty when you see it sideways. Oh, because it started at the knee. By. I don't want to see it, Jamie. Stop. Stop. Stop. Oh, bro. It started at the back. He killed round-tree versus Eric Anders. So Eric Anders is one of the toughest fucking human beings to ever live. I'm for sure. Because he was getting lit up. His legs were getting destroyed and he never even flinched. He never even made an outface. It was never like, ah, there's nothing. He just dead stoic the entire time. And then I asked him after. Oh, fuck you, that's true. But guys like Eric Anders, he's been in the... He's been in the U.S. for 10 years. Yeah. He's been career. Super smart guy. He's got money. Bought a bunch of houses. Oh, really? Very clever. Oh, that's great. Very smart. Yeah. He's smart. He's good to know. Yeah, he's planning. And he's just a cool dude to talk to. But when Khalil Kale, like we were looking at him, he's like, he's moving like a tie. Yeah. And movements, everything. Yeah, he came back totally different. That light front foot. Yep. It was like full-on, Muay Thai, and Khalil's always been super fast. Like one of his strengths is that he can hit guys before they even calculate. His speed when he's like really going after you, like in the Jamal Hill fight, he's got speed that confuses guys because they're like, oh shit, like you got to recalibrate. Because this guy moves faster than any of the middleweights. And he's a light helps. And his nasty, like he's like... He's like, well, I should've said it. He's just nasty. But he moves like a middleweight. That's what I should say. He's got like middleweight speed, but a light heavyweight frame. And he just started lighting him up with like pure Thai technique. And this was the perfect kind of showcase for him because Eric's not like a big wrestler. Yeah. He's just kind of a, would you? A brawler. And with a guy like Khalil, especially since Eric fights Southpaw. So when you fight Southpaw and Khalil fights Southpaw, it really opens up that left leg to get attacked. Well, the right leg, excuse me, to get attacked. Because your power leg is behind you. Whereas you're fighting normal people that are orthodox. It's usually, you have to kick them with an inside kick if you're a Southpaw. But Southpaw to Southpaw like this Khalil just can light that leg on fire. Oh, it was fucking, it was, but it was the sound it was making. Like we were there. It was like, this was, this was memorably different. Well, he had just gotten really tuned in, man, when he was in Thailand, he got really tuned in, particularly, oh, you already got it in the second round. It was particularly the first round. He got a good round before this, right? Which made him go there, which made him go to Thailand. Johnny Walker. So Johnny Walker clipped him with an elbow from the clinch. He hit him with an Italian tail. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Back when Johnny Walker was like very explosive and Johnny Walker was very wild. He fought wild. He fights more calculated now. After, I mean, I feel like after the worm, it was a wrap after he hurt himself. Oh, that worm thing was crazy. That worm thing. Like the shoulder is one of the worst things to hurt and then get surgery out. Never comes back, right? He blew it apart too. Doing the fucking, it was just doing the worm. Yeah, just have, you know, I'm a good time. I think that was, was that me sure, sir, Coronav? I don't know who he fought during that fight, but it was, he fought a good guy. And it's like Johnny Walker when he was winning in the early days of his fights in the UFC, he was, yeah, it's circling off, right? Yeah. Yeah. Like that kind of shit, like these flying elbows like wild reckless, but he got KOed a few times by some really technical people. And then he tried to be right there. Like he fucked his elbow or his shoulder up. I've jumped on the bed like that and hurt my fucking arm. You know, when you jump on the knee, yeah, he blew it apart. You forget that he felt like that. And like immediately blew his shoulder out. Oh, God, so silly. Fuckin' hard, but look at him. Looks like he came himself. Oh, you can see it pop out terrible, bro. Yeah. Terrible. Terrible. She was just shooting themselves in the dick. I know they do. Yeah, there's a lot of people that do. a lot of people ruin their life and no fucking reason. They can't help it. I go through life trying not to shoot myself in the dick. Yummy too. Right? It's like one of my cardinal rules. Cardinal, I think everybody should abide by that. Don't shoot yourself in the dick if you can avoid it. If you can avoid it, if not, thank you, sir. You're welcome. But you know, if I there's a wild people, they're doing a wild thing. Like it's part of what makes them great is that they take these crazy chances. They're just nuts. What am I, silly? Oh, you lift the top? Where? The top top, it flips back. There you go. And then push that button up. There you go. I'm used to a torch. Hmm. I'll hear you. I'm excited for this. But the ure thing was like, sorry. No, no, no, no. The ure thing was like, I understand his perspective. You know, that he did fuck up and he could have attacked and then smarter, but he can't have that excuse. He really was upset. You could tell he was upset right when Carlos Oburg's knee blew out. But here's the thing that impressed me the most. He's upset at him for fucking blowing his knee. How were you? Well, he was upset at the moment. Right? He wanted to be a clean victory. Right? But Carlos wasn't upset. That was what I was most impressed with. That guy never lost composure. He tried a switch kick, a jumping switch kick to the head to see if it worked. And his leg fell out again and he fell down again and scrambled. He never lost composure. He never showed anxiety in his face. Just a stone cold killer. Look at for his moment and he found it. Yep. C.K.B. You guys. That's a world champion. That's how you really become a world champion. You have a blown out knee and you find a way to KO a guy who's this wild, aggressive, awkward dude. You know, and he's coming after you. You got a blown out knee and he is. Thank perfect fucking left hook. You guys from the South Pacific are different breed. Wow. No. He certainly is. Just got just mentality. I mean camp. Yeah, camp stay. The camp is phenomenal. Yeah, the camp is phenomenal. Eugene Bareman, the guy is the head coach, super fucking smart dude. I went down there 2018. I went down there and I saw Izzy before the Brunson flight and it was like in the old C.K.B. And I had them come through and Eugene came out. I was DJing in New Zealand for a evening. My friends rest around the head of awesome. Yeah, it was dope. Oh, that's cool. You're DJing in the restaurant. Yeah. I was DJing. You know, I play all kinds of fucking weird, like 70s funk African music, Brazilian music. I just happened to be down there and everyone came through. It was a good time. Oh, here's something that people are saying is real. It's not, but I found out today. Everyone's saying that Hamzach, Amaya and Gordon Ryan are going to wrestle. It's not true. Are AF? Yeah. Like, are AF too. I like how like this is like something new and exciting. Sure. I don't particularly love the action. I like wrestling, but it's not as exciting as the like the entirety of the event. You understand? Right. Like the press conference, the people involved, the actual moves. I prefer fighting and just like a different type of like combat, but it still gets me going. I enjoy a lot. Look, it's the most important skill in MMA. The most important skill, but I like when you mix it. I don't like it singularly. I understand more than anything else. I understand, but the reality is in order to be at an elite level, you have to do it by itself. I think for the most part, Georgia. Georgia and Pierre might be an example of a guy who violates that law because George didn't really wrestle in college or high school. He learned how to wrestle from a bunch of Russian nationals in Montreal. That works also. If you didn't start wrestling when you're five years old, that's the other way to do it. Two, three years, Dagestan, that's it. Yeah, right? And forget it. Forget it. Forget it. I mean, I'm excited. I'm excited for Comzad and Sean Strickland because I'm, it'll be a newer, it'll be there. Yeah, I'll be sure. I'll be right there too. Yeah, you'll be there. The White House thing I'm excited for too. I want to ask to go, but I don't know if it seems like a lot of fucking hoopla. I might just watch out TV. I would watch that on TV if it wasn't working there. I think the Strickland and Hamzot fight is going to be very interesting. Strickland is not an easy guy to take down and he's not an easy guy to hold down and he's a very difficult guy to hit on his feet. He's got a super awkward style. His style is very clever. It's very different. It's not something that's easy to replicate and far as timing and it reminds me of be up a little bit. It reminds me of like be hop, but just a little bit more sloppy, just a little bit more loose and wild. Yeah, Lucid Wild and then also it's because he has other options, right? It's because he's kicking, it's because he's taking you down. He just kicks his nails, his teeth off his front legs phenomenal. He's just good straight punches man, just good hard straight punches. He's fucking jab is so accurate. You know, people think of a jab as like, you know, it's not that big a deal. That guy thumps you in the face with a jab three, four times. You're kind of fucked. He knows he's broken for bleeding or it's least bleeding. Well, there's three kinds of jabs. There's the soft one, then there's the step in. There's a fucking hard jab, you know, like yeah, throws them more. Yeah, that guy, Azamat, Mazur Khan. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He, uh, he just lost a polycoaster. Yeah, but that guy has one of the most evil jabs. He like steps forward and he'll like jab hooks at you. Yeah, he turns that. Yeah, it's like, it's almost like a hook. Yeah. And he knocked out, um, fuck, what is his name? He knocked out rockets with that one punch, stepped in with the jab. The rockets is his chin when, yeah, a couple fights go, but you know, rockets is a, he's in that. He's in that. He's in that. It was a good fight until that moment, but uh, Mazur Khan, I was so impressed that he just wouldn't abandon that strategy of going after polycoaster. He's, I mean, follow the good. He looked fucking, he looked phenomenal. If this, if this way is quarter, I would say dude, never go back to middleweight. or a fucking light up. He did. He's, he's really, yeah, for 100%. He's really like heavyweight champion. One million percent. And while this guy, while call Solberg is going to be out for a year, because he's going to have to get ACL reconstruction. I did. You know, you could be the interim light heavyweight champion. Like no doubt, man. I really think he could pull that off. Dude at light heavyweight, he's fucking terrifying. It's crazy to go to the podcast of old. I'm like, funny. When he was destroying people on his way up to the ranks, man, that's what I'm saying. like to see him go from there and then to like have those little hiccups and shit like that. And it almost seemed like he was a joke at one point. When Izzy humped him, made it, just made him look fucking. Yeah. It's so less than as a human being. When he's really just, Izzy might fuck them. No, he fucking, yeah. He's like a mother of a couple years, right? For a couple years. That's how crazy that fight was. He just, he's just coming back now. The Luke rock hold, I think helped him. But even Luke almost fucking knocked him out. Bro, that was a great fight. Why you put that in Utah? A resident in Utah, right? High altitude. Yeah, good point. Yeah. If that was somewhere else, I don't know. Well, it was great fight. Yeah, it was fun. And that was like Luke's like last really great performance where he still looked like a world caliber fighter for sure. But I think Homs out against Osmot was the best Homs out, excuse me, when I think Apollo, Paul Kosta against Osmot was the best Apollo Kosta I've seen a long time. I mean, he looked better because he looked physically stronger, like being at light heavyweight didn't at all look like a stretch. In fact, he looked like a better place for him. Like when I was listening to the sound of his punches and his kicks, it was even harder than before. He didn't look fat at all. He looked like a perfect light heavyweight. And like, I think he's probably at least at this stage in his life because I think Apollo's like 34 now. Yes, it would be. It would be way better for him to compete at light heavyweight. And there's a lot of people in line. Yeah. At light heavyweight, 34 is almost prime. Yes. At light heavyweight, that's a great age. Sure. Well, that was like when Izzy was on top of shit. He was around 34. John Jones was a little younger. Well, John Jones was the youngest champion in history. That's a different guy. But like when you look at Apollo Kosta's performances and then you look at this last one, you're like, I thought might be the best Apollo Kosta of all time. He looked fucking phenomenal. And he ate some big shots from Osmot. It just did even flinch. No, that didn't even flinch. I can't even imagine how that man cuts to 185, right? So it's truly unbelievable. That's a muscle mass that goes away. Exactly. It's like we can fully deplete your body. Yeah. I think him at 205 is really the way to go. Because I guarantee you he's probably walking around at about like two 30 or something. He looks like he's a good fucking heavyweight too. He's so lucky. He said it. He was falls out of the White House card. He'll step in and fight it heavyweight. Well, it makes sense to fight Josh Hoke at that way because they're both similar body types. I'm not similar. He's allowed to share you. How dare you. I'll be here. I meant weight wise. They're both around 240. But they look a lot different. A lot different. I don't know if Hoke is ready for that yet. That's crazy. Unless he could take Apollo down, he's going to get that's a fun. It's fun. It'll be fun because he'll go after him. He's given blades very different than Apollo Kosta. When it comes to striking, Paul coast is fucking terrifying. But I've also shook. How do you say shook in shinkets, hand? I shook. I shook. Curtis blades hand. Oh, the giant. It's fucking four times the size of a normal hand. Oh, yeah. Chris blades is to be punched by that hand that many times until I go down. It's pretty impressive. Well, also impressive for Curtis Curtis had a blown out eye socket, a broken nose. Chris is the man. I love Chris. He's a good incredible heart. Incredible heart. After all that shit, the Josh Hoke had talked. He did not want to lose that man. He gave everything he had. There was not a moment of quit in that fight for Curtis. He could have scored if they had me if you wanted. Well, I don't know. Cool. No, but you could have. I don't think so. I don't think so. I don't think that would be reasonable. But he's making things that are on the boat. Yeah, but that's not fair. Yeah, he's egregious. He could be. He might have won around. But the most important thing is like that guy, he gave it what he had. He gave it. He could be proud. He could be proud. That guy there's not there's no question all that guy left nothing. There was nothing left in the tank at the end of that third round. You know, and that's all you could ever ask. It's a fucking beautiful fight to watch especially from heavyweight men. But makes me sad too because boy, you can only do a few of those. That's probably the last one. I mean, I always go back to that of that. The came the last guest, junior dos Santos ones. Master. Master. Those were sword watch, man. It's nasty stuff. Because Kane just didn't get tired. Being in there with a guy like Kane who didn't get tired, you're constantly getting punched in the face constantly. And it's just nothing but heart keeps you there until the fifth round. Kane, man. I just want to shake Kane's hand. Give him a hug. He's out. Yeah, I know. We were trying to get him on the podcast before he went in. But the judge wouldn't allow it. Really? Yeah, I definitely have him on now though. I love Kane. He's in my top. I don't think there's a goat, a real goat in heavyweight. I think there's times where one guy would have beaten all the other guys. Of course. Everyone had, they had, he's in moments though. He's in the goat category. For sure. I would say in heavyweight, there's a goat category. You got to put steep A in there because he defended the heavyweight title more than anybody. He beat in Ghana when in Ghana was in his fucking prime and got rocked a bunch of times on the same crazy fight too. Crazy fight. Crazy fight. Crazy fight. He's got to give it to him. He's always going to be in the goat category. Kane, Fadeor, of course. Fadeor is like the real connoisseur, the real connoisseur. And I may head, they're like Fadeor is the goat. He's the one. I always have everybody forget about Fabrice over Doom. Because Fabrice over Doom, tap Kane Velasquez, Minitaro Nogara and Fadeor. And he tapped Fadeor when Fadeor was Fadeor. Everybody looks at a guy like when he lost a bunch of fights or they didn't go so well for him and later in his career, he's in his late 30s. When you look at Fabrice over Doom in his prime, he's in that range, man. He beat Kane Velasquez, he beat Mark Hunt with a flying knee to win the title. He has that resume moin. Bro, at that time those are heavy hitters. Bro, I mean he beat the best of the best. He beat them all and he tapped three of the all time greats. Those are Minitaro for sure when he was in pride. He's in the goat category. But then you got to give it a little bit more like Fadeor's a notch above him because Fadeor beat him and beat him with ground and pound. But then the other guys are Kane and you always got to think Kane, Prime Kane against anybody ever, a man who knows. Prime Kane was just an unstoppable tornado of punches and takedowns and no, no, no, no tired, no fatigue. It's not coming. Like you think he's going to get tired, he's never going to get tired. He's going to keep punching in the face. Top tier wrestling and fucking Probeecio topped him too. And he's Mexican. Yeah, right. He's Mexican. A lot of Mexicans have great cardio, man. They have Ray Cardio and unbelievable fucking heart and chin. I wonder if it's from high altitude genetics. You know, what you were saying, you had it from more years is warrior genetics. Right. 100%. Volcanowski has the same thing. Just from a different type of, a different type of indigenous tribe. You know, the Macedonians and the crazy fucking, the up in the mountain people that are five, six with hands like fucking. Morob. Oh my God. Morob Blauvish will arrive at the next time. Also warrior genetics. 100%. Yeah. That dude, I've never, a lot of these athletes if they had, it's like if they were had a little size, they'd be playing any professional sport. Right. You know? Especially if you have the mental toughness to reach championship level. But I've also seen a lot of fighters can't throw a fucking baseball. A lot of fighters can't do anything else. Like I grew up playing baseball. I could play every single sport because of the dexterity baseball showed me. I feel like baseball and basketball are the main sports to show the child early to create dexterity and sport for competitive drive to. Gymnastics. I've heard Kabib say that you keep your child in gymnastics till they're 10, then they could do martial arts. I'm following father's plan. Well, that's actually very smart because then he developed like crazy body control. Oh my God. That's fucking shredded. Mm-hmm. Six years old shredded. Yeah. Right. From gymnastics. I never had an ab not even as a child. I've always had a fucking, a little bubble. I've always been a little bubble. Hey man, party of charm. It is. I was shredded. I wouldn't be as likable. Yeah. You think so? Let's find out. That's fine. That's fine. That because I'll be fucking shirtless everywhere posing. They might not like that. Try this one. Yeah. That's why there's a diet out on me. Oh, I buy him new and they still die out quick. I guess you a torch. This is a, that's like a mini. That's like a little mini. You got to get you to like a mini welder. Mm. The mini welding one works well. Wow. Wonder what a welding torch is for the cigars. So this Homsot and Strickland thing, it to me, it's going to be what what can Homsot do on the feet? Can he clip him and can Strickland stop to take down? I don't even like it's so hard to even think anybody could stop Homsot right now. And anything. It's true. It's like you're not even going to get to throw hands or to me. It's just going to be smiling laughing. You think it's going to fucking take you down and man, handle you like no one's ever been man handled before. His timing and his take down is fucking insane. It's so good. Watching the training, the speed and he's like, it's equivalent to like Alan Iverson doing a crossover. He's doing it with that type of like flare. If I was going to make an argument against it, I would say he's handling guys that don't have a big background in elite wrestling. They're not like elite grapplers. The guy that he thought that wasn't elite grabbergs. No, no burns for sure, but that was like more stand up fucking him up. Yeah, but Gilbert burns. He took him down like you can get. Gilbert can get back up to his one of the most elite players on the floor. Yes, especially back then, you know, Gilbert just retired. Yeah, no. Congratulations, Gilbert tremendous career tremendous, but he they were they were banging it out and Homsot fought a completely different kind of fight. He tried to like slug it out. I think his ego got in the way because Gilbert slipped him a couple times. Couple drops dropped them. Rock them. Gilbert was a wild boy. How is fucking screaming during that one? In his prime Gilbert was so fucking game. He was so gant so dangerous, man. He knocks people out. So I was going to say, Kamaro. Kamaro, Usman and that was a short notice fight. The Kamaro took it 185. I believe it will find in the third round. Kamaro was winning. I was like, this would have been very interesting. It was a five round fight. I feel like I mean, it's hard to predict, but Kamaro had the he had the momentum one percent. If it was a five round fight and Kamaro had a full camp because you're taking a fight on that short notice like that. You don't trust in your wind. Like you would trust in your wind if you just went through 12 weeks of hell. Well, you just know you're in fucking tippy top like. That's his knee barking also. I'm sure his knees always barking. He's such a warrior when he gets in there. He fights like it doesn't matter. I mean, you know, he would they were in the wrestling positions for a while where he like he wasn't able to really do much. You know, like, well, I was defended. He just wasn't able to do anything to him. That's what saying. It was like a stalemate kind of. He was just like there. Where with everybody else, Homsaw basically racked all some mounts, um, can't just roll some around. It was like a fucking video game like rolling thunder. That was crazy. And him at Kevin Holland had so many words before that too. So there was a lot of anger in that. You know, that was crazy. That was wild. That was really crazy. And they had gotten some sort of an altercation before that. And another event. So there was bad blood there. So it's like Homsaw just wanted to prove a point. Yeah. You know, these guys aren't really playing. They play by a different set of rules coming from that block. Yeah. That's a fucking different block. It's a war zone son. They used to actual fights for sure. Yeah. Like they stay alive. Like yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Scary shit, man. That's a fight though. That's a really interesting fight. And the fight where they're not struggling can avoid the take down and whether or not Homsaw can hit him. And whether or not he could avoid getting hit because Strickland will set some traps. He's sneaky with his striking. Very clever. Very clever with his striking. I mean, the also, Homsaw had the issue coming off of that, of a COVID. He had that long, long COVID where his lungs were fucked for a while. Well, you know, that was, he wouldn't stop training. So he got COVID and trained hard like a fucking psychopath all through COVID to the point where he was getting bleeding out of his lungs. I don't know fucking shit. He was coughing up blood. He just, apparently he's an animal that just can't keep him out of the gym. They just can't keep him out of the gym. And so he kept training while he had COVID. And he got real bad. The point where he was hospitalized. That's a different type of level of being able to just like push past like physical sickness. It's COVID fucked up. Or push past the point where you're almost dead. Yeah, but also showing up doing rounds. I think I had mentioned this, but I was trained with Blinio and Pereira before the first Uncle I have fight. And we got sick the same way. Oh, wow. Nuro, everyone like I was sick. Nuro virus. Nuro, bro, it's fucking so sick. And he went and did the fight. Did the whole thing. He was as sick as me, apparently. That was the first Uncle I had. Like I was sick. Corovirus, right? No, he was a bra was fucking so sick and he went and did the fight. Did the whole thing. He was as sick as me, apparently. That was the first Uncle I ever thought. First Uncle I fight, I fucking literally was knocked out for 10 days. And the motherfucker's training, traveling and fighting. With the neurovirus. For the championship and it wasn't a, it wasn't a, it wasn't a pareto fight, but it was not horrible. No, it wasn't terrible. He lost, but then the second fight was like, holy shit. I see them training now. He looks like a fucking behemoth at 250. He's in 260 now. Holy shit. They wait in at 263. Bro, that's, to him at 263 is scary. It's nuts. The guy fought at 185 just a couple of years ago. Okay, well this is, this is a true body type. He's, he's meant to be a cowboy, you know what I mean? He's like a fucking Brazilian cowboy. Amazon warrior, James. Same shit we're talking about. That's what he is. It's the bone density stuff. It's not, it's like, it's true. Genetics. Indiginy. It's true. It's really, you look at certain people and you see the past. Right. I see warriors. So, yeah. You know, when that song comes out. It's, no, no, no. Chance were made to excite. They would, they, to conjure up spirit. That's what you fucking do. He's conjuring up spirit. That's why the hearing was so scared of your black. You're a fucking cast. You're gonna sh- break his head. You're he asked him the second fight to not use spiritual warfare. So good. That's good. There's no, there's no, there's no movie that I can write this type of script. I love this shit. Yeah. I thought that I'd be your either. But I felt great for Carlos at the same time. Yeah. It's like, I love that old team. That's in all those boys out there. I'm, uh, yeah, they're great guys. I like those guys. It's like, look, I get it. It's a hard pill to swallow. I get it. You did back off. I get it. But also that guy just can only blame yourself on now. Well, he found a way to win. I found a way to win in the most spectacular way possible. That's the only thing that should really be spoken about is his, his will and his, like his, his ability to fight through that. Bro, to an ACL, they're carding you off the fucking fields. I know. Everyone's crying that their career is over and football. Carding you off the field, which your heads like that. They still fucking knocking home me out for the, for the light. heavyweight championship. It'll fucking crazy. So to have that type of will in you, you could only just be mesmerized by that. I know it's not mad. Think about it. Like how many great fights are out there to be had? How many great fights have been had? I mean, those moments like that, that's like you can't. That's one of the things that makes a sport so exciting. Like you could have imagined that he would blow his knee out. And then you could have imagined that Yuri would pause and not know what to do. and then you couldn't have imagined that Carlos would knock him out. Yeah, it's perfectly. Let me ask you something about the footing in the, in octagon. Did his foot slip? Was this slippery in there? I think it was just a placement issue. Oh, he placed it wrong and it, yeah, sometimes in scrambles, you know, you're moving weird and it looks like he did. It looks like it just blew out, man. That shit just blew out. There's a video of Carlos blowing his knee out and it looks like they're in the middle of a wild exchange. He moves his foot in a certain way and it just pops. And you can see it go up the back of his leg. It's a ripple up. It was nasty. It's nasty. Yeah, it's horrible. And it's got to take a long time for that thing to be better again. But he won. He won. He won. He won. He won. He won. He won. He won. He won. And then Paul Acosta, in terms of shit. If I was the fucking captain of the ship, that's what I would do. and he just knocked him out, but he deserves to be in it. So here it is. So he placed his leg weird and pushed off and it just blew out. It looked like he was on. Just a freak movement. He didn't step on the pull of the foot. He stepped more on the inside like that, like the angle of the step. Well, it was definitely weird because they're in the middle of a scramble, you know. But look at him. And look at his everything. He's in the system right there. The way he just spun off that and stayed on that left leg. Yeah, no, that's nasty. When that happens, your legs are so unstable. The crazy thing is there's guys in the U.S. You see how it's like that fight with no ACL. They have no ACL and they fight in the UFC. I know how far else, how far else Dos Angel's was doing that for a while. He had no ACL and he's fighting in the UFC. I mean, was that during his decline? Or was he... It was still pretty close to the top. He had lost the title, but he was still pretty close to the top. He was still fucking a lot of people out there. He's just another breed also. Well, that guy, like conditioning, that guy was sculpted. Dos Angel's in his prime looked like somebody made him at a marble. He looked like he belonged at the Vatican. I know. I was few. Every time I tell people I'm going to come see you there, we said, yo, you can you ask him to ask him to ask him that? I just started fielding questions for you. I'm sorry. I'm sorry about that. For what? For you getting those questions? No, I like it. Oh, you do? I like it. I'm ridiculous. What's the most ridiculous one? I don't remember. It's so silly. But one good one is like when you're going to have a miracle crocheop here. Oh, I actually talked to him. I wasn't crazy. Because my boy during the summer, I'm not talking. I'm just talking. I'm just saying neighborhood is him that I trained with my boy Dean. He's literally a Croatian. He looks like fucking miracle. He throws the leg. Bald headed, fucking. He looks like he's driving BMW M5 for sure. I would definitely have a miracle on. He's a legend. I need to hear from him. Yeah, he's a legend. And he's very funny. I've seen him in interviews before. I was wondering whether he spoke English enough. But he's pretty good. Pretty good. Good enough. Yeah, definitely good enough to have a conversation. I was watching him versus Fade or today. That was crazy. Fight. I think that was like 2000. Look at him man. Jack. That's unbelievable right there. How old is Marco now? That's a recent picture. Yeah. For these three years ago. Wow. He's in phenomenal shape. I mean, he's got to be 50. How old is Marco now? That stuff doesn't go away when he's real, man. 51. That's so great. That's so great. It's on. Yeah. He was an animal in his prime bar. He was the first kick boxer to really start doing well in MMA because he was so explosive. So a lot of the other guys like Ernesto Hoost or Peter Arz, they were real technical, but they set things up. Slapper is for the most. They were setting things up. Set it up. Yeah. He would just explode on you and explode your liver, explode your head with those fucking kicks. He was so fast and so explosive that when he entered into MMA, he had a kind of advantage. This is back when they let him fight with shoes on. Marco with shoes on is a crazy proposition. That's nuts. Is that? I've seen, I see a guy like this and I go, that's a giant. Yeah, he's a giant. But I mean, he's a man, Troy. He was like seven plus feet tall. So when you find a skeleton of a person like this, don't you have giants or real? Oh, yeah, definitely. They're around now too. Right. Definitely. Yeah. But he doesn't look like he has gigantic. No, he does. No, he does. But he does. But most of those guys are unafilitically and knees are knocking. Right. Right. Right. He doesn't seem un-athletic. I see what you're saying. He looks like he's kind of on his toes. You know, like he moves well. Yeah, like his legs are working in the right way as proper athleticism. It was another guy that beat Fade or big foot sole. Yeah, but he'd look like he had fucking giant face. Yeah, yeah. NBA Victor women, Yama is again. Yama's seven foot four. That's crazy. It doesn't look like he moves as well as he does. He's 22 years old. So fucking praying man to just be able to do this stuff. He dribbles behind his back. He shoots threes. Bro, do you watch them? Seven foot four is crazy. It's crazy. I do watch the NBA. Sometimes. Seven foot four is different when you weigh 190 pounds. Right. You know, seven foot four like Rick Smith's back in the day. Or like dudes who have a little weight on them look different. This guy is 235. But that's unbelievable. You don't believe that? I probably is. No, he has to be so big. He's so big. He's still getting bigger too. He's got a little brother that's not even in the NBA yet. He's like, this kid is going to do this future. Maybe 16 or 17 is younger brother. And he still grows, I don't know, 6'10 now. This is ridiculous. This is the future right here of sports. Giant humans. Humans. Right. So that if you go back to the Bible, that's not your time. It's like you have a lot of time. There are giants. There are giants around. We'll look at the guys in Iceland. Like the mountain from our strong. My favorite people. John Paul Signison, one of my favorite strong men of all time. All the Icelandic heroes. I know. Right? All Vikings. Giant humans. Have Thor Bjornsson. He's the guy from Game of Thrones. Yeah. That's the mountain. That's the mountain. Yeah. He's the mountain. But bro, I go, you know, world strong man taught me about the world. It taught me about how to pronounce names. And yeah. Magnus von Magnuson. Magnus von Magnuson. Magnus very magnificent. That's who it is. There's all Icelandic legends. Yeah. John Paul Signison, Magnus very yany, Vyrtonan, and Yuka Holofam Finland. Like bro, I have some. Some edics in that part of the world. Unreal. Vikings. And that's like, you want to know what a Viking looked like? That's what they looked like. Those guys showed up with a fucking gigantic boat filled with animals, swinging swords, just ready to kill everybody in your village. Fun swinging that fucking mace swinging the hammer. May I have that, please? Yeah, man. I'm rewatching Game of Thrones. I'm on the final season now. I've never seen it. God damn it's good. I need to watch it. I've been watching the lobblend. Good. That's great. Tom Hardy kills it. I love Tom Hardy. That's my man. Yeah. A fucking Pierce Brosnan. Oh, the shit. Heels it. And what is the woman's name again? Helen Marin. Oh, my. Oh, my. She's so good. She's so good. What a fucking legendary cast. I really like that show a lot. Yeah, that's amazing. That's got a reaction beyond it. Yeah, I think she's the fucking man. He can't do an accident. You could learn. You can learn an accident, bro. Let's try it out right now. I've tried out. Which one I reached? Which one I reached? Oh, fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck. There you go. You're in. I've been there. I'm a Srowson. You could do it. You have to crows the floor. Just let's do that. You would love to put a patty pemblet for like a week. Me too. Me too. You want to live with Miley and me Paul Bali. I love to talk. And I want to box. There you go. No, come on. I just want to throw hands. I just love fucking black. I just want to love boxing. Do you have for real fun? I love it. But remember how you were trying to show me how to throw kick? I've just stopped kicking. Yeah, you give up. I'm not a kicker. You don't have to be. I'm not a kicker. I'm a choker. I'd like to be a choker. You could learn how to kick. I could. You could learn. I'm just going to learn how to stretch first. It's that leg thing, man. I'm scared to break my leg again. Yeah. Because every time I kick in the wrong place, it feels like you hit the ball on the wrong part of the bat. When you broke your leg, did you have to get pins? Yeah, I got it broken half. It broken half. So I got the plate. Oh. But it was a clean break. It was good. It's better to get shattered. Shattered. I would have been bad. So it's bad. So clean break. It kind of made a bionic return. So it doesn't bother you now? No, nothing. Oh, no, it's strong. But if I kick it in the exact spot, I'll feel it. Like if some of the checks that kick on their knee or something like that. What part of your knee, bro? You're like, bro? I'm going to not disclose that like Bill Belichick. Look at you. You're high nineties. How did you break it? I fell. Literally slipped in the kitchen. I was making fucking two hamburgers and I was carrying them out. And the home he was mopping at the same time. I was wearing the wrong shoe and I just slipped and got caught behind me. That's so exciting. Free gags. You know what I thought happened is what's this face? Pierce Morgan. He fell and broke his hip. How did he get his hip replaced? That's the thing. He doesn't seem like he's in great shape. I wasn't fucking sick shape at the time. I was riding my bike every day. I was feeling good. How long will this happen? 2011. Damn. Yeah. Oh no, 2010. So that's why you're worried about kicking. So don't kick anybody. Just work on knees to move. Like inside knee. Hey, girl, that's good move for you. Clinch. Yeah. It's all just about a hip mobility. Just learn some hip mobility stuff. I know work out arena bars. Yeah, yeah. Those are actually really good. I have. I could do a good. I could get the leg up there. Battle arena bars are really good for swinging your leg. You like you stand on your left leg and swing your right leg. Yeah. And then up like that and this. Yeah. That's really good for like opening it up and getting the dexterity and strengthening up those supporting muscles. Yeah. Well, the flexors. Yeah. Everybody should have some leg and hip mobility. You should be able to throw a kick. It's not that hard, especially a low kick. Not a throw it. You know, the accuracy and you know, the devastation factor might not be the. You'll figure it out. You're a big guy. You're strong. Got a lot of horsepower back there. Come on, son. Come here. They fucking wrestle you. Yeah, I hear. I'm getting excited. I've been I train with Plinyola. I train with him in Jersey. Just hold pads. I thought he was in Connecticut. Oh, his place is in here. His place is in here. Yeah. He's low resinger in Connecticut. But everyone's part of Jersey is Plinyola. And not Lee. Oh, nice. Right there. Ten minutes from me. That's great. That's great. It gives me good work. It's a good dude too. Love him. And great coach. And I spent years, I'm saying he spends time with me and like, teaches me fighting. Mm-hmm. Not boxing. Show me how to fight. Right. Like things Alex would do. It's probably a good thing for you too to have something that takes your mind off all the other shit you do. That's one of my favorite things. Yeah. The thing is that the one thing takes my mind off the next. This takes my mind off of that thing that takes my mind off of that. So it's like a constant therapy that I'm giving myself. Because I'm getting burnt out here. Oh, let's turn to this. Now that's stopping me from doing that. And I will get burnt out there. Go to the next thing. Right. I'm just a seasonal person. I like doing things when I feel them. I know what you mean. Yeah. I don't know what I'm like to feel it. Yeah, well, not just the joy in it. Yeah, exactly. I don't want to be forced. Maybe you'll stalk Colvin soon. That's fucking nothing me. Really? Tom. Really good. It's not a lot of it. Look at me. It's a really good place. Pitching putt. I'm a fucking pro. You're good. Mini golfer. Pitching putt. Now, Mini golfer, not that good. What's the difference? Pitching putt is like everything's subdriving. Yeah, it's like 100. It's like a city game. We have it at the park. We have it at the park. Oh, oh. What does it good? 70 yard. What's the wedge? Mm-hmm. Okay. It's just not long drive. It's no drives. Got it. So I'm pretty good. I'm going to have a game starts off for the long. I'm totally ignorant. Me too. Every game starts with a drive from the beginning. Is that true? Mostly. Mostly. 14. It should be two-four, three is per side. It's not. Every course is in the same, but it's like average. Two-four, three is per side. Two-four, five is per side. And rest of the park, four is. And do you always open with like a long shot? Is that the thing? Not. It's not like two. How you play the course is supposed to be up to you. Ideally, you want to get as far as the one swing as possible. So you have less throws. Yeah. How does the master start? Yeah. I mean, that's how I'm starting. How they start in Augusta, Shinacak. I want to play all these down. I just want to smoke hash on the golf courses and chill while other people play. That's what you want to do? That's doable. I think we can do that. I think that's very attainable. I want to do it once. I don't want to follow them like that. Like Jamie? It's like we might have a show. Well, you already did that with Ancient Alien. Bro, how do we bring this back where you fucking producing it? I was just talking about it yesterday. Can you produce this for me? I don't know. I don't mean to put you on the spot. I mean to put you on the spot. Can you be the executive producer? Call? Well, where would we do it? It really doesn't take much. Where did you do it before you did it at vice? We did it in a fucking rented studio with green screen. That's where vice went bad. Well, they should have kept you around. They fucked up. They fucked every day. They had any Wong. They had a bunch of dope shows. I did any Wong show. We went and did yoga together. Seriously? Yeah. Yo, bro. I don't even want to tell you what I'm about to do. I love Eddie. He's a good kid. I'm about to do Tybo with Billy Blanks. Now? Right today? Like you're about to do it? Thursday. Really? Me, Ryan, C-Crest and Billy Blanks. Oh, boy. Oh, boy. I'm going to tell you here first. I went on real fortune. Did you? I did. How'd you do? I can't tell you yet, but just let me tell you I dominated. I can't tell anyone yet, but I dominated. I think he just told us. Let me just say something, bro. I'm sorry if this is going to ruin anything with fuck's sake. I dominated. Nice. Beautiful. That's why I mean, I'm looking for jeopardy to be honest. I'm better at jeopardy. And so why are you going and doing Tybo with Ryan C-Crest and Billy Blanks? Because they took a liking to Ryan, took a liking to me, and now we want to something else. Oh, so you guys filming this? Yeah, we're going to film me and Ryan. Who? Doing Tybo with Billy Blanks. But for me, Billy Blanks, the last boy scout, the first scene. That's right. That's what I know is, Rast Moshy. That's right. A life of bitch and he fucking sh... Come on. ...for God about that. That's one of my favorite movies of all time. Well, Damon Wayne's one of my favorite comics. Come on, Tom. Damon Wayne's is a fucking underrated comic. Underrated comic and underrated action star. He's great in that fucking movie. He's the only proof without him standing up. I used to love Damon Wayne's. Major pain? Oh my God. He had a run. What about his brother and fucking low down dirty Shane? Yeah. Now he's a good action movie too. Keenan? Yeah. Who knew Keenan's Iveruanes was a fucking action hero. Keenan is a cool guy. I'm gonna get you sucker. That's right. Come on, that's right. He died from overgreeting over gold. He's too much gold. Wasn't there a guy who had like goldfish tanks for his platform? Yes. Man, that was the poop. You see. You're a jig. You're a jig. Like a fish tank's platforms? In living color, change my life. I should change my life. Hey, I just read something. I should probably call Dave and ask him. But I just read something with it. Thinking about bringing back the shpelship. Yeah, gave us speech. They're so eddy Murphy got another award this week. I think AFI or something. And Dave was on stage speaking. And he said he was talking with eddy about it. And Eddie sort of like pushed him. But then during the speech he sort of said, all right, if you want to do it, I think they actually even said maybe a movie. I could show Michelle movie. Oh, okay. The actual show. But he's like, he kind of said Eddie if you do Charlie's parts. Let's do it. Oh, that would be incredible. Yeah. Cause it kind of does want to do it. That Charlie is so incredible. Oh, that would be incredible. That would be incredible. I'm trying to be Eddie and Charlie on vacation once. It's totally random. And why? Really? Is that at the counter getting my, you know, Keith for the room. And Charlie's cousin was there. I was like, what are you doing? What's going on? What are you doing here? It's like Charlie's here with Eddie. Come say hi. I went over. I had lunch with Charlie and Eddie. I was like sitting there talking to him. Like this is crazy. That's crazy. It was crazy. Where we staying. We want a surf club. No, four seasons. Four seasons of Maui. Oh, yes. Beautiful place. Beautiful place. It was like just talking to Eddie Murphy. What am I really talking to Eddie Murphy? It was so weird. That's like a delegate. It was cool. He's really cool. It was fun. I met Martin. Martin Lawrence, who was like, my grandparents learned English from this man. My Albanian grandparents would watch Wheel of Fortune Jeopardy and Martin. And I did the thing with Wheel of Fortune. And then I went to the next game versus the Lakers. I said, fuck it. I'm getting myself a ticket. And as I walk in, it's fucking Martin Lawrence right there. I'm almost, I literally, I've never done this to another man. I shook his hand. I went into his ears. I yelled, bro. You're not much. This means to me, man. You're, you're, bro. I was just talking. I was like, whispering is he how much it meant to be. Fanboy doubt. Yeah, fanboy the fuck. I don't care. I don't care. I did it. Dude, I saw Martin Lawrence in his prime at the comedy store in the 90s. I would have died to see that. He, there's another guy that people sleep on. My favorite, he's one of the best comics ever. Like when he was in his prime, he would fucking destroy. And I would have to follow him. It was hell. I bombed so many times. Mitzi Shore that lady right there. Yeah. When if you were coming up, one of the things that she would do is like young comics, she thought of it any, any promise at all. She'd put them on after monsters. But you were at the garage. But you were at the garage. You're not through a legend. Yep. That's just spot. Right on after the killer. Good luck. I like that. Yeah, man. Showing kind of shame. She knew what she was doing. I mean, she's the most important figure in comedy outside of comedians, for sure. She's number one. She knew what she was doing. Even with her son. I mean, she didn't even get Pauli a break. You know, Pauli had it earned it himself too. Yeah. That's how she, you know, she knew. She knew like how, what was the best environment to create comedy. So, Pauli Shore was a stand up first. Oh, yeah. I didn't even realize that. Oh, yeah. I don't know that. I didn't always been a stand up forever. I just knew, I just, when I was young, like he was like in movies and shit that I liked. He was like, he was like that, he was like that actor. Where's it at? Yeah. Yeah. Well, he started to stand up. I mean, he used to get baby sap by Sam Kenison. Oh my God. You got to be a fucking funny guy after that one. Could that be my baby sitter? What's some things you don't want to learn when you're that young? I mean, you know what I learned from Sam. I kind of do. I kind of, I don't know. I had some pretty fucking some interesting characters raised me also. I'm just so glad that the comedy store is still around. I was really worried about them during the pandemic when they were closed for like a fucking year. The whole thing was so insane. It took so long for LA allowed them to open up. Can I ask you something honestly? No. All right. The comics of today. Do you find them? It's just because we've aged a little bit. And we find different things. Like do you find them as funny as you found people that you looked up to like your elders? Do you find these younger guys funny? Like can you vibe with it? Yeah. I definitely could vibe with it. You know, as far as like do they make you cackle? Yeah. You know, the fuck we got for sure. It depends on who you're watching. You know who I like. I like Stavi. Oh, yeah. Stavi. Stavi. Stavi. Stavi. Stavi. I think they're never. Really? Yeah. I think so. Yeah. It's a really good time for like up and coming people, new people. There's like a lot of like excitement about comedy. You know, and then there's Kill Tony, which is like this awesome platform for them. So there's so many people who are getting that last night. No, I wasn't there last night. Because I drove by the by the mothership. It was there. Fuckin. Yeah. It was kill Tony Knight. I wasn't there last night. But Ari Schfeer was there. Lewis Jay Gomez was there. So it was a great, great setup. And it's always a good show. It's always a fun show. And that gives people legit opportunity to get on stage and either to get on YouTube or to get on Netflix in front of the whole fucking world. And it could make your career. It could make your life. It could change everything. It's not like a voice type of vibe. It's more of like a fucking real show. And it just people see you there. It's not like a competition. No. No. There's no competition. You get one minute. And if you do well. And you get your touch. It invites you back. Yeah. Not judged. But you get feedback from the comics or you or everybody's just fucking around. It's all very loose and open. Show time of time. Tony, yes. No, you don't get yanked. You get your one minute. And if you suck Tony, roast you and you know, but sometimes the people that suck, they know they suck and they're really funny. Talk about how they suck. It's just a great show. But it's just an opportunity where a comedian see there's a path. And all I have to do is keep doing open mics, put together an act, start getting a little road work, do kill Tony. And then next thing you know, I'm headlining on the road like all these other guys that have become regulars on the show. Is it clear, Pat? Yeah. You really make a living and have a real career and comedy. So because of that, it's like comedy is really exciting right now. And because of YouTube, because you can put your special, just you don't need big guys, you put it right up. You don't need big guys, you put it right up. Anything. Just upload it onto YouTube. Next thing you know, it's got a million views. Totally shit. You're often running. And then people could, the best thing about YouTube is people could share it. You could see a funny comedy special or no shit. You got to watch this. You sent it to me and I'm like, ah, then I'll send it to him. And that's how things happen. It's like that never existed before. So that paves the way for more comics to be encouraged to try it. Because there's an, if you got a work ethic and you're willing to do it, there's an actual path to have it a career. Yeah. Because before it had it, it was like a little bit like luck. You had to meet the right person. But now there's like, like getting to the major leagues. Go through the minors, you go through here, you just clear. What's the pathway for rappers? I don't know. There's really none. Nowadays, I believe it's all the same thing. You just, you choose your own path. Just become mayor. Yeah. Hopefully. You fucking get me out. I'd love to do that. I could be the mayor. Yeah, you could be the mayor. Just someone got to feed me some political situations. Good. Good things only. I don't want to do anything bad. No, but like the path to being a rapper, there's really, first off, you have to be just nice. You have to be good. You shouldn't be doing it if you suck. And some, your friend should tell you, you'll listen, this is not for you. Let's step away from this and do something else. Right. You have to have good people around you. I had a lot of people around me that are fucking straight up haters, very raw deal people. No one told me to stop. Of course. And that inspired me to keep going. And honestly, you just have to have it within you. This is a, you either have it or you don't. This, I've been around here now 16 years. And I've seen a lot of fucking people come and go. But I've been a constant. And I don't even think I've peaked in any area of life yet. Truly. I feel like I'm on the brink of, I'm always on the brink of a new exploration, a new breakthrough. And that's how I take things. Cause I don't like, I don't want to be stagnant. I look older. I'm visibly grizzled. I'm visibly sure and kind of read. But because I started later, you didn't see me as a fuck of 15 year old kid jumping around. Right. I came in as a 27 year old man. Right. So you've seen me throughout the years. I've just now I'm more of a man. Right. So I didn't start as a little baby face, you know. A lot of these kids, you see them 16 years later. They look the exact same because you saw them at 13. Not me. Right. I've really, you know. Yeah. But well, that's a great attitude anyway. Yeah. Just continuing to improve it's something. That's a great way to live life. I just like learning man. I like, I love new experiences. I'm not, I want to fucking like, I'm just finding new things that I love every single day of life. That's awesome. Truthfully, man, I got, I feel, I feel blessed and special to have those type of outlets where I don't have to like search for shit and things just like hobbies falling my lap. They do because I just, I really, I'm a kind of store of many things in life that I love. What are the hobbies you like? Like I said, I love gardening. I love over landing now. I love, I want to take over landing. I want to take my truck everywhere. And I want to just kind of truck you. I got a Sequoia brand new twen juice. Good moves. It was the best purchase I've ever made in my life. They never break. They never break. And New York was so fucking heavy duty. I was like in War Mode. There was nothing stopping me. Right. Poor Will Drive. 100 wheel drive that car. Yeah. It got power like you can't believe. It's perfect. Toyota's are hard to go wrong. I love Toyota. I love Toyota. I had jeeps for a while. But I started. My mother had the 83 Toyota Celica. That was our first car. We called it brownie. You got us everywhere. Then we made the change to the 94 Jeep Grand Cherokee forest green. We had that for a long time. And so we got the Hyundai Sonata that I got stolen by accident. You know, it was the morning before. That was the night before the Brett, the Brett Farv jet experiment that was going to happen. You know, he went to the jets. I went to the store in my underwear that I always do him up the block from my house. Board of vanilla dutch and a set for life. And two fucking kids jumped in the car and just dipped. Oh no. So. And you were in your underwear? I was in my underwear. And I had to make the police report in underwear. Why were you in underwear? First of all, that was the first question. Why are you in underwear? That's solid question. I said, should I take them off? You want me to take them off when you crazy? It does make the situation weirder. It makes it all weirder. Are you in underwear? That's solid question. Just as I take them off, you want me to take them off when you crazy? It does make the situation weirder. It makes it all weirder. Why I left with underwear on only. Yeah, it was hot out. I wouldn't advise that. No, no, don't do that. Even if you're going to your local store, did you do things to this, did you put a lift on it? What'd you do? I put the lift on it. I put the tires. Yeah, some 35, some toyos. Look at you. I went nuts. I got the crazy rack. Yeah, I got a roof rack. The whole deal? I got a roof rack. Nice. No, but I'm trying to throw the dabbing since kid on there, so it's really lifted. And I want to go, I want to do like a decor alley vibe. Okay, so do you want to take this and just go out into the woods and camp out for a while? I want to do that too. But I want to drive to the old nose. Just drive over through there. We're not sure. Yeah. There's a truck that's as good as them. It's probably not. It's not the move. It's too big. It's too burly. I need a little blank cruisers in the move. I need 80 series land cruisers. I need something that's a little bit more mobile. You're like, I've been looking to go maybe Mitsubishi Pajero, right hand drive or? You know what's real good is the Lexus GX. Last the one. Yeah, a little comfort. Comfort. But also a lot of dudes take those and put lifts on them. And there's a lot of aftermarket stuff available for them. There's a lot of hire me. And there's so fucking reliable. That's that Toyota motor. Yeah, you can't go wrong with Toyota. They know what you're doing. Toyota Holler at me. Come on. I'm the person. I'm the person. I'm the person. I'm the person. I have a 95 land cruiser. I love those. Champagne. Look how. No, it's silver. Silver. It's Lexus Atomic Silver. I had it painted. Oh my god. Yeah. It's dope. She gets me crazy. Yeah. And that fucking thing you got to raptor, the Hennessy. Oh yeah. I got to do more than the Hennessy. What is it? The fucking VSOP. No, it's the Hennessy. It's the Hennessy 1000. So they take a raptor, our, and turn it to a 1000 horsepower pickup truck. It's ridiculous. Totally necessary. It's 100% do you overland here? No. This fucking drive the streets. Yeah. Well, I have taken it out to ranch. It's before though. I've taken it on. No, you need that vehicle for the ranch. It helps. It definitely helps. And you get in over stuff. Those things have so much wheel travel. Those raptors. They're so good, especially the Hennessy, because it's even more lifted. It's so good at articulating over space. It's independent. They're independent arms. Well, it's just the suspension is designed to be pliable, right? It's like when you're going over fucked up ground, like moves with it. One thing about those, the old land cruisers, is that they all had solid axles front and rear. That's like a real hard core off-roading vehicle. You know, the solid axles are just so durable. And because it turns like the size, you've seen guys going over landing with land cruisers. Well, they have like the crazy, all year. Yeah, yeah, yeah. With the rocks. We're going over like, dude, let's get obsessed with those weird trails. Like just getting up them. I'm starting to be just the burn is there. I'm just a little bit a little, so soon you'll see me in fucking Moab going crazy to the rocks for real. She got a Jeep. Jeeps are really good for that. Because they're real small. They're not very big, you know, two door Jeep or four door Jeep. They're real small. He's had moved a lot of fucking stuff that you can get put on them. A lot of aftermarket stuff for sure. How much fun is that to put shit on things? Oh, so thank you. Fuck it. Soup things. I'm so excited. I'm working on a, I'm working on an 87M6 right now that I've had just sitting there in my garage for 12 years. Real? About to give it a new life. What are you going to do to it? Baha. I'm making it a rally car, lifting it. Holy shit. They're wheels. Really? I'm done dropping things. I'm only lifting things now. Wow. I've dropped every fucking BMW I've ever had to the ground. You know what's scraping? You're subconsciously preparing for the end of civilization. Right, I think. We're going to have to go off the roads. I got the Japanese GI Joe truck. I'm prepping everything. Yeah. You have an apocalypse vehicle. Yeah. I recommend those. You should get one. Things go sideways. You got to have something that can go away from the road. 100% of the stuff's going to be a Ferrari. And you're on the highway. You're stuck. I can't even get in the fucking thing right now. It's not that bad. But it wouldn't be a stock spot. It's those seats that hug your ass. I don't want anyone hugging my ass. It's a little tying out of cigarette man. Exactly. Fucking with his legs crossed in the car. Like this. Like the real deep bend. Bro, who could cross their legs with the deep bend? My nuts don't allow that. It's a European thing. Artier. What's your fear? Does it? He says like, double his balls. What do they do when that happens? They tucks them in there somewhere. They go in the space. The gap. The gap between the two legs. You know? That's a crazy way to sit for your own subconscious to know that's how you're sitting. Yeah. That your shit's tucked. You're crushing nuts. Yeah, no. I can't do it. Well, you and I both have tree trunk legs. There's no way. Get the, it won't work like that. There's no go over there. Like, it's also the thing. It's also the thing. I'm going to think, Adam Crowell talks about this. He's like, it's a thing that like liberals do to let you know that they think the way you think. Just sit like that is not real. It's like they've got this like cross like, well, it's like a feminine expression. I'm not threatening. I'm basically progressive. You know, I'm, you know, I've got the legs in the proper position. It's letting you know. Yeah. It's all body language. We're just like this. We're just like his hands over and forth. Fuck him. He holds his hands. Everything's open. He's got like the whole, but right over his cock. So ridiculous. Oh man. Well, women always get mad on subways because men man, man spread. But the reason why is our, that's how our hips are designed. What is this? The microphones right now is kind of stuff. That's ridiculous. I'm like, they did it. Oh man. That is ridiculous. It's a funny picture. So how did ancient aliens that show that you did, you getting high watching ancient aliens? How did that even start? This was about to fucking take over the history channel. They just needed content? No. I was like, yo, you guys are fucking bugging. You're not taking this off. This has to stay. I go, ancient aliens, this comes with vice. Like this is now going to be transferred. And they were like, I don't know if we could do it. So I had to go and speak to the homie who invented it. He gave me his blessings. I sat with him for like four hours. He was talking shit to me, whatever. He was like, yo, this is not a joke. Like everything is tongue and cheek and ridiculous. But this is how it makes us feel. I'm a proponent. I'm a believer. If I need to talk to Georgia, sucralose, bring them here, whatever. So he believed me and he gave us the blessing. He recently, in a recently passed me, passed a couple of years ago. Who did Georgia? No, not Georgia, but the main creator. My name is Fucking Fucking Fucking Fucking Fucking. Georgia was the meme. He's the meme, yeah. He's the meme. He's the man. He's the man. But it's aliens. But there's a lot of other sickle dudes on there that I'm eating. Oh yeah. Well, there's a lot of people. The guy who just died also. Vondanican? Vondanican. Yeah. Yeah. Vondanican. Yeah. I met him. Really? Yeah, my friend Eric Weinstein brought me to a lunch where he was at. And I had a chance to talk to him about what he believes and all the stuff. He was all in on the idea that aliens definitely came down here and built everything. I'm more of a believer that there was an ending of civilization and a rebirth of it. And that what we're looking at is some incredible technology that humans had invented a long fucking time ago. And that's what's responsible for all these structures that we don't understand. Like the ones in Mexico are crazy, man. They didn't know they just uncovered those. I didn't know that until like not that long ago. Yeah, these were like, I thought the Aztecs built all that shit. Think about all these things that they're finding now. Like I've seen recently like all these pyramids they're finding and Antarctica and yeah. Like, well, I know that there's one, these like these mountains or in China. Look, you know, the ad looking nature of it, there's like domes and like it looks like underneath. It looks weird though. That one looks weird. There's a bunch of them in the Amazon that look really weird. Like when they do the lidar underneath the riverbed, there's like civilization under there. There's like true civilization in certain areas of the Amazon. Yeah, I have a friend of mine, Luke caverns who goes and explores these things all the time. We were actually just talking about one of them that I think is in Peru. I sent it to him and I asked him. I said, hey, is this legit? And he's like, yeah, absolutely not only is it legit, but you can't get there. It gets a really hard place to visit. It's almost impossible to get there and no one's really looked into it in terms of like, here it is. I found it. So what did they do it overhead? Well, they have images of it and you look at the image and you're like, whoa, what is going on here? Like this is weird. Like the image it here. Like full civilization alone to bank. Well, it's in the middle order. I think it's deep in the jungle and I think it's very difficult to get to. But the thing is a lot of the jungle, a lot of the Amazon, a lot of this stuff is, there's areas where people don't necessarily know how many people were living there a thousand years ago or 2000 years ago. It could have been like densely packed. Like look at that. That looks like a densely packed area with people. What the fuck is that? That does not look, that's the AI version. But go back to that. That's a real picture. Bro, that does not look natural at all. It doesn't match anything around it. It's crazy. It looks like something that someone built. It doesn't mean that it's something that someone built and it might just be that angle. Right? If you look it from the other side, it might look like bullshit. But from that, there's angles of there's isosceles right there. There's this triangular situation is going on. They're saying it, but it said that image. But it don't look like a four size. It looked like five side boom, boom, boom, boom. It's hard to say boom. No could be four. It just could be four. Because where it is. It's reverse. It's reverse what you're saying. So it says, geologists refer to this formation as Sarah Elcano, attributing its sharp angles and pyramid like structure to the slow patient work of win, rain and erosion over countless centuries or someone built it. If you're not exploring it and you're saying that this thing that looks just like a pyramid, you think it was made by pyramid by slow patient work of wind and rain. But there's no other rock around it where the patient's happened there. This is a straight up line. It doesn't make any sense. It's a jungle plane. That looks like a person built it. Those are right angles. And it's covered with bushes. So you got to think like what did it look like when they haven't gone and checked it out? I'll tell you what Luke said to me because Luke is actually an expert in the stuff this is what he does. He goes and visits these places. And he was telling me it's like this stuff is so strange because there's a bunch of these kind of structures that are in the jungle. All of them haven't been explored and there's a lot of resistance. He says it's deep and uncontacted tribe land. There's a small river that can get you within the 25 mile mark. He said it's crazy out there. So it's just like you just have a really difficult time in getting to it. I mean, there's a river they can get you within 25 miles of it. Okay. And then you got to walk through the jungle 25 miles to get there. But what does it look like on Google Earth? What does it look like though? I mean, I'm just showing like that. I know, but get that stupid little dot off of this right at the border. Pro, Brazil. Pro. What is what's under there? I want to know what's under there. Boy, that does look like a fucking pyramid, man. That looks like a pyramid that's covered with bushes. Yeah, in the middle of nowhere. They find all of the ones. They look at that there. It's in a similar line and it looks like it's in a pattern of the star in the sky. Right. Yeah, it's a rainbow bone bone and that. Yeah, it's weird. Oh, here's another one. Did you see that they think that there's a second Sphinx in Egypt? Yeah. Yeah. So they've done scans of this area where a second Sphinx would be and there's something under the sand that's the size of a Sphinx. It would be next to the original one. It's in the same area, like the same area so that you have your pyramids and then there's a Sphinx and on the opposite side there's another Sphinx. But there's Sphinx isn't the Sphinx. There was something else. The face was something else, right? They think. They think the face was a lion's face and then like that rogue. Like a little dog. The long, not the long, snouted dog that they have. Could be. I don't think they think it's that though. I think they think it's a lion. And so there's one exactly opposite of it. And so this one, what does it look like when they show that image the scan? I mean, there, I don't think there's anything there. What did the scan say? I don't know. You would just scroll up. See, that's a scan. And it said something above it. It said, scan's hinting at complex megastructure beneath the Giza Plateau. And so satellite images of the Giza Plateau reportedly captured this dune, which the signal processing researcher claims measures approximately 108 feet tall. The first Sphinx sits slightly below the surrounding surface in a shallow depression. So it's quite possible. The second Sphinx could be hidden beneath this higher mound. So it's in the right position where a second Sphinx would be. Because I think the same size. Did they be side by side? No, I don't think so. I think they it's like the pyramids are in the center. Sphinx going that way. Sphinx going that way. I think that's the idea. Sphinx appear in pairs more than once. Would they looking for it? Because that's a normal like setup. What's the normal configuration of Sphinx's? Yes, Sphinx is a frequently appear in pairs. In ancient Egypt, Greek and Roman art, often acting as guardians in pairs or long avenues at temple entrances rather than a solitary monuments like the Great Sphinx. Which makes sense, right? If they're facing opposite ways, also, the ones who got on the exit with both entrances. Exactly. Far away from each other though. Right. But far in relative position to how far the Sphinx is from the pyramids in the first place. Well, then we'd have to ask like, do they appear in pairs far away from each other, not next to each other? Because that's sort of saying like they're guarding doors next to each other. Well, there's guardians. I understand. But, or just entrances if this two edge is you need them. But let's put that into perplexity. Ask it when Sphinx's appear in pairs, what is the configuration? What is the configuration? What is the configuration? What configuration? So maybe it'll tell us there and give us maybe they are like right next to each other. And then this doesn't make any sense. Both the gypsion art and architecture. Sphinx is very often appear in pairs. Usually flanking in axis, such as a road, doorway, or staircase, right? So like two in front of a doorway. Temple approaches. Roads are pairs of Sphinx's commonly lined the processional roads with one on each side of the central path. So usually like on two sides of a door. We gateways and doorways, pairs, Sphinx, orientation idea. Modern popular writers often say one faces east and the other faces west. Okay. Well, that's different. That's what they would affect. So it's possible that they did it in several different ways, but often in twos. So if they do have ones, vix, vix, and this is another story. But it's pulling that from a Facebook post talking about this potential second one. Oh, interesting. Interesting. So it might be hard. It's just a grain of salt with it is all the time. We won't know until they get in there. But if it is there and it's just understand, that's not that big of a deal because they had to uncover this one. That's what... Well, there's a taste of excavated these things. I think a while. I mean, it's a lot of sand. But depends on how many workers, how many machines also they have to do it carefully. Oh, right. Because you want to make sure you don't fuck up the Sphinx. But if there is a Sphinx under there, that would be fucking nuts. They found a second Sphinx and they dug it out and they're like, oh shit. Look at that Sphinx. Ooh. Tootoo. Like you said, with one today. The Nurtra. That's weird. Weird head. Like it's got pointy years, right? Those years pointing or is that just where the hair goes? How weird. Fail. Maybe it was a chick. And they're like, nah, I'm making my face. One big trick. Take one big breath. Yeah, one hard one. Fucking arm is jacked. Yeah. I don't like it. Little too much. There's a take over now. Three breaths if you want. Yeah. And it weird that we like two, but we don't like three. Three is three. It's gross. Because it's weird, that middle part, you don't want the separation naturally. You don't want like a third's, it's like a fucking, you know. Our own girl would have to be to pull off a third tit. They'd be like, I think I like it. I didn't like it when I first met her, but now I really like doing one now. What do you want? Why not? The first, where in the future, total recoil? If it was normal to have three boobs, that's what we would like. That's weird. Like the female shape, the desired female shape, like the fertility doll shape. It's very weird how that could have been a bunch of different shapes. Like for an ant, it's something a little high on its ass. Exactly. Yeah. But this is also a thing. Why are we sort of obsessed with ass? I don't know. I am obsessed with an ass. And shit comes from it. Like you shit horrible things from your ass. But yet I love looking at that ass. People are complex. The dream of biting that ass. Like why? When I know fecal comes from it. People are confusing. We're confusing to each other. I'm confused that myself, it should be. I really am. But I love myself. Mike Tyson told me to never speak bad about myself because my conscious doesn't, my subconscious doesn't know whether I'm joking or not. Right. Ooh, that's wise. I think he heard that from fucking Bruce Lee though. I'm not gonna lie. I heard Bruce Lee say that I'm some chiris. I was like damn Mike. And then I heard Bruce Lee say it. This something true to that for sure. There's no doubt. No doubt. Yeah. Yeah. I was calling myself a jerk or a schmuck. I'm not. What's this jamming? Look at the oldest known pictures of the Sphinx. This is the oldest known. So part of it's still underground. Somewhere on 1850 to 1860. Wow. I'm trying to be here. It's this is X8 and I need to. That's nuts. Well, it looks so strange. The whole thing is so strange, man. That place is so old. This, even if you just go by what they think, which is 4,500 years ago, they built this thing, that's so crazy. That's so fucking long ago. Well, now they're going to have fucking Rico Verhoov and who else fight there, right? Oh, yeah. And who's sick? And who's sick and fucking Verhoov and fight there? That's nuts. That's kind of bugged out. It is kind of bugged out. But I liked the idea of using the backdrop. No, the natural arenas. The real wonders are really we should have it in Rome. We should have it in, you know? By the way, it's hot as fuck out there. It's in the sandstorms. Because it's going to work. What are they going to do? How's this going to work? Right. What if there's a fucking sandstorm in the middle of the fight and they get sand in their eyes? They're swinging blind. They fucking tried to do it in Times Square. I was a mess. Yeah, that didn't work out so well. The fights weren't that good either. Except to your female. Do your female fought really well. Well, you got to bring them right people. Yeah. Someone was saying that it's almost like they're paying them so much that these guys are scared to lose. That they're, you know what I mean? Like that was the argument about that Times Square car. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Because the Saudis came in and they just went rowing at the truck. They don't like rap, huh? They probably do. Well, they haven't holled at me. Oh, man. I don't think I could go there. Yeah. I'd be interested in seeing the Middle East. I'd be interesting to see. I'd be interesting to see all these places, man. I've been to a lot of places on Earth but never over there. I've been to Dubai briefly for a UFC weigh-in and the UFC, which was in Abu Dhabi. Yeah. So I've been there for that. And it was great. That was a long time ago. But obviously it was the best possible conditions. Absolutely. From there with the UFC standing in an ISO tell. A lot of money over there, man. I'll tell you that. Like when you're in Dubai and this was quite a while ago. So Dubai is even crazier now. I mean, the construction there is just nuts. It's just so fucking like high tech and everything's beautiful and no crime. It looks like it seems like a great place to be. Yeah. And it'll be most important to Dubai just because there's no crime. Yeah, but there's no hash either. Yeah, right. There's hash but then I'll let you smoke it. Bro, you get caught with that. You go to jail forever. Oh, they're the ones who've been making it for fucking millions of years. What the hell? I know in that crazy. I'm keeping it for themselves. I wonder why they make it so illegal over there. Doesn't make sense. Yeah. Because if they didn't, I wonder if they're just worried about like people behaving foolishly. Because they don't have any tolerance for fucking around over there. Well, you fucking see Amsterdam. That places a goddamn mess when it comes to weed. Even since they made weed legal in America in some places, it's a fucking, it's a carnival. It's terrible. Yeah, it makes it, huh? Amsterdam is. No, no, no, just places in America also like New York now that weed is legal. It's disgraceful. And what were? Just the culture like people smoking weed in fucking in the street like openly, not just openly, but like obnoxiously. Like everything is obnoxious. Like weed smoke everywhere. Not just that's just the way it's done is obnoxious. It's just like we can finally do it legally. Yeah, let's fucking go. Let's be real stupid about it. Do you think that that'll eventually settle down? And this is just because it's a new thing that's legal? Probably. I think so. It's just really not even the people who like, you know, it's not like I'm a connoisseur of smoking weed, but I kind of am. And I like to do it in a certain way, but I'm not judging how anyone else does it, but I feel like my way is best. I hear you saying it. Nice and chill. Yeah. Chilling in the crib. You don't want to know why other people with it. That's the problem. Not having to be like old school back in the day. I used to come into this class smelling like the most weed that I possibly could. Because that was what I was trying to exude. I was trying to be cool. Coming and smelling like this. Yeah, you're trying to blow it on you. Oh man. Bro, you go in and like, who's fucking smite? That was like some rush being in class and that happened. Like you and you're all stoned and shit in the bag. It worked out for you. It did. A lot of people probably thought it wouldn't though, right? There's no doubt about it. Are you kidding me? Nice. I've been so short my whole life. It'd be funny too. The people that had a bad opinion of it back then and they look at you now like, boy, did I call that one wrong? Just in general man like, I did all right. I did all right. I've been reflecting a lot under the stars and in nature. Well, we're over landing. Yeah, because when I'm not over landing now I'm camping. Oh. Now I'm camped. Stay. Now I'm at camp. Base camp. I'm not a grounding. Take my shoes off. Feel the grass. Dude, I went down a crazy space rabbit hole last night. I was going down this rabbit hole of black holes. And you remember Jamie I told you about that black hole? They found that's as big as our galaxy. Not our galaxy. Excuse me, our solar system. They found a black hole that is so big, that it's bigger than from here all the way to Pluto. Well, they found one now that's bigger than our galaxy. They found a black hole that's larger than the, I think it's called Phoenix A. See if we can find the Phoenix A black hole. If it's larger than the galaxy, there's really no measurement of what this is. Well, even think about you saying, yo, it's bigger than our galaxy. What the fuck is that? What the fuck is that? The way this person in this video was explaining it, it's so insane because the amount of time that it would take for a black hole to suck in that much matter to become that massive, there's not enough time since the birth of the universe. That's what their, so their confused as to how it's formed. They're like, well, maybe we're wrong about how these things are formed. It's roughly a hundred times larger than the distance between the sun and Pluto with a diameter of roughly five hundred and ninety billion kilometers. Unlike many supermassive black holes that inhibit star formation, Phoenix A is currently in a phase of rapid growth consuming enough matter to grow about 60 solar masses per year. Zectivity drives high rates of star formation and it's surrounding galaxy. Fuck. Is there any way to diagnose this black hole from here? Can we see it through any telescope and can you detect it? But I don't understand how they detect it. But any of them, can we see any of them in real time? You can't really see a black hole. What you see is everything around the black hole getting sucked into it. Yeah, well, you see some sort of like weird movement, no? Right. I saw this, I thought you were going to head towards this. I saw this within the last couple of days. Anzympetrov? No, no, the Milky Way lives in this thing called a void that is like a black hole, but it's like two billion light years across. And we're in the middle of it. Why? I think that picture is like an example of what that would be. There's nothing else around us. That's perfectly true. So is that circle supposed to be the Milky Way? Yeah, that would be the Milky Way. That's the galaxy. And then there's a billion light years to be the direction. But that's Earth. I know, that's the perfect. Again, it's not the best Earth is in the Milky Way, so it's showing you that. OK, so the Milky Way is just in the center of a void. Is that uncommon? I don't know. I don't know. That's the thing. I think all these galaxies in the center of a void. But just the idea that there's a supermassive black hole out there that's 100 times more massive or 100 times larger than the distance between Earth and Pluto. Like what? What is this? What? This is why we have to be smoking weed in front of a green street green talking about this. And having weird people come on in common, do you have been paying attention to those news about these UFO researchers and scientists that are going missing? Yeah. What do you think of that? Listen, don't top doctors go missing. Don't top physicists go missing. Don't fucking ash them. All these fucking people were in facts. Power positions. Not just position of high intelligence knowledge. Yeah. They go by by the best heart surgeons on Earth. Seven of them were on the same fucking plane that went down. What do you know? Yeah. Whatever. Whatever. They just found the cure for cancer. These 10 doctors, they're on a P.J. to fucking who the hell knows where and they go down. Jesse wrote a good write up about him all that I think explains the angle we would prefer to hear about, you know, like conspiracies and UFOs and stuff. So he thinks it's a conspiracy. I don't know. He's laying out the possibility of it being discouraged. And at least from that angle. It's just crazy that all these top doctors and top things and physicists and just like these people just disappear. One of them was a general who's also he's the general's no shit. He was he was in charge of I think the UFO program. Right. If there is one. But if you didn't he just leave the house with just a gun. I don't hear it. It's on the screen what he left with. He took a red backpack his wallet and a 38 caliber revolver. Left behind his phone. He left behind his phone. His wife reported missing within three hours despite FBI involvement Air Force office of special investigation search dogs, drones, helicopters, horseback teams, clear sweeps and 700 canvas households. No confirmed sightings of McCassland has ever surfaced. Surveillance cameras covered both ends of his street. None captured his direction of travel after weeks of searching. The only item returned recovered was a gray Air Force sweatshirt a mile east of his house. Testig could not confirm it was his. He was the first one to disappear and then another one disappeared and they're like they actually might have worked together and then like every other day it's like another one and another one and another one. Also if you knew something that the whole world didn't know, if you knew the human race was just a bunch of soul containers for some super advanced alien race that just uses us as a farm. And what's the purpose? Alien race that just uses us as a farm. Yeah, here's the purpose. Name pops up this because his name was in the. Well, just an empty body with fucking aliens hosting us. Hack emails from Hillary Clinton's campaign chairman, John Podesta revealed correspondence from Tom DeLong, naming McCassal and directly. DeLong. I'm saying it wrong. Tom DeLong. DeLong. DeLong wrote that McCassaland helped assemble his advisory team was deeply aware what DeLong was trying to achieve, had received a four hour briefing on the project. DeLong added that McCassaland ran the laboratory at Wright Patterson where the Roswell material was shipped. But that's all speculation. What's the part? The Roswell material. He keeps talking about his eyes well and he's mad at this. So much whiley. Why is it always like told us how good that she was on. Say it again. He did run. It was in charge of the Air Force lab at Wright Pat. That's why it's linked to the Roswell material. That could be the. The wrong two. It could be the part you put in parentheses. Mm hmm. But he did run that lab. It's all very interesting because that is the lore was that that's where the wreckage was shipped. But and then that the one we talked about yesterday, Monica Res, I looked her up. She is known for being on a patent of some super metal alloy. I was looking that up yesterday. Doesn't mean anything specifically. This is the lady that vanished. Right. She was the lady that was hiking. Her friend turned around saw her kept hiking, said something to her, kept hiking, turned around a little while later and she was gone. Yes. No one ever found her. Co invented an alloy called Mondyloy, which is used in rocket engines currently. Don't, don't, don't. Come on. And maybe working on some new shit. Uh huh. Maybe. I mean, those people who got those patents through all those metal, like the fucking guy who got the patent to the clip that turns the gun into an automatic or the, that's that shit. Right. Those little components turned bigger things into like super situations. This is like a crazy alloy for spaceships. Yeah, but it's kind of weird. It's kind of weird that, of course, but it's kind of weird that that lady is the lady that goes missing. So if you were a competitor or country, I could see why you'd want to take out one of those scientists, you know, definitely, if you were involved in another industry that might be harmed by her work, like if her work would make your work obsolete, you might get rid of her. Get rid of her. That's right. Look, that's always happened. People have always done that. You can't take it out of the equation. You've got to thoroughly investigate. This is, it's a story as old as time. It is, right? You get rid of one person and the next one comes in. If they're threatening to you, they go bye-bye. Especially in big business, like rocket engines and alloys and space travel and something as small as fucking numbers betting. They kill you for betting numbers, right? I'm not going to kill you for that. Truth. Nothing but truth, man. Well, that's the brother. Thanks for being here. Tell us, everybody, one more time, your album. Give us a fuck. Come on, dog. We do. I'm not here for that. But I just need to say hello. I'm going to like to get people to check it out because you think they're going to give a shit? I think they will. Yeah, they like your fucking planted frog coming out. We're a Sue, man. We dropping out. You already know you've got hype shit. Hype shit. You know, I got all kinds of things. I got many projects on the way for the year. Fuck, that's delicious. Always. That's always going down. Always. You know that. KG barbecue. You're going to make them a star. Yeah. That was a good workout. KG or KB? KG. KG. Yeah. I wanted to make sure. Like I said, I'm not. I just want to come and work out with you and just fucking chill, kick it, talk some fucking fights. Anytime, sir. Anytime. That's it. It's always fun to hang with you. You too, bro. Come on, brother. Like I said, I'm going to give a fuck about my album. Fuck that shit. Well, fuck everything else. I'm here for a good time. Well, it was a good time. Thank you. Appreciate you over. You too. All right. All right. Fire, buddy.