We're about to play you an interview we did  with US Ambassador to Israel Mike Huckabe two days ago in Israel. In general, it's never worth  talking about the backstory behind an interview. It's kind of not the point. It makes it about the  interviewer, not the person being interviewed for one thing. For another, it's not that interesting  most of the time. Um, and for another, it's kind of off the record. you know, the other person  hasn't consented to you telling the story. So, in general, we don't do that. Who'd want to hear  that? Let the interview speak for itself. But in this case, we want to tell you just a few things  about how this interview came about because they are pretty interesting, revealing, and now weirdly  relevant apparently. So, this interview with Mike Huckabe came about a couple of weeks ago um on  Twitter. One of our producers showed me, he said something to the effect of, "You're talking  to Middle Eastern Christians, Tucker Carlson. Maybe you should talk to me. Why don't you come  do an interview?" And I paused for a minute. I thought in the past about trying to interview  Mike Huckabe, whom I've known for over 30 years and worked adjacent to at Fox and I had mixed  feelings about it. Um, mostly because it's hard if you're me to interview Mike Huckabe because of  just the personal affect. to my cuckabe is jovial, comes off as friendly. He's a grandfather when  annoyed. I can be nasty in interviews. And so it's it takes a lot of self-control to interview  someone like Mike Huckabe. Not not cuz I hate him, but because it's hard to ask him tough questions  and not come off as a jerk, which I often am. So, but I thought in this case, yeah, I should  definitely do this. Um, for a bunch of different reasons. mainly the United States is  moving toward a big war, a real war with Iran, a regime change war. Um, the biggest war we've  had since the invasion of Iraq in the spring of 2003. And Israel is driving that. We are  doing this at the behest, at the demand of the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. So, it  seems like now is the time for more Americans to understand the dynamic between the US and Israel  and to call attention to that. And for another, Huckabee's behavior in the last year in Jerusalem  as the ambassador has been very very striking. He famously had a meeting with the most damaging  spy in American history. Um, and why did he do that? He hadn't been asked uh by anybody up  until two days ago, why did you do that? So, I I wanted to be able to ask him that. Um, and so  we accepted and then began the usual negotiations about when and where the interview would take  place. And we were constrained because we weren't expecting this. We wanted to do it quickly, but  we had tons of travel. So, we threw them a date, them being the American embassy, uh, we can do it  on this date. And they were very accommodating. And then the question became, well, where do we  do it? And maybe a Christian holy site. We said, we've got to get in and out really quick. Got  to be back to do a bunch of other interviews, but we've got this time frame. They said, "Well,  why don't you do it at the US embassy or maybe we set that?" Great. US embassy. So, the US embassy  is about an hour 55 minutes from the big airport in uh Israel, Bengarian. So, we said, "Okay, what  about security?" Now, at this time, the Israeli government, the prime minister included, were  attacking me in this show. Netanyahu suggested I was a Nazi, uh, for example. And so, we  thought, you know, how about security? Obviously, um not because the Israeli government necessarily  would do something bad, but because there are a lot of people in Israel who think because they've  been told, you know, that I'm an anti-semite or a Nazi or want to kill Jews, this kind of crazy  overstatement. Um all untrue, obviously. Uh but it would be good to have security. And I should  say, uh having done interviews on six out of seven continents over 35 years, I'm not very security  conscious at all. never really feel uncomfortable, but this seemed like a a prudent thing to do.  So, we were told by the embassy spokesman, "No, we're not going to provide security." And so, we  said, "Okay, I guess we'll get private security, but could we get someone from the embassy to  ride in the car with us from the airport to the interview?" And we were told, "No, could  we get what they call a control officer, just an American with us, an offic, you know, in  an official capacity as a embassy employee with us?" No. quote, "For legal reasons, we can't do  that." So, I thought, "Well, that's very strange." And then they said, "But instead, we're turning  you over to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, MFA, and they're going to arrange everything in  Israel." Well, this was within 24 hours of the Deputy Foreign Minister, Sharon Haskell, releasing  a video calling me an anti-semite and an enemy of Israel. This was the person who the embassy was  telling us was going to handle all of our travel. So it was at this point that I just called I  called the spokesman from for the US embassy in Israel and I said okay I'm an American citizen  responding to an invitation from the American ambassador to Israel and by the way I'm the son of  US ambassador so I have some sense not an expert obviously but I have some sense of how this works  and I think that the US ambassador has discretion to send somebody from his office to the airport  to accompany someone in. I think that's right. And if it's not right, tell me what law you're talking  about, what legal reason you're talking about that would prevent that. And now you're sending me over  to a government official who's been calling me a Nazi. That's the person in charge of getting us  to the embassy. Like, what is going on here? And the embassy spokesman, who's totally nice, said,  "Well, this was the decision of someone called David Brownstein. He's the DCM, the number  two guy in the embassy." And I said, "Well, put him on a text exchange. Like, what is going on  here?" And so Branstein got on and didn't answer the question, but basically said, well, okay,  let's just do the interview at the airport in the diplomatic reception area at the airport. Okay. I  said, um, we're going to be flying in from Europe, uh, and we had to be in and out really quickly,  so at great expense, we chartered a plane, which I never do cuz I'm cheap. Um,  but we did. And so then I said to them, "Okay, I want to send you uh the flight  information, tail number, flight number, route, um and I want you to pass that on to the Israeli  military just so you know they don't mistake us for an Iranian drone or something." I mean, not to  be paranoid, but again, this is probably the most violent country in the world, Israel. Is there a  country in the world where a higher percentage of the population has held a gun or shot someone?  I mean, I don't know the answer, but this is a country uh famously waging a sevenfront war  with all of its neighbors, you know. So, this is also the country that bombed the USS  Liberty knowing, we know this from NSA intercepts, that it was an American ship. So, don't, you know,  just send the military our flight information and uh, you know, we can all just sort of know it's on  the record and we can all calm down a little bit. No, they said the US embassy said, "No, this  is your flight is not a a matter of concern to the Israeli military." I said, "Okay, now  now you're making me uncomfortable. Isn't the airspace of Israel the purview of the Israeli  military? Aren't they in charge of maintaining the integrity of their airspace? When you fly over  the country of Israel or any country, its military keeps track of you because that's their job. So,  why wouldn't you send our flight information to the Israeli military? You're making me nervous.  I sent this exchange. I took a a screenshot of it and sent it to a bunch of people, including in the  US government um because I'm not a paranoid person and I'm not a jumpy person. I said, "Is this weird  behavior?" Yeah, it's really weird behavior. All of them said that. So, I got pretty aggressive and  just said, "Look, you got to do this." Okay. and they to their credit got back to us and said yes  we will we will do that but I just thought that was completely bizarre and menacing by the way  now at the same time and I think this is relevant certainly it goes to motive I was attempting to  set up a meeting as I have been for the past 3 months with the prime minister of Israel Benjamin  Netanyahu who I've dealt with a lot in the past um and who denounced me as a Nazi uh in public  a member of the woke reich And why was I trying to do that? Not an interview. I knew he wouldn't  sit for an interview. Um but I wanted just to meet with him in person. One, to show that I'm willing  to go to Israel. I don't hate Israel as a country. Um but two, just to to say directly to him, this  is bad. This should be deescalated. This kind of rhetoric doesn't help anybody. Calling people  calling me specifically a Nazi and an anti-semite when you know that I'm not. By the way, if I  was, I would just admit it. I've said many times, I think anti-semitism is immoral. It's against  my religion, just as hating any group on the basis of their bloodline is immoral. So, the new  year is here, but that does not mean you've got to overhaul your whole life despite claims to the  contrary. You don't have to take drastic measures. Make a few changes here and there, and you'll be a  lot better off. And you can start with the snacks in your pantry. Now, products from standard  American chip brands are, let's be honest, pretty repulsive, filled with chemicals. They make  you feel heavy and bloated. They don't even taste that good. They're not good for you. We recommend  an upgrade with Masa chips. Masa is the easiest way to eat clean without feeling like you're on a  diet. The chips contain three ingredients. That's it. Organic corn, sea salt, 100% grass-fed  beef tallow, and that is it. No seed oils, no mystery chemicals, just food, actual food. And  they're amazing. and you feel great after. You don't feel weighed down. We particularly enjoyed  the coinero flavor lately, but they're all great. You want to give them a try, visit masachips.com,  masach.com/tucker. Use the code Tucker for 25% off your first order, or you can click the link link  in the video description, or you can scan the QR code to claim this outstanding offer. Um, and  so I really pushed hard for this meeting and I called a lot of people who know him and who are  in regular contact with him. In fact, I went to go see some of those people directly. Please,  can you help me get a sit down for 5 minutes with Benjamin Netanyahu and I probably called or  met with six, seven, eight, maybe more people on this question. People in official capacities,  people in the Israeli government. I know I know a number of people in the Israeli government,  people in Israel, a friend of mine in California who knows him. I mean, I really really tried and I  did so for two reasons. Um, one, because there was a threat to my family, uh, the Israeli government  and Netanyahu himself tried to punish two members of my family. I won't be more specific, but  actually punish two members of my family because he, as he has said in public many times, believes  in blood guilt. Amalecch. You know, when someone commits a crime against you, you punish not  just him, but his family, his bloodline. There's no idea that's less western than that, more  anti-Christian than that. Christians reject that. Um Netanyahu doesn't. That's why he's talking  about Amalcch. And he was going after my family, literally. Uh so I felt very threatened by that.  But moreover, I think it's bad for my country to have people using that kind of language. Round  them up, bring them to the camps, gas chambers, Nazis, anti-semitism. It scares the heck out of  people. It makes people crazy and hysterical. And certainly in my case, none of that is true. I hate  collective punishment. I hate attacking people on the basis of their bloodline. I hate anti-semitism  and anti-white racism and all of this, any kind of racism, period. And I've said that a lot. So using  that kind of language against someone who is not fundamentally your enemy who just in my case I  want Christians in areas controlled by Israel to be treated with dignity to have rights and I don't  want the US government involved in a war a regime change war with Iran. Those are my priorities and  I've said them out loud. I have no secret agenda. So to attack me as a Nazi for saying that suggests  a total unwillingness um to compromise. You know, anyone who doesn't agree with us 100% must be  destroyed. His family must be attacked. My family um and must be written off as a Nazi. Well,  when you do that, it makes people hysterical. It increases the temperature to a point that,  you know, someone's going to get hurt if you keep talking that way. And it's just bad. It's bad  for the United States. it's bad for the world. So, I wanted to deliver that message. Um, I  finally wind up wound up talking to a guy called Yorum Hazonei who is an Israeli who  famously organizes uh the American conserv national conservatism conferences. And I said to  him, look, you're having a national conservatism conference in Jerusalem uh this summer. You  asked me to speak at the first, I think the first national conserv conservatism conference  in the United States and I did. Obviously, I believe in national conservatism, America first.  I think every nation should put its own people first. That's why you have governments. Um, and  I would like to speak at this one. And moreover, I would like you to ask your friend Benjamin  Netanyahu to meet with me. And we had this sort of long back and forth. And it was, "No, you cannot  speak at the National Conservatism Conference because you're an anti-semite." "No, I'm not." I  said, "Yes, you are," he said. And I said, "Well, I really would like to speak to BB to kind of  deescalate this." and he said, uh, it would not be in his political interest to meet with you. That's  almost verbatim what he said. Uh, therefore, no. So then I realized, you know, you're dealing with  people who are unreasonable, who are inflexible, who are in fact fanatical. Uh, and then add to  that, of course, that my tax dollars are paying them. You know, it's all pretty distressing. So  that was the backdrop um behind our very brief and highly intense trip to Israel. So we show up  on Wednesday, fly in from Europe again at great expense. Um and show up at the diplomatic terminal  of Bengurian airport where this interview is going to take place which is bizarre in itself. Filthy  building. The windows are so dirty in the terminal you can't see out them barely. There's like  exposed drywall. The whole thing is depressing and grim. There's litter outside. Like what is this?  This is the diplomatic terminal in Israel. Um I thought that was very strange having been in a lot  of diplomatic terminals. I've never seen a rattier one. We go in and Huckabe's there and of course  he's totally friendly as he always is. um very very friendly guy and uh cheerful and we sort of  chat and the whole place is filled with these guys in t-shirts, thuggish looking guys in t-shirts who  are some kind of security. So we do the interview, you're about to watch it. Um it's very long at  2 and a half hoursish and I try my hardest to be friendly. Uh I think I kind of succeeded. You can  judge for yourself. Um, but you I really got the sense and again you can decide as you watch it  that uh Huckabe was not well able to answer any of the questions um but also not really in charge.  You really got the feeling of a guy sort of trying his best to to repeat the talking points but very  constrained like unable to say certain things not because those things might harm the interest  of the US government. He was happy to attack, for example, the US military and say they're more  brutal than the Israeli military. Okay. Um but unwilling to say certain things because they might  reflect poorly on the Israeli government. And you sort of thinking about this for a second. You're  like, "Wait, you're the US ambassador. You're our representative to a foreign country. Why is your  red line criticism of that country? Shouldn't you be representing us?" And it was very obvious he  was representing the Israelis. Obvious. And again, you can judge for yourself. But anyway, so we do  this interview. It was cordial. And at the end, uh, we're set to fly out. We have a time. We  have to get out. And the plane is sitting right outside. And we're ready to go. And for some  reason, the Israelis still have our passports. There are five of us um there. And four of us  are flying out on this plane. One's flying out commercial with our gear. So my business partner  and I were standing there. We we've never left the airport, never went anywhere. But our two  producers have spent the night in the night before in Tel Aviv, and they're called into rooms  and given the third degree. Now, keep in mind, they're about to get on a plane and leave. In  fact, we're late. We have to get out of there. We have a slot to get out. And security, whoever this  is, won't won't let them go. So, I don't really know what's going on at this point. I'm like,  "Where are our guys? We got to get out of here." So, one of them comes out and he says, "That  was the weirdest experience of my life. They asked me questions about the interview.  Who did you speak to?" Keep in mind, this was like 8 ft from where we did the  interview. Well, the US ambassador Mike Huckabe, what did you talk about? Why did you ask those  questions? Was it a hostile interview? Of course, everything in the diplomatic terminal is taped.  Everything in Israel is taped. It's a police state. It's a surveillance state. Obviously, you  go to Israel, they put software on your phone. Everybody knows this, okay? They're constantly  spying on you more than probably any other country. And so they know the answers to these  questions, but they're asking my producer like, "Where do you work? How many people work there?  Do you go to the office? Where is the office? What are their names?" They're doing like an intel  op and humiliation exercise on my producer. This isn't security. We're leaving right now. And  they're holding his passport. The interrogator is holding the passport in his hand as he's asking  these questions. So he's telling me this and I'm I said, "This is the most outrageous thing I've  ever heard. Puckabe's gone by this point. You're an American citizen who's just had a conversation  with the US ambassador and some thug is demanding details of that conversation and I hope you didn't  answer." And he's like, "No, I I didn't. I don't know what to say." Meanwhile, our last guy, our  the youngest man who was traveling with us, our last producer is still in a room being questioned.  So, I pull over one of the guys and said, "I I we got to get out of here." So, I don't know  what this is about. It's outrageous. And you know, there's nothing I can do about this point, but we  got to go. And this woman comes up to me and says, "Look, let's just go. We're going to bring you to  the plane and he'll come later." I said, "No, it's my producer. He's being interrogated. ask totally  over-the-top, fully inappropriate questions that have nothing to do with security at all. You know,  pull up your website, show us your text exchanges with other people on your staff, what what are  your politics like? And again, what did you say to the US ambassador and what did he say back to you?  Those are not relevant questions if you're trying to keep your country secure. Those are intel  questions and they're over the top. And I said, I want this guy out now. Let's go. You know, we got  to go. Oh, and they said, "No, no, just leave him here. We'll bring him to the plane later." Twice  they told me that. Just leave your guy behind. No, I don't think so. So, I was enraged by this. Um,  get on the plane, we get a text from a reporter who somehow knew that this had happened. I have  no idea how. I had no interest in publicizing it, actually. Um, there was, you know, a a long  trail that showed that the US embassy had been coordinating against us in a in a public relations  battle before we even got there. You know, they were leaking that we we demanded to do it  at the airport because we were afraid to go into Israel. We're cowards. Okay. We're cowards, right?  Um, and so I just said to the reporter by text, you know, they pulled my guys into a room  interrogating them. This is outrageous, etc., etc., etc. The interesting thing is I never  heard from Huckabe or anybody to this moment from the US embassy about what security did to my  producers. They didn't ask us and instead Huckabe went out and called me a liar. So, it raises again  the question, who exactly is Huckabe working for? We're American citizens in a foreign country.  He's our ambassador. He represents our country. We pay his salary, but he's taking the side of the  foreign government without even calling to say, "Hey, what happened to you at the airport? Did  you get hassled? Did your guys get hassled?" No. He just immediately repeats their lies. without  even consulting us. So like what are we looking at here? We're looking at the reality which is if  you're an American in Israel, you can be certain that your government will take the side of the  Israeli government and not your side. And really, is that so different from the experience of  Americans in the United States? Can you be sure that your government will take your side over the  Israeli government? No, of course not. will always take the Israeli government's side over yours. And  that's the core problem. Even if if you support a war with Iran, I think we really the most pressing  issue for Americans is that we kill the Ayatollah or whatever, you still have a fair expectation  that your government because it is yours, you pay for it. It exists to serve you and for  no other reason. and you have an expectation that your government will take your side against  a foreign government. But the daily lived reality, the obvious truth visible to every single American  is that's the opposite of reality. In fact, if you criticize Israel in your country, your  government will work to censor you. If there's a standoff between you and BB, you know whose side  your government's going to take? BB's side. That is not sustainable. That is too humiliating. It's  too clearly an inversion of the natural order. Your government exists for you, not for a foreign  government. But that's not how we live in this country or in Israel. So that's what we learned.  And one last thing, the Israelis apparently went may probably with the help of Mike Huckabe went  to uh the surveillance tape inside the diplomatic terminal and pulled some clip and they're of  course getting all their little bots online to promote it of me with my arm around somebody to  show that actually I'm lying about what happened. That person was our driver who drove  us from the plane to the terminal, a short drive. Very nice guy, good guy, Israeli  guy. And um right when we arrived and he said, "Could I get a picture?" Of course. He's a  nice man. So I just put my arm around him, took a picture. That's what that is. That was  before the interview. It was before uh our producers were hassled by the thugs um and asked  ridiculous questions. It was before any of this happened. So that's just uh another installment  of the propaganda war. I thought we'd give you the backstory on that. People seem to be more  inflamed, not just emotionally, but physically, and more tired than ever. And food is part of  the reason. Bad food tastes good, but not good for you. For most of human history, people ate  actual food, stuff that your body recognizes, but now you eat a ton of chemicals. Paleo Valley  is the solution to this. Paleo Valley's bone broth protein is made from, let's see, 100% grass-fed  and finished beef bones. That's it. No fillers, no additives, no weird industrial byproducts. It's  actual food turned into something you can consume every day. Most people use it the way we do. You  blend it into a smoothie or coffee. The chocolate flavor is top tier. It actually tastes awesome.  They also have vanilla and salted caramel. Plus, they make a savory original turmeric ginger and  an unflavored version you stir into soup, rice, or even just mix with hot water and drink like  bone broth. You could do any of those things or all of them. Americans use Paleo Valley to support  joints, digestion, recovery. Paleo Valley verifies sourcing and test for pesticide. And that does  matter. You don't want to drink pesticide, though you probably do inadvertently. If you want  to add something genuinely useful to your diet, visit paleo valley.com and use the code Tucker  for checkout. 20% off your first order if you do that. That's paleo valley.com code tucker for  20% off. So, with that, here is our interview with Ambassador Mike Huckabe. I hope it's informative.  Ambassador, thank you very much for having us, for inviting me. I was grateful to be invited.  Thank you. I I was grateful cuz I don't like all the the name calling. I've engaged in some of  it. I want to apologize for that. I don't but I in general, I don't think people should be going  immediately to motive calling each other Nazis or anti-semmites. I said I hate the Christian  Zionists. I lost control of myself. Of course, I don't. I've apologized for that. I  have problems with my anger. And so, I just want to apologize to you since you are a  Christian Zionist. You and I have known each other for over 30 years. Over 30 years. That is totally  true. Back when you were in Little Rock. So, yes, the newspaper. It's why I wanted us to have a  conversation, talk to each other and not about each other. And I appreciate very much you're  coming here to of course. And I'm only staying a couple hours unfortunately because I kind of  shoehorned this in. But I hope that I'll be back soon and I hope that I can come back soon cuz I  want to I actually like despite what you may hear, I actually like the country. I've been here a lot  and there are a lot of things I love about it and um and I want to talk to people in it for like  a week. Good. And get a better sense of it. Um so I want to ask you, everyone I've talked to in  in preparation for this has said the same thing. Jonathan Pard like can exp I'm just gonna show the  the name to you and have you explain. No, I'm glad you asked. You know, interestingly, there's been  a lot of things about it. You're the first person who has asked me about it, which I find amazing.  So, I'm glad you did. Really? Yeah. The very first. Well, it's better to like hear it. Sure.  I met Jonathan Pard two times. Once I was making a speech in Jerusalem. This has been a few years  ago. His wife was still alive at the time. And he was there. and someone introduced me to him and  his wife. I said hello to them. That was it. Hi, nice to meet Esther, his wife. And that was it.  I went and made my speech and I left. Um later his wife passed away uh here in Israel. And I  sent him a note and just said, "I'm sorry to hear about your wife." I remember meeting her at  the hotel and uh sorry to hear it. He then asked, "Could he come and see me?" He wanted to come and  thank me for being kind to him. Um, he came to the embassy. I think we met for maybe 30 minutes. We  had a nice, pleasant visit. The funny thing was the New York Times reported that it was a secret  meeting. Tucker, if you've ever been to the US Embassy, you would know there's no such thing  as a secret meeting at the US Embassy. There are cameras everywhere. You walk through Marines,  you walk through security, you walk through the front office, and there's a dozen or more people  that are going to check you out when you come. And before you get there, you're going to have to give  us your passport information. You're going to have to be vetted and screened and all of this stuff.  So, the idea that it was secret was ludicrous. The whole idea is, look, Jonathan Pard did something  that was terribly wrong. Um, he sold secrets. He shouldn't have done it. He was sentenced to 30  years in prison and spent 30 actually was I think yeah I think he was sentenced to maybe more than  30 years but he spent 30 years in prison. Most people convicted of something similar uh which  was one count I believe would have spent two to four but he spent 30. I don't have a problem with  him spending 30 because I think what he did was despicable. I'm not defending anything about what  he did, but even people like the former director of the CIA, um, a number of other senators  on the Senate Foreign Relations of the Senate Intel Committee said that he should be allowed  to leave and move to Israel if he wanted to. So, it to me was not as big a deal that I had this  basically courtesy meeting. He wanted to thank me for being nice to him when his wife died. That's  pretty much the you advocated for his release when you ran for I remember it in 2011 long before he  had served 30 years. And I agree with you that there are a lot of people languishing in prison,  you know, in our country and in this country, many countries, um, you know, for longer periods  than they deserve. And I think it's a Christian impulse to to want to see them free. But this  was the greatest traitor in modern American history who sold our battle plans sold our battle  plans against the Soviet Union, our main enemy in the Cold War to the Israeli government, which  according to our Reagan CIA director, Bill Casey, then gave them to the Soviet Union. So this was  the most profound betrayal of the United States in my lifetime. Why advocate for that guy's  release before he serves his full sentence? If that were the case in 2011, it would have  been because I had a number of friends that uh suggested that he had more than served time  and he didn't want to live in the US anymore. He wanted to live in Israel and uh but my association  with him again I had never met him until I met him in Jerusalem at a hotel. That was the first time  I had ever encountered him. I'm friends with a million bad people or I've talked to a million  bad people. I'm sitting here with you. I mean, come on. I mean, Jesus hate with tax collectors.  So I trust me I am do not judge people who are friends or know or enjoy the company of immoral  people because it's not an endorsement of their immoral behavior. Pard is different I think once  you become US ambassador the representative of the president of the United States in the United  States of America in a foreign country and then you invite not only the most damaging betrayer  in our lifetimes but also a guy who continues to advocate for betrayal. So he gave an interview,  as I know you know, in 2021 to Israeli media in which he said, "I would encourage Jewish  Americans with security clearances to spy for MSAD against their own country, the United  States, because," and I'm pretty much quoting him, "All Jews should have dual loyalty." Mhm. That's a  I mean, that's not repentance. That's not someone who feels bad about what he did. That's someone  who's encouraging American Jews to betray their country. That's pretty heavy, don't you think? Oh,  I do and I disagree with that wholeheartedly. I I think let's remember it was President Trump who  probably facilitated his uh departure and uh I'm certainly supportive of President Trump. I think  you are. And Per's not. He called him a madman after your meeting. That's why I say Per is is  not for me the real issue. It was the fact that he did something that was despicable. I'm not denying  that. Of course he did. And he paid dearly for it. 30 years in prison and he should have that. That's  what he should have done. There's no no question about that. But why meet with him in the US  embassy? Your colleagues said they were shocked. They said who were the colleagues that said they  were shocked. Quoted on background in the New York Times. I think the meeting was in August. I  this could all be fake. That's why I'm asking you. Well, the same New York Times said it was a secret  meeting. And I'm telling you there's no such thing as a secret meeting in the US embassy. Do you see  why the US ambassador hosting a convicted betrayer of his own country who's encouraging Americans  to continue to betray their country would seem shocking? Well, I would say that it wasn't that  I you make it sound like I'm hosting a meeting. I simply met with him. I meet with people all the  time. Some of You just walk in without a No, they have to have an appointment. Of course they do.  Oh, so it is hosting him then, I think. Well, I don't know if it was hosting, but it was certainly  he was able to come to the US embassy to have a meeting at his request. I did, and frankly, I  don't regret it. I I met with a lot of people over the course of the time I've been here, and we'll  meet with a lot more. Um, that's it. So, if you spend the evening at my house, you are guaranteed  to find yourself in a conversation about the Hallow app. We talked about it this morning.  It is the best prayer app ever. This Lent, Hallow's Pray 40 Challenge invites users to step  out of the noise of everyday life and dive into something much deeper. The parable of the prodigal  son. It's a story about a man who leaves home, wastes everything, hits rock bottom, and then  realizes something transformative. He can go back. And when he does go back, he's not punished. He's  welcomed. He's celebrated. That story tells the truth that no matter how far you have gone, you  can still turn around. You're responsible for your next choice. Even if you behaved in deeply unholy  ways, and we all have, mercy still awaits you. This Easter, Hallow's Pray 40 challenge is the  best way to stay in touch with the word of God, the good word. The challenge begins Wednesday,  February 18th, and runs through Easter. Get three months free at hallow.com/tucker. It's the best.  There have been um Americans in prison in Israel. There have also been and there continue to be  dozens and dozens and dozens of sex offenders, accused sex offenders from the United States who  fled to Israel, including one recently, an Israeli government official who was caught trying to  molest a 15-year-old girl and fled to Israel and is not going back to the United States to stand  charges for attempted molestation of a child. Have you advocated for the Israeli government to return  him to the United States? I'm not familiar with that case. It has not come to us at the embassy.  So, I'm not aware. Is this the person in Nevada? That is correct. Okay. County, I would imagine.  So, yeah, I heard about it, but I heard about it through open source media. It was never something  that was presented to us, but I would have no problem with uh him being extradited back to  the US. You're the president's and our country's representative in the state of Israel. So, I think  it would fall to you to advocate with your friend, the prime minister, to say, "Wait a second. We  have a very close relationship. We're obviously the single largest source of outside funding for  this country. How can you take an accused child molester and shield him from American justice?  Send him back to the United States?" Have you ever had that conversation? No. Because the prime  minister would not be the proper person. That may be right. pardon my ignorance but that would deal  with an extradition. It would go through their uh court system and so the prime minister is separate  very similar to what we have in the US where there is a separation of powers. So it would go through  uh something other than the prime minister. Have you advocated to the courts to judges to anybody  in the Israeli justice system? There has never been a request for me to engage in that. I I  would be happy to do it if if the White House sent a message to me. I do work for the president. I  serve it as pleasure. If anyone at the White House were to say to me, would you please go and make a  case for it? But probably if that were to happen, it wouldn't come through the embassy as much as it  would likely come from the Department of Justice at the US in DC. They would make the request. They  might involve us, but they very likely would not. Does it seem strange to you that people accused of  child molestation in the United States are allowed to have refuge in our within the borders of our  closest ally? How? That doesn't make sense to me. Well, I would say that if you've molested  an American child, shouldn't you be required to It's an allegation. Let's be clear. One of  the things about our system of jurist prudence, you're innocent until you're proven guilty beyond  a reasonable doubt. So if the charges are there, should he be extradited? I would say so. The  charges are there. Yeah. Okay. So they should be, but that's a Justice Department decision and  they're the ones who should be pursuing it. To my knowledge, they haven't. They certainly haven't  engaged the US embassy over. Why would the Israeli government harbor fugitives from justice in the  United States? I'm not sure that there dozens and dozens and dozens. In fact, there's an Israeli  group that keeps track of them that is dedicated Jewish Israeli group dedicated to combating the  molestation of children and keeps a long list and any you can look it up and I would I hope  you're not saying that you think the Israelis support the molestation of children. Obviously,  I'm not saying that. I'm saying that the Israeli government allows shields Yeah. accused child  from justice in I'm not sure I could say that that's something that is provable. I don't know.  But I am not aware that the Israeli government is shielding people. You obviously want to sleep  well and fashionably Brooklyn bedding can help. Here at TCN, we take sleep time seriously. Try to  get 8 hours. And a lot of the people here cannot help rave about their Brooklyn bedding mattress.  The first thing you'll notice about your mattress is how stable they feel. That's because they're  built to last for decades, not just years. It's American durability. By the way, we when we bring  in a new advertiser, we have them send stuff to the whole staff and people test it and they love  this. Brooklyn Betting's founder built the company here in the United States from the ground up.  Craftsmanship, grit, no college degree. Their factory is in Arizona. The prices are low despite  the fact they're Americanmade. High-end comfort without the high-end price. What makes these  mattresses so great? Brooklyn Bedding uses copper infused foams and thermmorreulation coated foams  to help keep you cool and comfortable all night. Plus, they offer a 120 night sleep trial.  That's plenty of time to make sure you love it, and we're confident you will. Brit, visit  brooklyn betting.com. Use the promo code Tucker at checkout to get 30% off sitewide.  It's not available anywhere else, only on this show. So, take advantage while you can. Visit  bricklandbetting.com. Promo code Tucker. Well, they are. And I'll give you a And I just want to  make sure that I pronounce this this man's name correctly. It's Tom, I believe, Alexanderich. Um,  I think that's right. And I've written it down, but of course my handwriting is so terrible I  can't uh read it. But yes, he is an Israeli, I believe, cyber security official who was  at a conference in Las Vegas last year and was caught up in a sting uh designed to catch  people soliciting sex from children. He was one of a number of people arrested for this. He  was arraigned and charged and then 2 days later he fled to Israel and did his first hearing by  Zoom. He was allowed for some reason to leave for a foreign country having already been charged  for a attempted molestation of a child and he remains here now and the is and there have been  many news stories about this and I just wonder if you would ask the Israeli government to send  to put him on a plane and send him back to face justice for attempting to molest an American  child. It it doesn't seem complicated. No, I wouldn't mind doing that, but I want to find out  if the Justice Department in the US has already sought to extradite him. Is there anything in  process? I don't know. Why wouldn't they seek to extradite? I have no idea. That's a question for  the Justice Department. I have many questions for the Justice Department. Like, why are millions of  Epstein files still classified? Why do you think that is? I have no idea. I haven't kept up with  that. I've never met the man. I don't know him. You haven't kept up with the Epstein disclosure?  I mean, only from a distance. I'm 6,000 miles but there's no question that he had extensive  contact with CIA. I think you said it a turning point event. Everybody knows Jeffrey Epstein. I  said everyone thinks and it turns out everyone was right that he did have I'm not sure everyone was  right or everyone thinks. Okay, but you said that I was lying and I don't want to make this about I  don't think I said you were lying, Tucker. I don't recall. I'm just saying why don't we release  all the files and then we don't need to guess. I got no problem with that. Go ahead. it. Well,  because you weighed in on it and said that this was not true when of course I said there was no  evidence. Well, there's quite a bit of evidence, but you haven't apparently bothered to read any  of the files. Is that what you're saying? I have not read the Epstein files. Apparently, you have  Well, they're on the internet. But when you say that there's that everybody knows that Jeffrey  Epstein was a massage, that everyone believes that. I don't think everybody does. I don't know.  Oh, well, everyone knows that he had contact with, and by the way, not just Israeli intelligence,  American intelligence, which is more much more distressing for me. I'm not Israeli. I'm American.  I don't want my government having any contact with someone like Jeffrey Epste. So, the shame neither  is on the United States, as far as I'm concerned, just to be totally clear about that. Everyone's  very sensitive about the Israel connection, not at all sensitive about the US connection,  which I find very revealing. We should care about what our government does first, I think. But since  you weighed in on it and said there's no evidence, I'm surprised that since that evidence has been  open to the public for a month, since you've already weighed in publicly on this question,  that you've made no effort to evaluate that evidence. Why is that? I've just told you I was  certainly not aware that there were some specific uh allegations. I knew about the former prime  minister um but I don't know him. I'm not sure I ever met him in my many times. You know, I've  been to Israel over a hundred times since 1973. The first time I came here was 1973, July. And  uh that's almost 53 years of coming and going to this country. So, I know the country well. I know  a lot of people here, but I don't know everything. And I don't know everybody, but I do know a lot  of people. Of course. No. And I and I can see your love for it. And I I think that's great.  I but I'm talking about the US government and its responsibility to you know there's a lot of  complaint about conspiracy theories and everyone you know he's a hater everyone's assigning motive  but there's a way to end these conversations very quickly with facts and I'm highly confused by  have you brought this up to the president? Uh no I don't I don't work for him. I've said this  many times. You don't work for him, but you you go to the White House and you see people there. You  and JD Vance are very good friends. So, have you brought this up to them? Because I have brought  this up in public. It's not on my portfolio, but apparently it's highly very strongly on your  mind and I'm a significant concern for me. Should be for everybody. But if well there's an there  is a charged child molester. But I'm saying if you are very involved in the details of this and  you think it's the US government that's hiding and shielding somebody then bring it up to the  people. But you don't I don't think that I know it because the justice department has said we have  millions of documents we're not releasing. Why are they not releasing them? I I'm asking you as a  US government official. Well, but a government official at the embassy in Jerusalem that has not  one thing to do with the Justice Department and what they're investigating on any given day unless  it involves and I don't want to argue or talk in circles, but you were the one who brought it up  and said it's absolutely not true. I was only responding to what I heard you say. Okay. But now  you know there's evidence and we can settle this debate. you haven't looked at the evidence and  you're not pushing for the release of the total corpus of evidence and I'm confused because I want  to believe that your goal is to get to the truth and the fastest way to do that is by releasing  the evidence. Don't you think you suggest that I can release the evidence? I'm suggesting you  could call for it right now. Well, I fine call for it. I would let's let's have it all open. I  thought it was being all opened up for everything. Once it's open, I hope you'll read it because  it's it's really interesting and then it puts to rest a lot of the the debate and it ends the  name calling because we can say here it is right there and we don't have to call people names. We  can just assess the documents. Let me ask you, would you bring it up? I hope you will bring it  up to people at the White House. I've brought I've brought I'm bringing it up right now. I'm  bringing it up now and I'm asking I just want to say this one last time as the US ambassador to  Israel. I hope that you will make a formal request to the Israeli government to send every accused  sex offender in this country back to the United States to face justice. And I don't understand  why that hasn't been done. I I'm confused. Well, we'll try to clear up all the confusion that we  have. Well, if someone's been accused of trying to molest a child, I think it's then then  certainly and I'll check with the Justice Department because it is a DOJ issue and it would  be handled through DOJ the US to the court systems in Israel. That's how it would be handled. But the  first step is the Israeli government saying yes, we will allow you to extradite this person  back. The person is being shielded by the government. That's why the person's here.  That's why he fled here, so he wouldn't have to stand trial for trying to molest a child.  I want to get to the as I said at the outset, I said something awful that I regret that my wife  barked at me about. Um, I lashed out at Christian Zionists and evangelicals and I'm just want to say  again that I'm sorry. Uh, I've always liked them because they're pro-life and they're also really  nice people. So, for the third time, I'm sorry that I said that. I think part of my problem was  I don't understand the theology and you are not a fake Baptist minister. You're an actual minister.  You had a church for many years. You're an actual theologian. So, and I mean this with sincerity.  I hear people say those who bless Israel will be blessed. I know it's a reference to Genesis.  I don't understand the connection between that concept and modern Israel and the geopolitical  world. And so I'm going to stand back and and let's first define because you know from my days  as a debater in high school and college one of the things I knew you didn't start the debate till you  defined the terms. Amen. Let's define the terms. Thank you. What is what is a Christian Zionist?  What does that mean to you? What does it mean? I don't know. It's the people who call me a Nazi  for asking what Israel means. I mean that's kind of my I don't even know. But here's the point. If  you say a Christian Zionist is a person who has a brain virus and is guilty of heresy, that's  a pretty big charge. I know. I shouldn't have made it. I shouldn't have made it. I made it out  of anger and ignorance. And and I'm Christian, I think we can agree, is somebody who follows  Jesus Christ. Exactly. Has a personal relationship with Jesus Christ, believed in his death,  burial, resurrection, has repented of one's sins, and they've accepted him as one savior. Was that  fair? Christian. Define that Zionist. A Zionist simply means a person who believes that the Jewish  people have a right to have a homeland where they have security and safety. Did you believe that  the Jews have a right to live in Israel? Do you believe that Jews have a right to live in Israel?  I that would be a Zionist. That's all a Zionist is. I have a million questions about what all  of those terms mean. Yeah. But conceptually, I wish Israel no harm. I don't want to see I'm  very You want them to have a a a place where they can live with safety. Let me So I I saw this  recently in an extremely telling exchange between the lieutenant governor of Texas who I know and  I've always liked and a woman I don't know, never met who's on the Religious Liberty Commission  or something. And she said, "I'm a Catholic, but I'm not a Zionist." and they had this ferocious  exchange and he kept saying and everyone on the panel seemed to keep saying you have to believe  in Israel's right to exist which I've never kind of questioned just for the record but it did  raise two questions I think are really important and I hope you'll answer them one is where does  that right come from I would say it comes from essentially you could say it comes from the Bible  I would say that it does but it comes also from a long iteration of historical precedents going to  the Alford Declaration of 1917. It comes from the League of Nations 1927. It comes from the United  Nations 1947. The Declaration of Independence of the Israel State in May of 1948. They were  immediately attacked. They won the war. They were attacked again in 1956. They won the war. They  were attacked again in 1967 by five countries. They won the war. They were attacked again in  1973 in the Yam Kipar war. They won the war. The point is, does Israel have a right to exist?  They also had wars in 1982 in Lebanon. They've had two of those. They've had uh in I was there. Uh  no, I'm very familiar with the modern history of the state. Okay. Pretty familiar, I think. And  I've been a Zionist simply means somebody who believes that Israel has a right to exist. Now,  the question is, do you believe Israel has a right to exist? I guess. I mean, I want Israel to exist.  Well, no, but I want to know what that means. So, like, do other countries have a right to  exist? Well, they do exist. Do they have a right to exist? You keep saying Israel has a  right to exist. And I want to know what other countries have. They have a legal right because  every international body in the last 100 years has said the Jewish people have a right to their  indigenous home. But that's a legal right. Do they have a biblical right? I would say that yes, but  you may say they don't. I don't know. I'm actually sincerely interested in finding out what you  mean by a biblical right. But first to the legal right. Does any other country on the planet have  the same right that Israel has to exist? Well, you could say does Jordan have a right to exist  when it was Trans Jordan and the Brits came and divided up the Middle East and they gave some  land to Jordanians and they gave some land to the Saudis and they gave some land uh to various  Middle Eastern countries and it was all carved up and the French gave Lebanon its right to exist.  Do they have a right to exist? Do they? Well, why not? Okay. So, that's my So, every country,  does the US have a right to exist? I'm asking you. Okay. And I'm telling you, I think the US has a  right to exist. Okay. We came here. We came there. We're in Israel now talking. But does the US have  a right to exist? Does anyone question whether we have a right to exist? I don't. Yeah. But, but I  of course I'm for America, you know. Good for you. But I So every current country on the map has the  same right to exist that Israel has. Is that what you're saying? I think what we're saying is that  when a country has established itself and it is following international law, it has been deemed  by numerous bodies that it is indigenous to its homeland as Israel is. This is its homeland. It  goes back 3,800 years to the time of Abraham. It's not that. Well, hold on. Now I'm getting  the Jewish people just showed up here in 1948 and said we're going to we're going to have some  Hold on. So those are two different tracks and I just want to make sure that we separate them so I  understand each one separately. So you're saying there's the modern legal framework and so you  said a country that abides by international law has a right to exist. I would say that that is a  part would it be would the inverse be true that a country that does not abide by international law  forfeits its right to exist? not necessarily if it has the capacity to stay and make its case known,  but there have been Jewish people in this land, this very land for 3800 years. Okay. So, but  you're saying as the modern nation state with borders and a military and a kessid and just all  the kind of trappings of a modern country, all of which I support, that country has every country on  the planet has the same right as Israel to exist because it does exist. Is that what you're I'm  just trying to understand the concept here. Well, I think what we're trying to get to is Christian  Zionism. And you've taken this way off the road here. I know that I have. I don't mean to.  Um, Christian Zionism is a separate thing, but I just keep hearing people say Zionism is the  belief. That's the fundamental argument that's going on. Does Israel have a right to live  in their indigenous ancient historical land, a land that has been affirmed throughout  international organizations, a land that has direct ties to the Jewish people. I just want  to know if this is a universal principle. I guess that's what I'm getting at because if it's not  then it's meaningless to me because as a Christian I believe in universal principles. Something is  right for everyone or it's wrong for everyone. I don't we don't believe in special cases. Question.  If the Jews didn't have this land, would the Jews have a right to any land? I I don't know. I'm not  attacking the Jews. I'm asking if this applies to every people and every nation. Does every nation  have the same right to its own homeland, to its own physical land that you say Israel does? I feel  like we're in a rabbit hole here. No, I think it's a very straightforward question. Does that right  extend to other countries other than Israel? But the most important thing that is going on in our  culture right now is whether or not the people that are yelling in the streets from the river to  the sea, whether that that's a legitimate point of view to say that there should not be a Jewish  homeland, there should not be a Jewish state. You'll never hear me say I just want to know. I  know you haven't said it, but that's the argument. That's one of the arguments going on globally and  the United States, excuse me, has a pretty narrow view, I would say, in our media culture, what's  happening around the world. There are plenty of countries having this debate. Stonehenge is a lot  older than the first temple in Israel, and it was built by the same people who live there now.  It's the same people, and they are being pushed off their island and outnumbered by people from  other places. And so in Great Britain, in Ireland, which is also a a country with a nation of people,  a race if you will, that is being displaced, replaced. Who are they being replaced by?  Immigrants, okay, from other places. I just wanted to clarify because I was one of the Well, just  as a as a demographic matter, it's just like you can look at the numbers. It's not controversial.  Just look at the numbers. They'll be a minority in their country and their people have been there  longer than than Jews have been in Israel. And so they're having this debate, too. That's all I'm  saying. And lots of places are having this debate. Sure. So, does that principle apply to everyone or  is it specific just to Israel? I think it applies specifically to Israel. It applies to anyone who  can prove that they have some connection to the land and connection to the history and connection  to international law. But Israel, I think, does have bringing up international law. My So,  if again, no, but but let me finish this because here's the here's the point. We're talking about  Christian Zionism. The idea that as a Christian, I believe in both the Old and the New Testament. Why  wouldn't I? I'm a person of the book. There are 80 million evangelical Christians in the United  States. What makes us who we are is our adherence to the scripture. Our belief that the Bible,  all of it, not part of it, but all of it is the word of the living God. Yeah. So if I believe in  the Old and the New Testament, I do believe that there is a very specific call to the Jewish people  that started with Abraham and he called them out of what is now modern day Iraq. Said, "Come where  I send you." He came. This is the land. Genesis 12:3. He says, "I will bless those who bless  you. Curse those who curse you." In Genesis 17, he looks out of the world. says look and this is  where I'm giving you the land. I think since that time there have been people living in this land  connected to that moment of history. So there is a historical connection that is not even broken.  I you've said that and I want to ask you what that means a little more specifically if that's okay.  But first let me just say that you could say the same thing of Britain who've been there in their  land longer. Does anybody try to tell the Brits they the Brits they can't live there anymore? No.  What's happening is But they are saying that to the Jews. Oh, okay. Okay. But I just wonder if  you would extend extend the same sympathy or the same principle. You don't You seem like this is  You think I'm trying to trap you? I'm not. I'm at all trying to trap you. I It'd be as simple as  saying native Britain have I got no problem with the native Brits having their land. My point is  I don't know that there is a biblical connection for the Brits, but I would say that's take that  off the table and I think there's still a basis for the Jews having this little bitty strip of  real estate and it is I'm not even arguing with you. I'm just trying to at all. I'm just trying  to understand what it is that you're saying cuz it's it's not obvious to me and maybe it's an IQ  problem but I'm having trouble understanding this. But let me just go back to just clarify one thing.  You've brought up international at least twice, maybe three times. as a basis for Israel's  legitimacy. If Israel was out of compliance with international law, whatever that is, would it  be less legitimate? Depends on if the the law and the way it's applied is legitimate. There there  are some applications of so-called international law that are not legitimate. Look at the ICC  or the IC. I agree. Utterly ridiculous. One of the reasons I'm so grateful President Trump and  Secretary Rubio are pushing hard trying to get rid of the ICC and the ICJ is because they have become  rogue organizations that are no longer really about an equal application of law and justice. I  don't know enough about it to say if that's true or not. I I um but I just I'm interested that you  yourself appealed to international law as a basis of is Israel's what I'm looking at is the whole  of the last 100 years. The Belffor declaration is not exactly international law by the way. It  was a letter I think. It was maybe maybe not law but it was a declaration. It was a an assumption  and a declaration that was done by Lord Balffor in the in Great Britain at that time. This land  was under the British mandate and he said the Jews should have the land that was theirs from  3,800 years ago. It was simple as that. Right. And I'm not debating that. I'm just It was not not  international law. It was a colonial power saying, "Okay, divide up the world under the League of  Nations, under the United Nations." And then because of the victories that Israel had against  those who tried to annihilate them and it wasn't just that they were trying to take a little  piece of their land, they tried to annihilate them. Okay? And there is still to this day the  shouts of from the river to the sea. And Tucker, that means only one thing. Not the shrinking of  Israel, but the annihilation of Israel. I don't think I don't think you can say that you know what  it means actually because you don't know what's in people's hearts. So why don't we just deal with  the facts? Maybe some people mean it. It's in their mouths. I know it's in their minds. But I'm  not Look, you'll never hear me say that. I What you will hear me say is I'm confused by what the  definitions are. So let's go through this. You've appealed to Genesis. Genesis 15 says it's Abram.  It's pre-Abraham. It's Abram receives from God the news that his descendants will inherit the land.  And you tell me as the as the theologian if I'm getting this wrong, but from the Euphrates to the  Nile, I think I think that's right. And that would include like basically the entire Middle East.  That would be the Levant. So that would be Israel, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon. It would also be big parts  of Saudi Arabia and Iraq. It would be I mean not sure it would go that far. I mean it would be  a big piece of land. But here's the It would be a lot of places that are now countries that but  this particular area that we're talking about now, Israel is um is a land that God gave through  Abraham to a people that he chose. It was a people, a place, and a purpose. We we can look at  it that way. Christian Zionism, I want to go back because that's where we started on I'm not going  to let you off on this because you have said it three times that God gave this land to this people  and so it is entirely fair for me with respect to ask what land are you talking about because  I just read Genesis 15 as I have many times and that land I think it says from the Nile to the  Euphrates which is once again basically the entire Middle East. So God gave that land to his people  the Jews or he didn't. You're saying he did. What does that mean? Does Israel have the right  to that land? Because you're appealing to Genesis. Yeah. You're saying that's the original  deed? It would be fine if they took it all. But I don't think that's what we're talking  about here today. What would be fine? Well, it's exactly what we're talking about today. But  but here's what I I don't think I think it would be fine if the state of Israel took over all. They  don't want to take it over. They're not asking to take it over. But you're saying that the reason  that Israel is legitimate, has this inherent right to exist is becau in part because God gave it to  his people. And I am going to the same Bible that you're referring to and noticing that that is a  huge piece of land. So if God gave them that land, then they have a right to take it now by your  definition. Unless I'm missing something. I think you're missing something because they're  not asking to go back to take all of that, but they are asking to at least take the  land that they now occupy, they now live in, they now own legitimately, and it is a safe haven  for them. Well, may I ask though as because you're appealing, you're explaining what Christian  Zionism is and your theological beliefs and you think you just said it would be fine with you  if the state of Israel took all of all of Syria, all of Lebanon. That's that's really not exactly  what I'm trying to say. I'm asking, is that what you said? I thought that's what you just said. It  was somewhat of a hyperbolic statement in that, you know, if that's what you feel like that we're  talking about, but it isn't. We're talking about this land that Israel, the state of Israel, now  lives in and wants to have peace in. They're not trying to take over Jordan. They're not trying to  take over Syria. They're not trying to take over Iraq or anywhere else, but they do want to protect  their people. No, they're not trying to take over Lebanon. But you're saying that as a religious  man, as a Christian, a Christian Zionist, you agree with a lot of religious communities  here in Israel, that the justification for this country is theological. It's a it's a contract  between God and his people. And I'm telling you that that contract includes a tract of land that  is much larger than the current nation state. may be a bigger Zionist than even the Jews  are that live in I'm trying to understand the implications of your theology for geopolitics  because you're saying that the present government of Israel has a moral right to take over  what are now other people's countries. No, I didn't say that. Then what are you saying? I'm  simply saying that the people who live in Israel um I think have a right to have security, have  safety. They have a right to be able to live in this land that they have a connection to for 30  years. I told myself when I said a prayer that I would not get annoyed, but as someone who is, you  know, the father of daughters, when I see child molesters hiding in Israel and escaping American  justice, I think I have a right to safety in my country, too. So, you can understand that. I  think most people feel they have a right to safety. I do think Israel has a right to safety  and I I hope that for them and I'm sincere, but I'm an American and I have a right to safety  in my country, too. You agree? And I think so, but I just want to get to this point. If Israel were  to say, God gave us in Genesis 15, all of Lebanon, all of Syria, all the way up to Iraq, would that  be legitimate in your view? I don't think in this particular day and time they're asking for it.  Would it be legitimate? I'm not sure that it would be. Why? Because you just said that God because  I think that there is a a an understanding that the people of Israel today. Now, if they end up  getting attacked by all these places and they win that war and they take that land, then okay, that  that's a whole another whole another discussion. But you and I started women. We started talking  about something simple, Christian Zionism. But it turns out it's not because I don't the core of  Christian Zionism, you said, and I'm quoting you, is the understanding, the belief, the theological  understanding that Jews have a moral and legal, we went through the legal moral deriving from the  biblical. the promises in our Bible which we share with the Jewish people, the first part of the Old  Testament that it derives from God's promise to the Jews. And so I have two questions. What are  the borders of that? And who are those people in 2026? And you're not the first person I've asked,  but you're the most reasonable, most gentle, most theologically informed person. So I'm really  hoping for an answer. The first question was the borders. I can't get an answer. Those borders are  so I'm going to give up. But the second question is every bit as pressing which is who are the  people? Who are the modern? Yes. Who are who are the descendants? So we know and I believe and  I agree with you as a Christian that God promised this land from modern day Iraq to modern day Egypt  to this people the Jews to Abram's actually not to the to Abram's descendants as it says in Genesis  15. Who are his descendants now? And how do we know who they are? I think they're the Jews.  And we know who they are because they've always been a Jewish people. There has been an unbroken  line of Jewish people. And they've lived in this land for 3,800 years. Sometimes not very many  of them because they were chased out all over the world. They were hunted down. They were almost  annihilated during the Holocaust. They came back. To this day, Tucker, they represent, you know, how  many Jews there are in the whole world. Please. I understand. But first of all, the greatest  genocide of Jews no one ever mentions was by the Romans where they were literally banned from  Jerusalem for 500 years. Yeah, of course. And and it's all awful. And I'm opposed to all of that.  I'm opposed to mass killing of anybody. Period. I'm hear you say that. I mean it. Yeah. And I hope  that I believe that. My question is, and it's not a bumper sticker answer, it's a sincere answer.  How do we know? Because what you're saying is that certain people have a title to a highly contested  region. They own it in some deep sense. So I think it's fair to ask who are they and how do we know?  So the current prime minister's ancestors weren't from here within recorded history there. He has no  deed. BB Netanyahu on one side his family's from Poland. They're from Eastern Europe. So, how do  we know that he has a connection to the people who God promised the land to, Abram's descendants? How  do we know that? Well, if you take the genealogies that come not only from the Old, but the New  Testament, you see that there is a historical connection through the entirety of the Old and the  New Testament that details the Jewish connection to this land. Does that include family? How do  we know that if his family scattered? But how do we know it's the same people? No. Wh why is  that crazy? If if if you say to me if they speak the same language, if they worship the same God,  if they follow the same Bible, if they follow the same cultures and traditions and they always  pray next year in Jerusalem and they pray for the peace of Jerusalem and they pray facing toward  Jerusalem, does that not give you a little bit of a clue as to who they are? Let's go through those  things because I would like to have a rational. This is the conversation I've wanted. Bless you.  Thank you for doing this. Um let's just go through those things. Okay. So, one of the things I admire  most about Israel is they resurrected a dead language in 1948. Good for them. Well, they really  didn't resurrect it. It It was existent. Okay. I'm not That's not That's a compliment. I'm not  slightly No, no, no. But it is the first time in all of human history that a language has survived  through this length of time. It's it's it's I would call it You might not, but I would call it a  miracle. One of many, okay, that you can attribute to this. I think it's wonderful as someone  who loves language. Netanyahu's parents did not speak Hebrew. Okay? They didn't live in this  region. Netanyahu, the founders of this country were mostly secular. Some of them were avowed  atheists. They were not praying for the peace of Jerusalem. They weren't praying at all because  they didn't believe in God. There's no genealogy linking their families to the people of this land  3,000 years ago. They're none. So, how do we know since they didn't share a language? They didn't  share a religion. They had no religion whatsoever. How do we know that they had a right to come here  from Eastern Europe? And but they were scattered land. They were scattered to Eastern Europe. They  were scattered all over the world. There were many in Ethiopia. They were in Russia. They were in  Poland. They were throughout Asia. Jews were all over the place. But they were still Jews. They  were still Jews. Okay. So, let me get to the nub of the question since again a lot is at stake. A  lot of money is at stake. Land is very valuable. Uh, Israel has a lot of resources. By the way,  if you're accused of a crime, you can hide here. That's pretty good passport to have. It's a good  thing, right? So, who's entitled to it? I don't understand. And you're very discouraged in the  United States from asking this question for some reason. It's a totally rational discourage. No,  you're not discouraging. Others do. You're like the only person I have this conversation with.  Everyone will be like, "Shut up, Nazi." It it's a foundational question. Are you speaking of an  ethnic group or a religious group? Well, I think you're looking at for many people it is religious.  There are people who may not have a deep religious connection to Judaism, but they're still Jews.  Okay? So, it's it's an ethnic category. It is ethnic, but it is also religious. It is rooted  in religion. You can't take it out of it. Now, that means then how can an atheist Well, I will  tell you this. There are some people who say, "I'm Christian." They never go to church. They never  pray. They never read their Bible. They don't tithe. But they're not entitled to citizenship  on the basis of that. They still call themselves Christian even though they identify. Okay. Here's  the difference. You're saying that people who have this identification have a deed to a huge chunk  of land on the Mediterranean. Okay. So there's, you know, it's a it's a right. You keep telling  me it's a right. And so it's totally fair to say if you come to my house and say, "I've got the  title to your house." I get to ask, "May I see it? Where'd you get it?" And that's exactly what  happened here. People from Europe, Eastern Europe, came here. In a lot of cases, atheists and kicked  out a lot of people who lived here. Land. Well, they did not just throw people out. They bought a  lot of land. There's no question about that. Buy a lot of land, but they also in 1948 kicked out a  lot of people. And the war, it was a war. I agree. Yeah, I'm not look I'm not want to reitigate  the history. I'm just saying it's a fact. Okay, including a lot of Christians. A lot of Christians  uh wound up fleeing and they lost their homes and they've never been allowed back. And all  of this was justified on the basis of this identity that forms that is the ticket to the  right that you keep referring to. So my question is very simple. I'm going to wait patiently for  an answer. Does this right derive from religious affiliation or from genetics? And I would say it's  both. But I would also say that when you said that Christians were kicked out, Tucker, Christianity  is growing in Israel. Okay. But and and there is a big lie that goes out there. But but no,  let me finish this because I I keep hearing that Christians are really not treated well in  Israel. That's just simply that's a lie. Well, there are lots there are lots of different There  were 34,000 Christians in Israel in 1948. There are 184,000 Christians here today. And by  Israel, what are you counting? You talking about the land? What what what territory are you  counting? You're counting Israel proper or are you counting the West Bank as well and Gaza?  I mean, what what do you when you say Israel, those numbers apply to what land mass? It would  be in Israel proper. Okay, there 184,000. Now, I'll tell you where Christians are not doing very  well. They're not doing very well in the Muslim control countries. There's almost no Christians  in Qatar, for example, except those who live in the Christian ghetto who are the service workers.  I'm sorry. Look, I don't want to argue with you. There there are many more Christians in Qatar  than there are in Israel. That's not true. What it actually is true and I refer you to Wikipedia,  Mr. Ambassador. Wikipedia the I refer you to the government of Qar, the government of Israel. These  are knowable facts. Like I'm and I'm in Jordan by the numbers are down. In Syria, the numbers are  down. In Lebanon, the numbers are down. argue that about twice as many Christians, but they live  in the enclave. They are not native Qataris. Okay, we're we're mixing so many different categories  here. I'm just saying I get things wrong all the time. You've just gotten something wrong. And  I think it's important to acknowledge it. There are many more Christians in Qar than there are  in Israel. Fact. How many? Now, you caught me. I don't know. I could look at my phone, but I was  just there. And there are many more like whatever. But I just want to get to the point that forms  the basis of this whole conversation which is who has a right to the land. Yeah. And you said  it's a mixture of religion and ethnicity because as I noted and you agree many of the founders  maybe the majority of the founders of modern Israel did not believe in God at all. So they  were not religious Jews. They weren't religious at all. They were atheists. They said they were  atheists. I believe them. So that suggests it's ethnic. But it's also true, as you well know,  because there was a famous court case about this, that ethnic Jews who convert to Christianity do  not have the right of return that was settled by the Israeli Supreme Court. I'm very confused.  So that would suggest it's not ethnicity because you invalidate your Jewishness by converting to  Christianity. There are a number of Messianic Jews who live in Israel, who are here. I'm aware of  significant number, but you're not contesting what I'm saying because it's a very famous court case.  The right of return has to do with your mother, your grandmother. It has to do with family ties  ethnic. There is a lot of sure ethnicity is a big part of the right of return to make aliyah to come  to Israel to live here. Then if I if both of your parents are Jewish and you have an ethnic right to  the land, you are one of Abram's descendants, but you convert to Christianity. How is it you don't  have the right to return? I'm totally confused. But I know a number of people who have returned  as Christians, but have Jewish history. Are you saying that Jews who convert to Christianity have  a right, a legal right to return? Cuz I I know that they do. Whether when you say do they have a  right to return do they prove it's a it's a legal category as in government by their family history  their grandmother their mother and there are many aspects of that I've read it I think I know that  people who are Christian and they came here made aliyah they had Jewish blood Jewish history they  were Christian messianic but they came here and they were welcomed here and they were given full  legal rights and a passport. So, so clearly that's not it's not true that you invalidate your right  of return by converting to Christianity. That's just false. I'm not aware of that. I I know that  there are a number of Christians here. I go to church with Christians every week here. Of course.  But do you have a right to come and say I am an ethnic Jew even though I practice Christianity.  Therefore, I have every bit as much right to move into a settlement in the West Bank or into  East Jerusalem or anywhere I want, Galilee, anywhere because I'm returning to the land of  my forefathers of a legal right in the state of Israel even though I've converted to Christianity.  You're saying that's true. I'm saying I know people have done it. Now, can can I tell you what  the law specifically is? I'm not sure because it's really a Christian. I'm not I don't have  any Jewish roots, so therefore I cannot quote you the law. If you want me to do that, I'll look  at Well, it really matters because you're saying, in fact, people in the United States are being  called anti-semites. A lot of them, including me, because they somehow don't believe that Israel has  a right to this land. Do you think Israel has a right to this land? No. You haven't defined what  the land is, and you haven't defined who Israel is. So, I really don't know. No, it is the land  they're living in now. The borders that they have, the borders are moving. The borders have moved  in the last year. What do you mean the borders have moved in the last Well, they they are  the 1967 borders. I'm including, you know, the the West East Jerusalem and Jude and Samaria.  What are the borders of Judea and Samaria? Well, you basically take the Jordan River and it's  west of the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea to the Lebanon border. And uh Israel did have  control of the Sinai. They gave that to Egypt. They had control of it. They gave it away in  1979 in the peace agreement. Um, but okay. So, we whatever you call it, the land that was  taken from Jordan in 1967, you call it Judea and Samaria. There's a significance to that that  I don't fully understand. I'm against it. I know what it it's 80% of the Bible happened in Judea  and Samaria. We've also established that the Bible gives Jews the right to occupy the land from the  Nile to the Euphrates. So I'm very confused by why we've shrunk the land and why we're dis Israel  has shrunk the land. They have made that decision. That's why they gave away now given away a lot of  things. Abram's descendants are the ones who have the right to have this land. Correct? Yes. Okay.  Why don't we do genetic testing on everybody in the land and find out who Abram's descendants  are? It's really simple. We've cracked the human genome. We can do that. Why don't we do  that? Would you be against doing that? I I have no idea what that would prove. I mean, maybe it  would be What do you mean what it would? It would prove who Abram's descendants are and who has a  a right to live here and who doesn't according to the theology that you yourself just explained.  And so I'm very confused as to why we don't do that. If you believe the theology that you've  just explained to me, would we do that all over the world and everybody? This is the only country  in the world that you've said has this covenant with God that this people have a moral and legal  right to the land. What about people who convert to Judaism? Would they have a right? Well, you've  just you've just said to Judaism. So, you just told me they can make aliyah. They may not have  you've just told me that it doesn't matter. You told me moments ago, trying to keep track, okay,  that it doesn't matter whether or not you believe in God or whether or not you practice Torah  Judaism or rabbitic Judaism, which is something else that I I don't even know if we should I don't  even know what that means. But it doesn't matter whether you're quote a religious Jew or not. What  matters is that you are part of the Jewish people to whom God gave this land that extends from the  Nile to the Euphrates. And so if you believe that, wouldn't you want to know with a burning passion  who those people are? And because of science, we can now know who those people are. So why  aren't we finding out? I guess you could propose a DNA test for everybody who comes here, everybody  who lives here. But the point I'm comfortable with secular nation states where it's none of this is  done on the basis of blood. I'm uncomfortable with that. I'll just say that. But there are people who  may not have bloodlines but who have converted to Judaism. Are they going to be able to live here?  Are you going to kick them out? By your standards, they can't live here because you just said that  they have a right to live here because God gave them the land because they're the descendants of  Abram. They're the descendants of Abraham. But if they're the spiritual descendants of Abraham  and they've now decided that they're converting to Judaism, then do they have a right to live in  Israel? I well there's a whole legal literature in Israel on that question and my understanding  is that certain types of modern Judaism qualify a person and other types don't. Is that your  understanding? I don't believe that people converted and I could have this wrong but I  know people who faced this personally know people. I don't believe people who've converted  in a reform synagogue have the right of return. I I don't think that is because I know people  who've married into Jewish families and they find out they don't have the right of return. So  that is perplexing to me. Yeah. I know, you know, my experience is a little different than yours. I  know people who have definite Jewish connections, uh, family relations, but now they're Christian.  Some are not necessarily practicing Jews. They're not uh they're more secular Jews as you've  discussed, but they come back here. Okay. I'm not against that. I'm just I'm just wondering  since you have since you began this conversation by asking me did I think they had a right to come  here. Yeah. My question was on what basis do they have the right? And you said because God granted  it to them. Yeah. And also said because that there should be a land where Jews could live in peace  and safety. I suppose and I asked you what a Jew was and you couldn't answer it. You said it it  partly is religious but doesn't have to be. It's partly genetic, but it doesn't have to be. And so  that you can see why I'm I think I was very clear that being Jewish is an identification either  through blood or through faith that you're Jewish. It may be that you're a blood Jew, but you don't  necessarily practice Judaism. Just like there are people who say they're Christian, but they  don't do a thing to demonstrate what Christian There are a lot of bad Christians, including me  some of the time. a lot of the time, but I don't have a right to real estate on the basis of my  claim of Christian. You don't have a right to real estate if you're talking about a specific  parcel. But if you're talking about a land, I think what we're talking about, that's all I'm  all I'm saying. And there was a designation to the family of nations of the world that there would be  a Jewish homeland. Let's let's get to that point because I think you've taken us on several trails  here and I'm not sure we can follow them all. But is there a reason that the Jewish people that  represent and I want to get back to this because you didn't let me finish while ago. They represent  0.2% of the world's population in the entirety of the world there about 16 million Jews total and 8  million of them live here. The rest live mostly in New York or South Florida and a few other places.  Okay. So, this is a small population of people. They have connection to this land historically,  biblically. Do they? Yes, they do. If if BB's family, we know they lived in Eastern Europe.  There's no evidence they ever lived here. He's not religious. What? But do you have his family  tree? No, we don't. Do you? He doesn't. So, no one does. That's the point. So, how do we know  that he has any connection to the land at all? And if there has been a practice of Judaism and a  connection to the language, the Bible, the land, his His ancestors didn't he doesn't practice  Judaism in any rigorous way. His ancestors didn't live here. They didn't speak the language  and there's no evidence they ever lived here. So, in what basis does he have a right to very much  speaks the language? He has fought for the land. His family has fought for the land. dodging a  very obvious question which is where does this right come from and the reason it's meaningful is  because there are a lot of people in the territory that Israel controls today particularly in the  West Bank who through genetic testing we can know their families have been here for thousands  of years we don't know whether they practiced Judaism whether they were Samaritans pre-Islam  we don't know that a lot of them we know have been Christians for 2,000 years They have less of  a right to the land than someone whose ancestors, the only thing we know about them is they lived  in Latvia or Poland. They're Eastern European. How does that work? They're Jewish. By what  definition? They're Jewish by their But how do we know they have any connection? They're Jewish  by their faith. They're Jewish by the connection to the language. Jewish by the connection to  the Torah. But but but how do we know that BB specifically BB's ancestors ever lived here?  How do we know that? I I'm I'm not sure if I understand your question. How do we know if the  prime minister of Israel's ancestors ever lived? Maybe I could ask you, how do we know they didn't?  I mean, well, it's on the basis of the claim that they did that all kinds of things happen. People  are displaced. There's a money flow. I mean, there's it's a big question. A lot hangs on  this. It's not some theoretical thing like, oh, you know, did my grandparents do  this or do that? It's like, no, no, we have a right to be here because my ancestors  were here. Okay, how do we know they were here? I I I'm totally unable to process what you're  trying to get at. It goes back, do Jewish people have any land on this planet that should be  theirs? I feel that way about all peoples. I feel that way about Jewish peoples. I feel that  way about. Okay. Then then you don't mind him having this. Is there any Is there any country Let  me ask you this bluntly. Is there any country that European peoples have a right to exclusively?  I think they have attained their land through conquest. I mean, let's ask ourselves. Have the  Britons attain their land through conquest? No, they've always been there. The Romans,  the Greeks all speak. No, no, let's Well, you could certainly say that here. The Romans  the Romans controlled this as you know and they expelled they don't Jerusalem. Amen. I want them  to control it. I'm anti-Roman. Okay, we're on the same page. Okay. But my question is very simple.  Is there any European peoples that possesses the same right to their land that the Jews, including  people whose ancestors lived in Eastern Europe, possess here? The Britain, we know, the British  people, the Scandinavian people, the Irish people, their ancestors have been there for thousands of  years. That's provable through genetic testing. Do they have a right to their land exclusively?  Is anyone saying they don't? Yes, of course. Yes. No one will say they will. And I'm asking you, do  they have that right? And I'm not sure what what that question involves because no one is trying to  force them out of their land of their homes. But here, hold on. You want me to Why won't you answer  that question? Does any Because I just did. Oh, so the eur So the Irish people have the same  right to their land that the Jews have the biblical connection. Okay. But I'm a I'm a Bible  believer. Okay. So that is but it's also it's also a principle and that is and you've said it 15  times. Sometimes people have land because they they were able to attain it through war. They  were able to obtain it when it was challenged. I understand that there's all kinds of conflict. But  we can't say that about the Irish world borders change all the time. Not actually the borders  of the island of England have not changed nor but the Ireland those are just two examples. So  you've got the indigenous people there. Do they have a moral right to that as their homeland and  I think they would probably say yes we do because we have ancient history I've never thought about  whether now that I'm raising the question and you spent a lot of time thinking about the right of  the Jewish people to their homeland. Do the Irish have the same right to a homeland? As long as  they can defend it and as long as they, you know, as long as they can defend it. But Tucker,  here's the point. I'm telling you. Wait, hold on, hold on, hold on. Now you just flipped. You're the  minister here. Yeah. And I'm telling you, as long as they can defend it, and if they can't defend,  you're allowing me to tell you that I think that what is very, very special here is that there is  a biblical as well as an ethnic and a historical. So you can take any one, but if you add them  all together, biblical, historical, and ethnic, you have a very strong case that the Jewish people  are living in a land that is indigenous to them. That has been their historic homeland for 3,800  years. You can repeat it as and you can also look in the archaeology. The stones cry out. Okay.  Have you been to the city of David for examp so you know then that it's an amazing place. It  may be the greatest archaeological discovery in all of history because it's it's stunning and they  still continue to find things that date the Jewish people to this land archaeologically for 3,800  years. We can we can date the Britain the British people to their land much longer much thousands of  years longer. Stonehenge is 3,000 years older than any building built by the descendants of Abram  in this country. And so I just it's fine. I'm not trying to invalidate anyone's right. I'm just  wanting you to affirm that right, but it makes you uncomfortable and you won't. And I don't know  why. Because I've never honestly sat down and and asked myself, are the lines around the It's an So  we know what the lines are. I'm but I'm I'm saying but are those lines are those rooted in something  other than the historical connection? Well, great. Then they should have it. But that's they  have a right to have it. But then you said if they can defend it and if they can't defend it,  they lose the right. But I didn't say it was exclusive one or the other. I think you're really  going off the chart. I just want to know if these principles apply universally or if they only apply  to the people of Israel. And my answer appears to be just the people of Israel. They're the only  ones with these rights. And I just reject that. I didn't say that. But I'm saying we are talking  about Israel. We're in Israel. We're talking about Christian Zionism because you've made some  disparaging statements about Christian Zionist. You've apologized for him for which I appreciate.  And now we're trying to define Christian and Zionist. And it seems like we've gone way way  off of trying to get as you suggested as a former debater at the outset. I'm trying to get to terms  and a common understanding of what the words mean and the term and I'm no closer to that than I than  I was when I began. You're not closer to the term a Christian. What that means? I think it's someone  who follows Jesus. And that's my next question. There are a lot of Christians in the West Bank and  um there there were a fair amount of Christians in Gaza and some of them have been killed. There  were 5,000 in Gaza. Yeah. Yeah. and church. Two different churches were hit by the IDF. Christian  Hospital was hit seven times by the IDF. And I don't understand they were not hit seven times.  They were there were different I know. And one of the times it was a rocket that was shot  by Hamas and all the news agencies reported that the IDF shot the rocket. They said the IDF  ever hit the hospital or the churches. They did uh accidentally because and they apologized for  it and it was very unfortunate. But they also you got to remember there were times Hamas often  hid caches of arms under hospitals. Were you bothered by the fact that the IDF hit Christians?  I'm bothered that anyone got killed in Gaza. But you know why I'm bothered? You're a Christian  minister. You can't say that the Christians are Islamic extremists. No, but I can say that the  reason side with the Christians over the secular government of Israel, but I I would look at  it even more broadly. I would ask you this. Why was there so much suffering and continues  to be suffering in Gaza? It's because Hamas, which could have built a Singapore, built a Haiti,  they have a land mass the size of Las Vegas. They built tunnels underneath that are larger than the  London Underground, over 500 miles of tunnels. They didn't build it to move people from one  hospital to the other, one marketplace to the other, but to hide terrorist, to hide weaponry.  And on October the 7th, they went over there and they massacred,200 civilians. Massacred,  mutilated, humiliated them. You're never going to get me to defend Hamas. Sorry. Please  don't. I'm not going to. But I'm telling you, I'm appalled by it. How many civilians have been  killed by the IDF in Gaza? We don't know. You know why? We don't know. What's your guess? Well, the  only numbers we have come from this dubious entity called the Gaza Health Ministry. You know who that  is? Well, why does Israel have a have a some kind of count on it? We also know that a lot of the  people who were killed were in fact warriors. Sadly, how many kids were killed? We don't know.  What's your guess? I don't know. I'm I'm sure it was thousands. And as thousands of kids were  killed, some of the kids who were killed had been recruited to be in the military. Kids as young  as 14 years old kids. Do do you hear yourself? I wonder. I just said that there were kids as young  as 14 that were recruited to be Hamas soldiers who were given arms. How do you feel about the  kids being killed? I think it's horrible. You know what I also think is horrible? I think  it's horrible that,200 people were slaughtered by people across the border. 252 people were  taken hostage. 48 of the,200 were Americans. And then when Hamas could have ended this on  October the 8th and given all the hostages up, they didn't. Leaving no choice. You're never going  to get me to defend Hamas. I'm not pro Hamas. I'm totally opposed to slaughtering innocents whether  Hamas does it or whether the government of Israel does it in much larger numbers. And the reason  I'm opposed to it is because I'm a Christian and I believe that all souls are created by God. I  did don't do not disagree with that wholeheartedly but but I said how many children have been war  is a horrible thing period and we don't know we know that a lot of the numbers were reported  by you said you think thousands of children have been killed yeah and a lot of times you know why  they got killed because Hamas would gather up the children and put them in the targets. Do you know  what Israel does? They send page messages and they send texts to every cell phone in Gaza and they  say, "We're going to hit this particular target." They drop leaflets and they announce where they're  going to hit. Nobody does that. The US doesn't do that. Israel does that in order to prevent, let  me finish this, they do this in order to prevent civilian casualties. What Hamas does, they say,  "Oh, this is the target." And by gunpoint they push people into those various places. And then  when people get killed, they say, "Look, Israel just slaughtered these people." Even though it was  Hamas who moved them into harm's way, knowing that it was going to put them in a place of danger and  death and destruction. And they do that because they don't care. You say you care about life.  I care about life. It's interesting. They don't care about life. I'm not saying that Hamas does.  You're never going to get me to defend Hamas. I'm good. I'm anti-hasm. You said that three times and  I I believe it. Your dig at the United States is very revealing. Why is it revealing? Because your  priorities are very clear. No. No. Yes, they are. Yes, they are. And as an American, permit me a  moment, okay, of outrage. Because I said many civilians have been killed. And you said right in  the middle of your elaborate defense of the IDF's killing of civilians, including children, you said  they do a better job than the United States does. That's my country. and my government I consider  what flag am I wearing here? Well, I I'm asking why is it what flag am I wearing? Well, that's of  course my flag as well. And it's my flag. It's who I serve. So why the dig at the United States in  the middle? It's not a dig at them. No, no, no, no. You you've totally misrepresented. What did  you mean by that? I did not take a dig at the US. What I'm saying is So the IDF is more humane than  the US military. I'm just saying that Israel takes steps that we don't take and no other country  that I'm aware of takes to try to prevent because no matter what Israel does, they're going to get  accused of genocide. That may be right. And I'm um I'm just telling you that they But then let me  ask you on that question. You know, I that's such a politically loaded but I resent the idea that  you think that I'm not loyal to the US. Look, I'm not say you're not loyal. I'm merely noting  what you just said, which was that the IDF takes greater pains than the US, our military does to  spare civilian lives. And I guess my question is, when was the last time the US military killed this  many civilians? Do you know? Well, it could have been Nagasaki, Hiroshima, could have been uh Iraq,  Afghanistan. We don't know the full number. And I think most Christians would say all of those  things were atrocities because innocents were killed in large numbers. And we we don't believe  in that. And so that's not really a defense, is it? It's a horrible thing, Tucker. And there  are people who end up unfortunately being killed that shouldn't have been. I I would tell you that  I wish that none of those people in Gaza had been killed after October the 8th. Well, I say not  none of them. I'm glad Muhammad Sinoir was killed. I'm glad that some of those warriors, the people  who masterminded and carried out the atrocities, old Hamas operatives, how do you feel about  their deaths? If they participated in that, then God help them. I'm telling you, I don't know  that they were 14 years. No, but I'm telling you that when someone commits the acts of atrocity  and then they hold hostages, if these were your children being held hostage in Gaza, what would  you do to get them out? I wouldn't want to kill 14-year-olds. I'll tell you that. Let me ask you  something. Would you do whatever it took to get your kids back if they were being tortured, raped,  starved? I would not kill children, period. Well, I'm just telling you, and I would never make  excuses for killing children either. And I'm not talking about targeting children. I'm talking  about You told me that 14-year-olds deserve to die because they're working for him. My question is,  can you hear yourself? I do hear myself. So, do you think a 14-year-old child has agency? Do you  think that he deserves to die because he's being used by adults? Isn't his death a crushing tragic?  He's holding a gun and he's pointing it at someone who's trying to save a hostage and the only way  to save that hostage. I'm telling you, war is a horrible thing. It's a horrible thing. And a lot  of innocent I think I'm the one who thinks war is a horrible thing. No, no, no, no. I think what you  don't I'm trying to explain how horrible it is. And you're saying that the 14-year-old deserved  to die. We don't execute 14-y old. Putting words in my mouth that I didn't I don't know what you're  saying. You never said deserve to die. Okay. I say there are people who die. That is unfortunate.  Okay. But I'm saying that you are not giving Israel credit for having done everything they  possibly could to a level that quite frankly in urban warfare there has never been a war criticize  Israel but it's a foreign country and I would much rather criticize a foreign country than my own.  Feel free to do that. They can you pivoted against our country's done a better job than our military  has. I I simply gave you the illustration and I helped you understand that Israel goes to links  that no other country, including ours, goes to in the middle of an urban war. And yet, Israel ended  up with fewer civilian deaths in an urban war than any urban war of record. You said you didn't  know how many civilian deaths there were. So, how can you say that? If you took Gaza's numbers,  Hamas's numbers, you don't know what the numbers are. You just told me that. But I'm saying it's  a lower number. But if you took the numbers that they reported, which is like 50,000, 24 or 25,000  of those were actual warriors. How many civilians if you if you range from 120 to 78? Those ones I  just read. I don't know if that's real. I don't know either. I'm asking you. Yeah. And I'm telling  you those numbers I've not heard have not read. The numbers that I think are more reportable are  somewhere in the 60,000 range. Where are those from? from the Gaza Health Ministry. You said  those are valid numbers. I think they are. I don't think that they're accurate, but I'm saying  let's just You're saying they're inaccurate, but they prove that Israel is done doing a great job.  Let's assume that the most uh widespread numbers, the largest numbers that have been reported out  of Gaza by Hamas. Yes. Let's assume they're true. That's what I'm saying. I'm not saying they  are true, but assume they're true. Let's just take them at their word. Then you still have  a lower number of civilians killed than in any urban warfare environment in modern history.  Fact. Is that a fact? Yes. What are you comparing it to? To any urban war. Name one. Iraq. Where?  Afghanistan. We're in Iraq. Where in Afghanistan? There aren't many urban areas in Afghanistan. I  don't think there was any fighting in urban areas in Afghanistan. Cobble. I don't know. Was there  was there were there pitch battles in Kbble over long periods of time? I I don't 20 years in Kbble.  I don't think throughout all of Afghanistan. But what so what were those rates you're talking  about? What are the rates there? You just the number of people who were killed. Uhhuh. Into  the tens of thousands. I I'm I'm asking you to I don't know the answer. I'd have never heard  of any of this. You brought it up. You said the IDF has killed a lower proportion of civilians in  urban warfare than in any urban conflict in modern history. I'd never heard that before. I don't  know what your what are the controls for that. And you said, well, the US military killed more  civilians. Would you agree that the real tragedy was that Hamas continued to force this war? Hold  on. You just once again said that the IDF is more humane than the United States military. You  just said that. You said in Iraq and Afghanistan, the US military killed more civilians than the IDF  did in Gaza. You just told me. I never heard that before. And my question is, how do you know that?  What are those numbers? And I'm trying to explain to you that there were extraordinary efforts to  keep the numbers to you. I think they were tens of thousands. I'll get them for you. Well, you  brought it up. That's the only reason I'm pushing you. But you I'm wearing a flag. I've worked for a  country and you pretended or alleged that somehow I'm not loyal to this and that I'm criticizing  my own country. A better job than the US military in Iraq and Afghanistan. And I said, "What are  the numbers?" and you said, "I don't know." So, on what basis are you making the claim that the  IDF in Gaza spared more civilians than the US Army and Marine Corps did in Afghanistan and  Iraq? Why are you saying that? Like, on what basis are you saying that? from the conversations  that I've had with the people who fought there and I don't have the exact numbers for you. But what  I'm trying to help you to understand, and I don't think you're willing to go there, is that there  was no desire to kill people indiscriminately in Gaza. I don't think there was any desire  to kill people indiscriminately in Iraq, Afghanistan. Let me just say I think on and I know  a bunch of people who serve in the IDF and I don't believe your average IDF soldier wants to kill  innocents. I just want to be really clear about that. I don't think most soldiers want to do that.  I think a lot of them in our country, in Israel, wind up doing that cuz that's what war is about  and it really hurts them. And I know people who've done it personally, I know them really well and  it like wrecks their lives. So, but I don't think your average soldier wants that in this country or  any other. The leadership is a different question and I want to refer you very specifically to  a number of speeches the prime minister, your friend Benjamin Netanyahu gave in the aftermath  of October 7th, including one in November of that year when he referred to Amalcch. Now Amalecch  is a reference, a biblical reference. Of course, you'll be very familiar with that. The Amalachites  were a tribe described throughout the Bible, particularly in 1 Samuel, that obstructed the Jews  as they fled Egypt. And God tells Samuel to give the instructions to Saul to kill the Amalachites.  And he says, and I'm sure you remember this. This is in 1st Samuel 15. Of course, I'm sure I know  you know it. He says, "Kill the men, kill the women, kill the children, kill the infants, kill  the donkeys, kill the camels, kill everything." And Saul spares the king and he spares the  animals. And for that he l he is punished by God. That is genocide. God is calling for genocide of  the Amalachites of Amalcch. And the prime minister of Israel at least once, I believe on other  occasions described the Palestinians in Gaza as Amalcch. That's calling for genocide. And you know  that. I totally disagree. Tell me then what it means. Because to say that Israel was attempting  to commit genocide, first of all, that's simply not true. I'm not saying I'm saying what is the  prime minister talking about. Why would he refer to the Palestinians as Amalcch? What is You would  have to ask him. I don't know. I know what I know what Amalecch is. I do understand First Samuel 16.  I get all that. 1st Samuel 15. But I do understand very and it's widely known. So if you say our  enemy is Amalecch and we are proceeding on the basis of God's commands to us, you are calling  for genocide. Tell me how I'm missing something. Because if Israel wanted to commit genocide, they  could have done it in two and a half hours. We can debate what's happened in Gaza. I'm asking you why  the leader of this country ask him. Well, what do you think? I don't know. Does that bother you at  all, people? I I I don't know what he meant. I don't know if it was an illustrative metaphor.  I think what he was saying was that we're not going to let anything keep us from getting our  hostages back. Their sons and their daughters who are being brutalized, raped, tortured,  starved, beaten. Come on, Mr. Ambassador. No, I there are many examples of justice in the Bible,  but there are accused of genocide regularly. I'm not accusing Israel of anything. I'm saying  that the prime minister of Israel described the Palestinians intended to do genocide. I'm  asking why of all the references in the Bible and there are many to justice and there are many to  reconciliation that is a reference to genocide as you know killing every man woman child and infant  I'm quoting and their animals wiping them from the earth and when they don't do that they're  punished when you say that at the outset of a war and then you wind up with massive civilian  casualties maybe not as big as they were in Iraq Then I have to ask you what what is that? And  is that kind of thinking consistent with Western values and with Christianity? Do we as Christians  believe it's okay to kill people's children? No, we don't. And neither do the Israelis because  they didn't go after their children. If they wanted to kill all their children, Tucker, they've  got the military capacity. They could have done it in less than a day. I've heard you say that.  I mean, I guess why didn't they? Why didn't they? I think there are a lot of decent people in  Israel who don't want that. But I'm talking Do you think that the prime minister wanted to wipe out  every single person in Gaza? Do you asking you what you think is the US representative of our  government? I I don't think that that's what he wanted to do because why are you referring? You  never had to ask him that. Why? Because I never saw any evidence any evidence that Israel tried  to wipe out every single person. I just gave you examples that they tried to save civilian  lives. Not. By the way, I'm not, as I've said, and I mean this, I I I think most soldiers in  most armies, including the Israel Defense Force, don't want to kill civilians. I just don't believe  that. I think there are some lunatics. Can I ask you something? Yes. You platformed a guy. You had  him on your show. Tony Aguilar. Don't platform anyone. I You interviewed Not a liberal, so I  don't platform people. Okay. You you interviewed Tony Aguilar who claimed that IDF soldiers killed  a little boy in his presence. Uhhuh. That didn't happen. Okay. It did not happen. Let me give you  I don't know if you know whether it happened or not. Well, I can tell you why I know it didn't  happen. Because we found that little boy less than a week later. All right. I was involved,  heavily involved in helping to extricate him from Gaza. Four different countries were  involved in getting he and his mother to safety, get them out of there. Tony Aguilar is a liar.  Okay. Tony Aguilar claimed that he saw an IDF soldier shoot the little boy. He was fired from  the GHF for cause and he begged for his job back and they wouldn't give it back because they didn't  want him. And he told him that if they didn't give his job back that he would burn him down. Okay?  So he goes out. Now let me finish this because it's important for you to understand. Right? So  this guy then goes out and makes up this story that he witnessed IDF soldiers shooting a little  boy. I don't know that he made it up. He seemed to believe it to me. It's possible he's wrong. I've  been wrong many times. Well, this is a little bit more than just missing a fact. He claimed to be an  eyewitness to the murder of a little boy. a little boy that a week later we found. And you're sure  it's the same little boy? We're absolutely sure. How do you know that? Because we have pictures of  him. We had descriptions of him. We know his name. We know his mother. Okay. He was extricated out  of Gaza. It was a very delicate situation to get him out because if Hamas had found out that he was  still alive, they would have killed him in order to validate Aguiler's story. How do you know that?  So, he gets out. How do you know Hamas would have killed him? Why wouldn't they? Wouldn't they have  wanted to kill him? because that way they could have said that this story was true. The people are  just telling you that what you're saying is true and I have no basis of knowing. I'm really glad  cuz I don't want little kids to get killed even 14-year-olds. Okay. You shouldn't want anyone to  get. But let me ask you, is it true he also made the claim and he had audio of it um and video too  that uh US contractors were using live ammunition to disperse crowds and he had video of that. Do  you know if is did he make up that video? There were times here's what happened. Crowds would  come toward the sites. They were given verbal warnings and then they were given additional  verbal warnings and they were shots were fired either in the air, sometimes in the ground.  And if they continued to come and threaten, there were times when there were people who were  uh engaged in in firefights. That happened. Oh, they were armed. Sometimes they were. They were.  Can you do you know of specific instances where they were armed? I can probably get you some  specific information about that. I think I know the answer to that. I don't think there's  any evidence at all that they were. But I also know that Are you okay with using live ammunition  um at aid distribution sites for families, women and children? Very rarely did this happen here at  all. Are you okay with that? No. I tell you what, I'm not okay with No, no, no. I think you are  so trying to put words in my mouth. You you said that they were firing back, but then there's no  evidence that they weren't. On a Sunday afternoon, I can remember when there was widespread reports  on BBC, CNN, and the New York Times, and they said that 27 people were killed at a feeding site.  We had video extensively over that site. Not one single person, not only were they not shot, nobody  was shot at. There was not one bit of violence that happened at that feeding site. Trying to get  me to defend BBC. Not going to do that. It's like defending Hamas. I I agree with you. I I don't  believe anything I see in the media. It's just that it's really simple. If people are using,  and these were American contractors, by the way, these are not Israelis that I'm aware of.  American contractors run by some crypto minister or something was running the group. Um, if they're  using live ammunition at an aid distribution site, that strikes me as totally unacceptable. They  were not firing. Does that seem acceptable to you? They were not firing at people got killed.  There's a way to some of those people got killed because Hamas were trying to keep them from  getting to the aid distribution sites because Hamas was controlling the food. Hamas made $500  million selling the food that was supposed to be given away for free. And what they were trying  to do is to keep people from going to the sites where they were getting food for free. When we  set GHF up, the first thing that happened I know, but I'm telling you, the first thing that people  said was, "Wow, this is the first time we've had food that we got for free. Is it okay to shoot  unarmed people? I just told you it wasn't. That's awful. Yeah, it's awful. Of course it's awful. Um,  are all lives equal, do you think? Of course they are. So, the death of a Palestinian is every bit  as important, significant as the death of Israel. Why wouldn't it? Of course it is. There's no such  thing as a human soul that God made that is less valuable than another. That I'm pro-life. Me, too.  So, I believe that every life has intrinsic worth and value. There's no such thing as a worthless or  a completely disposable life. That's what makes me pro-life. Tucker, I totally agree. And I believe  that from the conception until the end of natural life. Why I would never say when confronted with  the death of children, war is terrible because it minimizes the deaths of those children. It's  awful. And I don't think it minimizes. I think it it is outrageous. It's a terrible thing.  I wish we never had war. Why do we have war? We're about to have one with Iran. It looks like  how many Americans do you think will die in that war? I hope none. None died last year when we  uh participated in the 12-day war. Not one. You said 20,000 would die and they didn't. I said  could and they could have and and they could die now. And that's a real risk. How many boots on the  ground do you think the US has supplied for Israel over the course of its life? How many times have  we put soldiers on the ground for Israel? Well, we had the Iraq war um which was for Israel.  That wasn't for Israel. How was it for us? Well, because it was a retribution against 9/11. Now,  was it the best idea? Was Was Iraq involved in 911? Our government thought so. Why are 9/11  documents still classified? I have no idea. Should they be unclassified? I think so. All of  them. Right. I have no problem with that. Me, too. I like transparency. I like sunlight. I do.  I hope you'll call for that. I like free press. I like free speech. I totally agree. I really  I like all of that. But if no if there was no con I've never seen I'm open to anything but I've  never seen any connection between the government of Saddam Hussein the secular ba'ist government of  Saddam Hussein and the terror attacks of 9/11. I don't know that there were I don't know right so  so I'm not sure but I don't know how why was that Israel's fault well Benjamin Netanyahu now prime  minister of course exerted lots of pressure openly on the US government to take out to regime  change the Saddam government. I was there. was in Washington and um and they complied.  I don't think there's any way to read it. I don't Do you think Israel leads the US and pushes  them and tells them what to do? Not on everything, of course, but what I think, let me be specific.  I think the uh Israeli government strongly pushed the United States to take out Saddam Hussein.  But there's no question about that. I think the Israeli government right now BB Netanyahu has  been in the White House seven times in one year. Yeah. Pushing for uh regime change in Iran. I  think they're on the verge of convincing this administration to affect regime. You think the  president is weak and is being pushed? I'm not saying that. I know. Well, I know. I know the  president's being pushed. Why do you think a foreign leader was in the White House seven times  in one year? Are you okay with that? That's a lie. You know, Israel is not just a friend or an  ally. It is a real partner. We have an incredible relationship with Israel in intelligence and in  military, in culture, in values. You know, to to be shocked that the Israeli prime minister would  have that many meetings, it's a lot. But I I want to ask you the question, do you think President  Trump is weak enough to let BB Netanyahu push him into something that he doesn't want to do? I  don't. Look, I think, and I don't know, of course, the answer to every question, including this  one, but I think the president, President Trump, really doesn't like nuclear proliferation, and I  don't think he wants Iran to have a bomb. I think he really sincerely means I hope you don't want  them to have a bomb. Want them to have a bomb? It I don't want anyone to have a bomb, including  Israel. I don't know why we're okay with Israel having nuclear weapons. I'm not I'm not okay  with Pakistan having them. I'm not okay with Saudi having them. Israel's nuclear weapons were  created, of course, with nuclear material stolen from the United States, from a nuclear plant in  Pennsylvania. As I know, you know, I'm opposed to all of it. I don't like nuclear weapons.  It's mass murder as far as I'm concerned. So, no, I don't want Iran to have a bomb, obviously.  The question is, what are the potential costs? And you have to factor that into any decision.  And and what are the costs if they were to get a nuclear bomb? They've said for 47 years, death  to America. Well, I don't think they target us. I don't think Israel they've targeted President  Trump specifically. Yeah. They've hired a person to assassinate Iran, BBC and Hamas, not defending  them. Good. All I'm saying, we're in agreement on that. I want our country is not thriving and  we're spending, you know, tens and tens and tens of billions of dollars over time defending Israel  and helping it prosecute all. You know where that money goes? Goes to a lot of places. But but let's  let's talk about that a minute. $3.8 8 billion a year. That money goes right back to the US to  purchase weapon systems. For example, every round of ammo that the IDF shoots is manufactured  just outside where I live in Little Rock, Arkansas. Mhm. The components, a lot of them for  the Iron Dome and the A3 missile defense systems. Yeah. Are manufactured near Camden, Arkansas,  which needs it. By the way, Camden's economically depressed. You know the area. I do. And there  are thousands and thousands of American jobs. And there are billions and billions of dollars of  expenditures that Israel makes in the US and buys the things that we I know how defense contracting  works. I'm from Russia. No, I I know this. I guess what I'm saying is America's not thriving at all.  And you think it's Israel's fault? I I don't think it's Israel's fault. Okay. Well, good. I I I think  I just think that what we're doing isn't working at all. And America is not rich. The president is  doing some amazing things to get us back on Trump. Not attacking Trump. Okay. I'm merely saying that  over say the last 20 years, America's not gotten richer or freer um at all. And I come to Israel  and the infrastructure we're flying in and I said to my buddy, I was like, "Man, the looks first  looks great. I love the agriculture in Israel cuz it's beautiful. I love green. I love plants."  I remember when it didn't look like that. Yeah. Yeah. First time I came here 53 years ago. It's  great. It did not look like that. Great. looks a lot nicer than our country and it has higher  standard of living. It has nicer roads uh than the United States. And so it's like, okay, why  are we sending all this money to a country that has a higher standard of living than ours? I don't  know that they have a higher standard of living. They do actually. They have free healthcare. They  also have free abortion. Are you okay with that? I personally don't like that. Why would we be  subsidizing? Why would we send any money? Why would we send any money to a country that provides  free abortion? Because the money that we send does not pay for healthare. It does not pay for  abortion. It pays for military. It's like if they don't spend it on this, they'll spend it on that.  They do spend it on that and then we get many more times back and the return on investment when we  say we're not sending you any more money as long as you have free abortion. Well, that would be a  policy decision. I would be okay with it because I hate abortion. I think it's horrible. How much  do you hate it? Why are we sending the money if they're paying for free? They're not paying for  abortions with the money and because we in turn get billions of dollars. The return on investment  is estimated somewhere between 400 and 1200. I've heard these numbers. I just live there and I know  and I'm by the way I'm for American manufacturing. The defense industry is totally corrupt and CD  as you know. However, I like to see American companies thrive. Like it's complicated. I'm not  an extremist or an absolutist on really anything other than abortion. However, net net, as we say,  our country is not really thriving. And I we're also totally Why is that the case? Is it because  we've done a lousy job controlling our borders, a lousy job of controlling our economy? It's a  lot of things, but we own that. I think President Trump is doing remarkable things to turn it  around. I cannot imagine any president. Oh, but if you're saying the country is in trouble,  listen, saying we're out of money actually credit to what the president is doing to get us out  of debt because I think that what he's doing economically, I'm not supporting Hamas and  I'm not attacking Trump. Okay. Just with those baseline agreements, it's also true that like  our debt is not sustainable. And so given that, like what do you think it will cost? What what  did it cost to move all these to move the fleet off Iran into the Persian Gulf? A lot less than  it would to bury a lot of Americans if they ever got a long range ballistic missile. A lot less.  I want you to understand that when Iran has told us for 47 years they're going to kill us, do you  think they would do it if they had the capacity militarily? What would happen if Iran took out any  of the energy facilities in the Gulf or took out a bunch of them? What would happen to the United  States economy, do you think? Well, our economy probably would survive because we have energy  independence thanks to President Trump. Would survive. Our economy is based on our markets. What  What do you think? It would be a terrible thing to happen globally. It's why Iran is a global  threat. It's why Iran through its proxies. Tucker, this is another thing people They're not blowing  up energy infrastructure right now, but if we try to regime change them, they have said that they  will. I don't know if they will or not. either is that a risk that but they have their own problems  to defend if they try to do that and they lose their own energy capacity worried about so if  they took out and I again I don't know what's going to happen and I guess we're not supposed  to think about worst case because that makes us pro-Islamic or something but I'm an American and  I don't want a depression in our country it's too fractured and unstable right now I don't think we  want that at all okay none of us want that none of us want that not right now we don't not at all  I don't want it next year next week 10 Seriously, now all these states are basically in a state  of insurrection against the federal government. They're not enforcing the most basic law of the  land, which is immigration. And thank goodness, President Trump is pushing back and he's I  agree. I'm just saying seeking to force if all of a sudden compliance markets just tanked and  gas tripled or whatever and you had, you know, like a severe recession or something worse. That's  a massive cost and I don't see anybody factoring in that possibility. Iran has said it will do  it. You've said 10 times they're evil. Okay, I believe you. Then why wouldn't they take  out the Qatari gas fields they share with Qar or refining prochemicals extraction in any of  the Gulf countries? That that would [ __ ] us. Let's well energy wise again we have independence  because President Trump put measures in place that gave us the capacity. We set international energy  prices in the United States. In some ways we do because our own market and our own production has  a whole lot to do with what those world costs are going to be. If you took Saudi energy production  or Qatari energy production or Emirati energy production offline that is making an assumption  that if there were regime change that they would be more effective at attacking than we would be  defending. And that's a pretty Can we defend the the straits for moves? Can we defend all of that  energy infrastructure? Is anyone even asking these questions or it's all like a Mark Leven episode  where are bad. Okay, they are certainly asking the questions. That's part of the whole process.  Saying is it I've raised this before and it's like shut up. You're taking money from the jihadis.  I've never taken a dime from anybody. Obviously, I just care about the United States and it freaks  me out and no one else seems worried about this. In caring about the US, you should care about the  fact that the proxies of Iran have moved globally. 12 Central and South American countries have  Hezbollah deeply embedded. Venezuela one of the worst. They're in the Western Hemisphere already.  Do we know how many? Where would you rank that on the on the like list of concerns for the average  American? Hezbollah in I doubt most Americans think about it. I think about it because I know  what they do. I know that if it weren't for Iran, there wouldn't be Hamas. There wouldn't be  the Houthis. There wouldn't be Hezbollah. We wouldn't have the problem on the border with  Lebanon. We wouldn't have the problem with Yemen. We wouldn't have the difference problem  on the border with Leb I'm as I'm an American. I'm not having any problems on the border with  Lebanon right now. I live in Maine. We don't have problems on the border of Lebanon. Like  what are you even talking about? No offense. There's 700,000 Americans who live in Israel  for one thing. Does that matter to you? Well, of course every American matters to me. Every  life you say matters the same. So that should matter when my country like shelling civilians and  civilians get killed and displaced. That should matter to all of us. But I mean there's a genocide  going on like in all kinds of different countries there. There's a lot that's sad and broken about  the world. We know that as Christians. Satan rules the world. But our job as like members of a  nation state is look after our community families, right? So I don't think any of the concerns that  you've just raised, which I think are all real, I'm not disputing them at all, are even in  like the top hundred for Americans. Can the US government be spending this much time and money  worrying about things that are not on the list of Americans concerns? Do we have self-government?  Does it matter what Americans actually think or doesn't it? Of course it does. But it also  matters how much does it matter what the threat is to Americans. Do you think there's a threat  to Americans because of the proliferation of the proxies in in Iran? Conceivably there is. I'm not  pro Ron, but but beyond conceivably, do you think that they mean it when they say 47 cartels like  in my town and no one's doing anything about it at all? I'm hearing a lot doing anything about that.  No one's doing anything about it at all. Okay, that's a fact. We have a huge country. This is a  country the size of New Jersey with no resources. You know, it's just a tiny little country. Mhm.  We're from a huge continentalized country that's totally diverse, very, very hard to manage and  police. And we have a lot of problems. And I just think if you ask Americans what do they want to  spend their time and money worrying about fixing, improving, no one's going to mention the border  with Lebanon that I know. Do you think? I doubt they will. But this don't like to think that there  are people that the US government has monitoring what the threats are to Americans long term. Do  you think there's a threat? The question is when people talk Well, but I don't know that Saddam  ever said he was going to take down America, but the the Iranian regime has said for 47 years  they are. Will you just if they had the capacity of a long range ballistic missile and nuclear  capability, do you think they'd light that puppy up and send it to us? I don't know. Um, but I know  Well, I know this from sitting here last year, four wars that I went through in less than  a year, the Iranians rain down ballistic missiles. Can I ask you a question? Like, how  much does it matter what Americans think? Well, it matters every bit what Americans think. That's  why Americans vote. It's why Americans have the opportunity to have free speech. We want them to  have that. Okay. So, what percentage of Americans support a war with Iran? I don't know. Do you  know? I do. It's I think it's around I saw the numbers yesterday. I think it was like 21%. Okay.  Is that enough to have a war with Iran? We don't live in a world where you have a poll taken to  find out whether our policy should be a particular direction because Oh, I thought I thought you just  said that democracy. No, we care deeply about it. But on the other hand, do we make the decisions  of foreign policy and even domestic policy based on we care deeply about it? In what sense? How  in if we're ignoring it, then in what sense do we quote care deeply about it? Well, I think we  care deeply when we see there's a threat. No, but about Americans opinions. So, you've got  350 million Americans. Um, they vote they voted in this last election on the basis in part of  the promise no more wars. Okay. So, now we're about to have a war. Looks like 80% of people are  against it. In that range, let's say it's 70%, but nowhere near majority support for this war.  And it's not direct democracy, but it is a form of democracy. It's representative democracy.  The ultimate form of democracy in our system in a republic because we're not a true democracy.  We're a republic. Exactly. Right. It's a mediated democracy. It'll be an opportunity for Americans  to vote if they think that we've made the wrong policy decisions. I personally think the president  is making the right policy decision. But I guess it but you just said it matters deeply what  Americans think and if the overwhelming majority are against it in what sense does it matter cuz  what I hear is it matters what they think but it really doesn't matter what they think because no  you take it in you certainly ingest that and then what do you once you ingest it then you make sure  that you have you just got it goes out the other end obviously no it doesn't it doesn't Tucker  but you also have information that the average American may not have they may not know what the  threat is. How many Americans know that Hezbollah is in 12 Western Hemisphere countries? How many  Americans care? Well, I would hope they would all care. How many Americans know? How many people  from Iran from terrorist cells have come across Joe Biden's open border? How how many Americans?  They definitely care about that. Okay, you care. Why haven't they been rounded up? But they're  trying, but you got all these blue state mayors and governors making it very difficult. But thank  god President Trump is trying to get it done. Look, I'm totally all for that completely. I guess  what I'm saying is that most Americans over I've never met an American who thinks other than like  the people who have ideological reasons to pretend they think it that the imminent threat to America  is anything having to do with Iran. Imminent threats to America include like bankruptcy  from too much debt, your son ODing on fentanyl, your neighborhood completely changing because  unlike Israel, Americans don't have a right to their country. It can just be completely changed  by their legislature. New people can show up from foreign countries and not speak your language and  there's nothing you can do about because you don't have a right because you're not BB. Can you feel  the resentment? Because it's real. I'm not against Israel. I'm against the total destruction. You  hide that very well. I'm mad at my lawmakers for not protecting my country with the care they've  protected Israel. I don't think that your country, my country, our country has spent that much  time protecting Israel. I asked you a little bit ago. They have no time protecting my  country. No, I ask you. Well, actually, they do. How? They are the tip of the spear. Every  enemy they have is our enemy. Our country. Things that are targeted toward us often go through them.  How do we have 60 million illegal aliens if they protected my country? Well, that we didn't protect  our country because we had a president that opened up the borders and didn't give a rip going on  since Reagan 1986. Yeah, but that's 40 years. President Trump the credit for having closed the  border. I'm giving I love the fact I campaigned for Trump cuz he said he'll close the border. He  did. Amen. Thank you, Trump. But we had Reagan, then we had Bush. Then we had Clinton. Then we  had Bush again. Then we had that guy Obama and then you know the presidents. Yeah. And they all  presided over my country's total transformation from a nice clean affluent orderly society into  like pretty kind of third world actually. That's not protecting us. That's behaving with total  contempt for my country. You said a moment ago that we do more or you inferred that we do  more for Israel than we do for ourselves. Do you believe that? No. What? I don't I didn't say we do  more for Israel. It's like, but where's the care? Where's the concern? Where's the Holy smokes?  There are drug cartels in your neighborhood. You're telling me about the border with Lebanon  and like Hezbollah or Hezbollah, whatever you call it, in some Latin American country. I don't  care. There are drug cartels in my neighborhood. I know people who've died of fentanyl os. Where  the fentanyl come from? Probably from China. It's from Mexico. From China through Yeah. The  precursor chemicals they say come from China. I get it. And who's in that axis with China? Iran.  Uh Larry Frink is in that access with No, actually actually the heads of our biggest corporations are  in that axis with China. I don't care about Iran at all. I care about America. And if blowing up  Iran makes my country richer and safer, I'm for it. And if it doesn't, I'm totally opposed. It's  that simple. I think most Americans feel that way. I asked you a question a little bit ago you never  got back to because I think it's an important one because one of the things that I I sense a tension  with you. You feel like that we do too much for Israel. We're getting nothing from it. And I  ask you how many I don't think we're getting how many boots on the ground has the US placed on  behalf of Israel? However many went to Iraq. We did that for Israel. No, I don't think we did.  You said we did it because of 9/11. That's was the US justification for it. But it wasn't 911.  So what was the actual reason? Well, that's the US government told us it was for 911. They told us  that they were part of it that they had weapons of mass destruction. They knew they had nothing to do  with 911. Obviously, there's no evidence. So what was the actual Israel was not in that component.  Israel had no influence on our decision to invade Iraq. That's not what the people who made the  decision say. They say Israel Well, let me get back to the point. Gave us that information about  the fake weapons of mass destruction. What do you think the question came from? BB, how many how  many Americans put their boots on the ground for Israel? The answer is zero. Everybody who served  in Iraq put their boots on the ground for Israel. Did not. Did not. Where did we get the information  about the weapons of mass destruction? That wasn't real. We didn't get that from You're saying  we got that from Israel? That Israel was one pushed us into that? Well, absolutely. You really  believe that? I know that for a fact. And so does every Yes. This has been uh widely written about  and discussed. And I'm not attacking Israel. Like they thought it was in their interest to take  out a government that was paying the families of suicide bombers. I get it. I'm not mad at Israel  about that. I never have been. I'm mad at the Bush administration and all the people who went along  with this to the detriment of my country. That's who I'm mad at. Not Israel. BB is doing what he  can for his country. Whether you agree with him or not, I want my leaders to do the same for my  country. That's it. I think the present leadership is doing just that. I truly do. And I don't  think that it's at all accurate to even intimate that tiny little Israel is pushing the US into  something it does not want to do. I totally Our leaders appear to want to do it. Our public does  not want to do it at all. The public does not want war with Iran. BB does. He's gotten seven seven  trips to the White House. The average American Hold on. The average American doesn't have that  level of access and a foreign leader does. Seven in one year. And now we're moving toward war  with Iran. The average American doesn't want that war. The average American is outraged. Don't  you understand? I'm not the strongest president I've ever seen in my lifetime. Going back to  Eisenhower for God. If you're an American. No, no, no. Listen to me, Tucker. For God's sake,  I'm not attacking Trump. I like Trump. I know, but you're making it sound like that he is being  pulled into something that he really doesn't want to do or pulled into something cuz he's persuaded.  I'm neither saying that nor implying. I was in the meeting last week. I was in the meetings last  summer. I can assure you, President Trump is not being led into something at all by Prime Minister  Netanyahu. To be clear, I'm neither saying that nor implying it. what I am stating out loud is  true and that's that Prime Minister Netanyahu BB Netanyahu has way more influence over American  foreign policy than Americans do. And we know this because he wants a war with Iran. The overwhelming  majority of Americans don't want a war with Iran and we're very likely to get a war with Iran. So  who has more influence, Benjamin Netanyahu or 80% of Americans? I'm saying that's outrageous. That's  all I'm saying. I would counter that. BB Netanyahu does not want a war with Iran. To say that he  wants a war, you know who's going to be at the very front of that? His people. And I don't agree  with that. I'm with him enough to know he does not want a war. He doesn't. Does Does he think  that there may be a necessity of taking a war in order to prevent an attack on not just Israel?  But I think I know too much. I mean, let's let's be real, okay? So, there was uh you know, Steve  Wickoff, in my opinion, is just a sterling guy, just a good guy, excellent guy. I that's my  view and kind of pro-American and just couldn't be nicer and wants to do the right thing and he's  probably Trump's best friend. He and maybe Jared, too, are involved in a negotiation with Hamas.  Um, or you mean with Iran? With Iran. Yeah. I'm so sorry. Okay. And the Israeli government short  circus it by hitting Iran. So like they What do you mean they short circuit by hitting Iran?  They did everything they could to shut down the negotiations between the United States,  the Trump administration, and Iran. And look, I wouldn't. They're acting again in their own  interest, but our country should also act in its own interest. That's all I'm saying. So don't  tell me that BB doesn't want a war with Iran. He doesn't. If Jared Kushner and Steve Witco could  be successful in getting the president's demands, and keep in mind, these are the president's  demands. What are those demands? No enrichment, no nuclear weapon. Quit killing your own people  in the streets by the tens of thousands. You, you and I both agree that it's a horrible thing to  kill your own citizens, which Iran is doing. It's a horrible thing to kill anybody's citizens.  Anybody's citizens. We agree on that. Except that they're 14-year-olds working for Hamas. But  whatever. It's still a tragedy. No, it is. Sorry, I'm being a jerk. You really are being a jerk. I  am. I know. I am being a jerk on it. I am such a jerk. I'm going to write down admitted. I know  he's a jerk. Oh, I am a jerk. Everyone knows that. I mean, I'm trying to really trying. Okay.  Okay. No, but I agree with you 100%. Of course, it's a trap. If that could be done, and I pray  it can. Yes. And you know why? Number one, because it would be wonderful for everybody.  Number two, if there is a war, you're going to be 6,000 miles from it. You know where I'm going  to be? In the bullseye. Do I want there to be a war? No. Do Israelis want there to be a war?  No. How many I keep hearing Israel is fighting a sevenfront war right now. What are those seven  fronts? Well, you got Lebanon, you have Egypt. Now, Egypt is not an active war, but you have the  Muslim Brotherhood within Egypt. You've got uh the Muslim Brotherhood in Jordan. You've got Syria.  Wait, they're fighting war with Jordan with the Muslim Brotherhood that is in Jordan, not directly  with Jordan, not the government of Jordan. What are they? You've got Hezbollah, you've got in  Lebanon, Hoodis in Yemen, you have Hamas in Gaza, you have uh the threats that come from Iran.  And how many is that? That's seven. That's seven. Okay. I give you an eighth one. You know  the eighth one? The media. No, I would tell you there's an eighth front war they fight. How many  journalists is Israel killed in Gaza? I don't know. Over 200. That seems like Now, are they  real journalists? Because a lot of those people that were supposedly journalists were actually  Hamas fighters that are documented Hamas fighters. So that's why I ask you how many are actual  journalists. You know, I I don't know. But a lot of them were. I mean, they worked for big news  organizations and they had press written on their chest. Yeah. Some of them had UNRA cars and they  were also working for Hamas. So are you concerned? So do you think that over 200 journalists killed  in Gaza, all fake journalists who deserve to be killed? I have no idea how many the total  number is. I I don't have their credentials, but I know that there were quite a few that were  actually Hamas fighters that protected Hamas. Ask the hostages. The hostages came back and they  started telling about the number of people that were doctors in hospitals that held them hostage  in their homes or the number of people who were pretending to be journalists who were actually  holding them hostage. As someone who is telling you that there's there's a lot more to what  as someone whose tax dollars helped pay for killing all those civilians in Gaza, I feel like  I have a right to know how many were killed and Israel won't let outside observers in to figure  it out. And I I'm frustrated. I just want to say that my last question is about Christians.  Um both Christians who visit and Christians uh who live here, particularly in the West Bank.  Um, I spoke to someone recently, um, a Christian minister who grew up in a town right outside  Bethlehem. We would know it as Shepherd's Field um, in the New Testament where the shepherds were  tending their flocks in Matthew and of course the angels come and announce the arrival of Jesus and  in nearby Bethlehem. His family's been Christian, he says, for 2,000 years. He says his where  he grew up is now surrounded by settlements um, of people who are not from Israel at all.  A lot of them are from the United States, Jewish settlements. They have different roads  uh that the native Christians are not allowed to use. I don't quite know how that works. Um and  he described a story where his mother was shot outside their house by an IDF soldier for reasons  no one ever explained. She survived um but no one was ever punished for it or even explained why  they did it. And he basically described being terrorized by settlers. Uh, and I wonder if that's  a concern for you for the native population, the indigenous population. Did you say this happened  in Bethlehem? Uh, it happened in Shepherd's Field. So, it's a Christian village. Beth Sahor, I think  is its name outside right outside Bethlehem. If it's in Bethlehem, it's not in Bethlehem. It's  again, it's I think it's Betahor, I believe, is the name of the village because there are no  Israelis in Bethlehem. None. There are no Jews in Bethlehem. Are there new settlements outside  Bethlehem where he is from? Uh over in in area C, but not in area A. There are none. Well, he he  describes the town he grew up in. And I guess I I wonder why a Christian whose family's been there  for 2,000 years. There are Palestinian Christians throughout uh today in Samaria. That That's  true. I've been over to visit them. I know. I know. I know you have. and some have been um you  know we've advocated for some that are Muslim but they're American citizens and we advocated because  there was uh but why can't they just drive into Jerusalem to go to the church of the holy supplr?  Why do they need a permit to do that if they're from there? Because of the acts of terrorism that  has made it impossible to do it. You know how many suicide Christians you asked this question. So  what do we do? Just say you're a Christian. Oh yeah, I'm a Christian. But you're wearing a  suicide bomb. Do Christians do suicide bombs? They could they could if all they have to do is  just say announce I'm a Christian. There were over a thousand. Why don't just get an identity card  says I'm a Christian. Let me just finish this. Before Israel put the the green line up and before  they took great care to put checkpoints in place, there were over a thousand suicide bombers in  one year. It was awful. I remember it. But I don't think any of them were Christians. And they  may not have been. Okay. But but my point is we we could find out if they were and so you're you're  saying we just trust somebody if they come up and say I'm a Christian I just want to go to the  holy supplr. Let me in. What I'm saying is that Christians have a right to go to the holy supplr.  Israel does not own it. They've had possession of it since 1967. It doesn't belong to BB. It belongs  to me and you and every other Christian. BB was a probably a young person. I'm not even sure he was  No Christian should ever be barred from the church of the holy supplr. Should Christians be barred  from Joseph's tomb in Nabilus? I don't know. Let's just start with the church of the holy self and I  don't understand on what grounds they are. Well, they can't if they're Christians at Betsah.  So, I don't understand why they're a threat. They're not a threat. And why won't you as the  Christian minister, US ambassador to the state of Israel say to the prime minister, "You can't  allow this. Your country exists in part because American Christians support you. So, you have  to treat us well." Part of the problem, Tucker, is that in the Palestinian Authority, and  that's what we're talking about, there are Christians. Look, I know some Christians who live  in Bethlehem, and that is area A. Bethlehem was 80 plus% Christian before Oslo. 80% Christian,  less than 20% Muslim. Today, it's flipped. It's now 80 plus% Muslim. It's very few Christian. And  some of the Christians that I personally know and know well are Zionist. Let that surprise you.  They're Zionist. They're hardcore. Some are are Let me finish my train of thought here. Okay.  So, in the Palestinian Authority, they still teach children from the time they're five years  old that the greatest thing in the world is to kill Jews. And that if they end up being a martyr  and if they kill Jews, they will get a pension for life if they die. And if they don't, they'll get  a paycheck for life and their families will. And it's called the prisoners and martyrs fund. It's  we call it pay for slay in the US. It is against our law. A lot of Christians collecting on that.  I don't know. Zero. So my question remains and I'm a little bit frustrated at this point. I because  I'm not defending Hamas. I hate suicide bombing. I hate suicide. I hate violence. I hate the killing  of children. Period. Why can't a Christian who was born there, whose family's been there for 2,000  years, following Jesus for 2,000 years, drive, cuz it's really close to the Church of the Holy  Supplr. He poses no threat. And why can't the United States government advocate for him to do  that? We do advocate for Americans because that's our job. And it doesn't matter whether they're  Palestinian or Israeli. We do that. But as far as when they How many Americans are being held in  Israeli prisons right now? Um total I don't have a exact number on that. I don't know. How can you  advocate for them if you don't know how many there are? Well, everyone that we know we go visit.  Our consular goes there almost every week and visits the Americans. It's not a large number  uh as far as Americans, but when we have them, we go we go to their trials when they're on trial.  So, yeah, we do a lot more than you've given us credit for. Oh, I'm giving you credit. No, no,  you're giving credit for doing that because we don't get much. No, we don't get much. By the way,  not every embassy does that. I happen to know for a fact they don't advocate for Americans in jail.  And we take our consular services across into the Palestinian Authority and help people over there.  Some of those are Christians, some are not, some are Muslim. But if they're Americans and they  have American citizenship, an American passport, we help them. That makes me so happy to hear. I go  to Ramla, I sit down with the vice president and the prime minister of the Palestinian Authority.  We try to work ways to make things better. But the reason that sometimes it's not just a absolute  free passage, I'll tell you why. because there are too many instances of terrorist acts and Israel is  not going to allow themselves. But the Christians didn't do it and they're not going to do it and  Christians pay for all of this. They pay for a lot of this. Horrible. It's it's very you can say it's  unfair. But here's you can't punish the innocent. How's that? But you got to somehow make sure that  you screen people. And that's why the checkpoints. Let me tell you what happened not too very long  ago. We had a humanitarian aid truck that came across from Jordan. The driver was supposedly  vetted. He was a former Jordanian military person. He came across the checkpoint. Everything should  be fine, right? He gets out of his truck. He takes a gun and he shoots two of the people, I believe  it, who are the Israelis at the checkpoint. One of whom was a young person less than a year in  the job. His mother teaches in the American school where our embassy people go in Herselia.  I get to make the phone call to the mother. I'm going to tell you something. It was not the most  pleasant day of my life. It sounds awful. It is awful. And so those kind of incidences are the  reason that it is difficult to go from Judea, Samaria, or the West Bank. Call it whatever you  want. But if you're in area A, which is under the control of the Palestinian Authority, and  your education has been that killing Jews is a wonderful thing. I'm talking about the Christians.  But the Christians, if they go to those schools, they're still going to get that education.  When was the last time there was a suicide bomb detonated by Christians? I don't know. Never. Let  me ask you this. Look, I'm not trying to defend, but I'm saying to you that if the curriculum  doesn't get changed, if the pay for slay doesn't get changed, that doesn't apply. You have a  culture. Well, it you say it doesn't apply. Maybe it never has happened. I don't know whether it has  ever happened. When will Palestinians in the West Bank have the same rights as Israelis in the West  Bank? Are you talking about the ones that live in the Palestinian Authority? I'm talking about  people who live in the villages they grew up in, but changed hands, went from one government to  another. whether they live under the Palestinian Authority government or whether they live under  Israeli. If they live under area A, do you know the difference? I do. I'm saying if they live  under area A, they live under the Palestinian Authority government. They don't live under  Israeli government. What? But it's controlled by the Israeli government completely. There's  no airport. They control the utilities. I mean, this is it's silly. I understand there's a form of  self-government, but the big decisions are made by the Israeli government. Obviously, I've been  there. I know this. And you know it, too. So, how long does this go on? You say that God gave  the nation of Israel the right to this land. Why not just take it, declare it Israel, and make  everyone a citizen? I don't understand why that's not happening. Well, you know what? There are  people who think that that would be a much better think. I think it it very well could be. And if  you ask certain people living in the PA under their very corrupt government, where 91% of the  people think the government is hopelessly corrupt, that's what the numbers are. They would tell you  that they would be better off if the Israelis were the governing authority. Everyone gets voting  rights. Would that be the case if they were all under Israeli authority? You know, there are do  you you realize there are lots of ArabIsraelis? I know. And they vote. Do you know they serve in  the Knesset? I'm very aware of that. And I'm just wondering and they serve on the Supreme Court. And  did you know that it was an Arab who sentenced a former president and prime minister to prison? I  I know this. So the qu I just want to know what's going to happen. You know how many Jews get to  help govern Saudi Arabia or Qatar or Syria? I I'm not attacking Jews. It's a much more open  government in society and you make it sound like that the Israeli sound that way. I'm just asking  I No, I am not attacking the nation of Israel. I'm just wondering what the plan is. So, I've been  hearing my whole life how bad the PA is. Okay, great. But what's the plan here? So they're moving  all these Americans, people from around the world into settlements subsidized by Americans in the  West Bank. No, they're not moving them from around the world to the settlements. They're people who  make aliyah. They come and these are is these are Israelis who live in Israel. Well, there are a  lot of people and area C is Israel. Okay. Okay. But does it remain a territory under military  control forever? Does it just become part of the state? You talking about the Palestinian  Authority? Correct. That's the big question. Do you believe in a two-state solution? And if  you do, I would I would show you a map and I would ask you because this is u I don't know. I don't  know what I think. I just think you need to treat people like human beings and that's not happening  obviously. And that would be you don't glorify their killing. Yeah. Let them go to their church  if they want. See the yellow parts? Yeah. That's Palestinian Authority. The tan parts, that's  area B. That's the area that is mixed. Israel has military authority, but the Palestinians can live  anywhere they want to in there. And the blue area, that's area C. Area C is Israel. And Israelis  can live in Israel. That's what it is. Now, when people say they want a two-state solution, I  love to show them a map like this. And I ask them, where does that state line up? There is no  continuous work. You know, we've got a lot of states in the United States that need help. So,  I'm not going to weigh in on other people's states to be totally honest. I just don't want to pay for  it anymore and just want to fix our own country. But let me ask you one last question, which is how  Christians are treated in Jerusalem. I've talked to so many who've been spit on. Uh I so many  how many? Uh well, two yesterday. Two. Okay. Yeah. Both Catholic clergy and both told me the  same thing. Anglican clergy. I interviewed I just had dinner recently with a Greek uh patriarch.  Well, there have been a million stories about this. Yeah, I know there are instances where  Christians get heckled. Usually it's people who are wearing clerical robes and they're wearing  crosses and it shouldn't happen. It's horrible. It is bad for that to happen as it is to spit on  somebody wearing a kip in New York City. Great. Terrible. It's horrible. And actually, I should  to be fair, there is, and I just learned this, a Jewish Israeli group that keeps track of  Christians being spit on in Jerusalem because they're offended by it. And God bless them for  keeping track and for being offended by it. But there are an awful lot of examples of that. And  my question to you, you're against it. Of course, your Christian clergy horribly against it. What is  that? And so is the prime minister, the president, the foreign minister. So is I think every No one  would defend that thinking person. But what is it? Why are they spitting on Christian? It's very  limited. It's very, very isolated. Where does it come from? But for the most part, you know what?  As Christians, we have freedom of movement here. Tucker, I go to church every Sunday. I play bass  guitar in my church band. I get it. I don't get hassled being a Christian. Everyone here knows  I'm the first evangelical to be ambassador to Israel. Do you think they hate me here? No. Are  evangelicals recognized by the state of Israel? Yeah, they are. Yeah. Okay. And and welcomed and  and appreciated. No, but like as a as a religious like are there evangelical churches in Israel?  My gosh, yes. There's 184,000 Christians in I know. I know. and much larger than but there are  churches that are non-denominational evangelical here. Of course there are and and it ranges  from when you say non-denominational some of them are affiliated Baptist Assembly of God some  of them are truly non-denominational Pentecostal some are messianic churches right where um most  of the people are um ethnically Jewish but they are Messianic they believe in Jesus there are a  lot of those churches and they're spread out all over Israel so um but you don't Oh I there I know  a lot of Christians in Israel by the way us and I, as I said, I really hope I can come back and  talk to more, but and come to church with me. Oh, I definitely would love that. Why, and I mean it,  too. Why would people spit on? Like, where does that come from? I think it's from an evil heart.  Yeah. What else would it be? I agree. I mean, I don't think anybody would ever spit on  another person, even if it was, you know, I don't care what a person's religion is or what  a person's nationality is. I don't hate anybody. I wouldn't spit on anybody. I wouldn't heckle  anyone. And I find it repulsive. Nothing about it is defensible. I will say that the one, this  was off camera, but I interviewed this Christian uh leader here and I said, "Oh, that's so awful."  And he goes, "You know, I feel blessed because Jesus was spit on and it's an opportunity for  humility for me." And I thought, "Wow, that's a Christian." Let me tell you this. I've been coming  in and out of Jerusalem and Israel for 50, well, soon to be 53 years. Before I came as ambassador,  I made over a 100 trips here. I've never been spat on. I've never had someone yell at me. Um, I've  never had an experience where I felt uncomfortable or that I was unwelcome. Um, if you spit on  someone wearing a yamak in New York City, you go right to jail. They would not put up with that  for one second. And they do put up here because it still happens. I'm not sure they do go to jail  in New York City. They should and they should go to jail here. I'm against it. I'm They should go  to jail here. Amen. So, there were all these uh Christian ministers who were brought over here,  evangelicals, in December. Uh and I think mostly to attack me, but also probably they had other  Oh, they really weren't here to attack you. I'm just joking. They were attacking me, but whatever.  Um and but they were flown over by the state. the state paid for it and they had a conference here.  I got one of the guides that they received when they arrived and I think it's real and it says  don't preach about Jesus when you're in Israel. We don't we don't allow that. Don't do that. Really?  Yeah. Why would a Christian minister agree not to preach about Jesus? I'm not sure because I have  I've never heard someone tell another Christian minister not to do that. Interesting. Good. Well,  I was I was totally baffled. What would be the purpose of going to church as a Christian if you  didn't talk about Jesus? Agree more. Thank you. I can assure you that that the church I attend, we  talk about Jesus. I mean, we pray in the name of Jesus. I don't get it. To anyone else outside the  church, are you allowed like could I stand on the corner and just tell people about Jesus here? You  could. I'm not saying you'd get applause or that people Right. That's fine. But I'm But I'm saying  there are people that There's no law against that though. Not that I'm aware of. The only laws that  that I know of, you can't proitize someone under the age of 18. And you cannot offer people things  of value in order to cause them to listen to your presentation. For example, I can't say, "Hey, for  $10, would you let me give you this gospel track and and scream at you?" Can't do that, right?  Uh I don't know if it's enforced. I'm I'm not sure. I don't ever hear anyone arrested for it.  But there no there's no law against just like preaching to people. walk down to the old city,  you'll hear people, you know, out there preaching on the street. Now, are they effective? I don't  know. I'm not sure that people are stopping and falling on their knees and saying, "This is what  I've been waiting for." I don't know. But what I'm telling you is that the idea that you can't  say it. I know that there are places in the rest of this region where you can't do that. For  sure. Yeah. Cutter, you can't wear a cross in public. For sure. You can't pray in public. I  see a lot of people wearing crosses in cutter, but in cutter, I don't know. I have, but I don't  know what the laws are. Yeah. In Saudi Arabia, don't think so. I doubt it. The one place is an  exception is the Amiradis, and I love those folks because they are so um progressive and they're  doing so many things to change the the template of things. They have a Abraham house that is it  is a combination synagogue, church, and mosque. That's pretty amazing, isn't it? That they have  the same building and they use it for all three of the major religions of the world. And I think  that's incredible. Um, but they're really trying to do things that are beyond what anyone else  in the region. They changed their textbooks. They teach that Israel is not a nation they  should hate or seek to annihilate. They've done some remarkable things. You've been following  all this stuff in the I agree with that. They have a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. You've been  following all this like hate the Muslim stuff going on in the United States on the right. I I  hear some of it and it's uh it's unpleasant. We shouldn't hate anybody. Amen. Yeah. It's not a  good thing. Hate is a an evil thing. I I don't uh you know sometimes you say, "I don't support  child killing." Okay, I don't either. But I don't support hate in any form. I think it's a horrible  thing. That is such a great standard and I want to hold myself to that and thank you for saying that  out loud. I don't hate you. I hope not. Governor, ambassador, thank you very much for spending  all this time. I appreciate it. I'm glad you came. Please come back. I will go with me to  some places and a church. I want you to see that as Christians, we're pretty free here.  Amen. Appreciate it. Thank you. And welcome.