It does sound like you're, like, directly connected to AI development. Yes. You're part of the ecosystem. Yes. And we benefit a lot from when it started happening. Like it was almost, a surprise to a lot of people, but we saw it coming. Yeah. You saw AI coming. Saw it coming. Yeah. So you know, this recent AI wave, you know, it surprised a lot of people. ChatGPT came out November 22nd. A lot of people lost their mind. Like, suddenly a computer can talk to me. And I was like, the- AI wasn't into it at all. Really? You know what, Paul Graham, one of my closest friends and sort of allies and mentors. He's a big Silicon Valley figure. He's a writer, kind of like you, as, you know, he writes a lot of essays, and he hates it. He thinks it's like a midwest, right? And it's just like making people write worse and making people think worse. Worse or not think at all, right? I think as the iPhone has done, as Wikipedia and Google have done, yes. We were just talking about that. The, you know, the iPhones, iPads, whatever, they made it so that anyone can use a computer, but they also made it so that no one has to learn to program. The original vision of computing was that this is, this. This is something that's gonna give us superpowers, right? Jake Licklider, the head of DARPA while the internet was developing, wrote this, essay called The Man Machine Symbiosis. And he talks about how computers can be. An extension of ourselves, can and can help us grow what we can become. You know, there's this marriage between the type of intellect that the computers can do, which is high speed arithmetic, whatever. And the type of intellect that humans can do is more intuition. Yes. But, you know, since then, I think the, the sort of consensus has sort of changed around computing, which is, you know, I'm sure we'll get into that, which is why people are afraid of AI is kind of replacing us. This idea of like, computers and computing are threat because they're directly competitive with, with humans, which is not really the the belief I hold. They're extensions of us. And I think people are learning to program. And this is really embedded at the heart of our mission at Replit is what gives you superpowers. Whereas when you're just tapping, you're kind of a consumer, you're not a producer of software. And I want more people to be producers of software. There's a book by dog. Not Hofstadter, Rushkoff, Douglas Rushkoff. It's called Program or Be Programed. And that if you're not the one coding, someone is coding you, someone is programing you these algorithms and, you know, social media, they're programing us, right? So too late for me to learn to code though. I don't think so. I don't think so. Okay. I can't balance my checkbook, assuming they're still checkbooks. I don't think there are, but let me just go back to something you said a minute ago. That the idea was originally as conceived by the DARPA guys who made this all possible, that machines would do the math, humans would do the intuition. I wonder, as machines become more embedded in every moment of our lives, if intuition isn't dying or people are less willing to trust theirs. I've seen that a lot in the last few years where something very obvious will happen. And people are like, well, I could sort of acknowledge and obey what my eyes tell me and my instincts are screaming at me. But you know the data. Tell me something different. It's like my advantages. I'm, like, very close to the animal kingdom. That's right. And I just believe in smell. And so. But I wonder if that's not a result of. The advance of technology. Well, I don't think it's inherent to the advance of technology. I think it's it's it's a cultural thing, right? It's how, again, this vision. Of computing as a replacement for humans versus an extension machine for for humans. And so, you know, you go back, you know, Bertrand Russell wrote a book about history, philosophy and history of mathematics and like, you know, going back to the ancients and, Pythagoras and all these things. And you could tell in the writing, he was almost surprised by how much intuition played into science and math. And, you know, in the sort of ancient era of, advancements in logic and philosophy and all of that. Whereas I think the culture today is like, well, you got to check your intuition at the door. Yes. Yeah. You're biased, your intuition is racist or something. And you have to this is bad. And you have to be this, like, you know, blank slate and like, you trust the data. But by the way, data is you can make the data say a lot of different things. And notice we can just ask a totally off topic question. It just occurred to me, how are you this well. I mean, so you grew up in Jordan speaking Arabic in a displaced Palestinian family. You didn't come to the US until pretty recently. You're not a native English speaker. How are you reading Bertrand Russell? Yeah. And how like, what was your education? Is everyone in is every Palestinian family in Jordan that's well-educated? Like what? What kind of like yeah, a Palestinian diaspora is, like, pretty well-educated. And you're starting to see this generation, our generation of kind of, who grew up are starting to, sort of become more prominent. I mean, in Silicon Valley. You know, a lot of C-suite and VP level executives, a lot of them are Palestinian origin. A lot of them wouldn't say so, because there's still, you know, bias and discrimination and all that. But I wouldn't say there are. Palestinians they want to say. And they, you know, they're called Adam. And some of them, some of the Christian processing especially kind of blend in. Right. And but there's a lot of them over there. But how did you so how do you wind up reading? I assume you read Bertrand Russell in English. Yes. How did you learn that you didn't grow up in an English speaking country? Yeah. Well, Jordan is kind of an English speaker. Kind of. Is that straight. So, you know, it was it was a British colony. I think one of the, you know, I, you know, the, the Independence Day like happened. Like 50s or something like that. Or maybe 60s. So it was like pretty late in the. You know, British, sort of empires history that Jordan saw being a colony. So there was a like a lot of British influence. I went to, so my father, my father is a government engineer. He didn't he didn't have a lot of money. So we lived a very modest live, kind of like middle, lower middle class. But he really cared about education. He sent us to private schools. And in those private schools, we learned kind of using British diploma. Right. So I GCSE A-levels, you know, that's. Are you familiar with. Not at all. Yeah. So, so, you know, part of the is that a British you know, colonialism or whatever is like, you know, education system became international. I think it's a good thing. There British schools everywhere. Yeah, yeah. Schools everywhere. And it's good education system. It gives students a good level of freedom and autonomy to kind of pick the kind of things that are interested in. So I, you know, went to a lot of math and physics, but also did did like random things. I did child development, which I still remember. And now that I have kids I actually use. And in high school you do. That and high school and I, I love. What does that have to do with the civil rights movement? What do you mean? Well, that's the only topic in American schools. Really? Yeah. Well, yeah. You spend 16 years learning about the civil rights movement so everyone can identify the Edmund Pettus Bridge, but no one knows anything else. Oh, God. So sorry. My dad with my kids, no doubt. That's me. That's so interesting. So when you when did you come to the US. 2012. And now you've got $1 billion company. That's pretty good. Yeah. I mean, America's amazing. Like, I just love this country. I, it's given us a lot of opportunities. I just love the people. Like, everyday people. I like, just talk to people. I was just talking to to my driver, which she was like you know, I'm so embarrassed that I didn't know who Donald Carlson was. Okay, good. That's why I live here. Yeah. I was like, well, good for you. I think that means you're just like, you know, you're just living your life. And she's like, yeah, I'm, you know, I have my kids and my chickens and my whatever. I was like, that's great. It means you're happy. Means you're happy. Yes. But so I've started to grow. I'm sorry. Digress. I was referring to all these books. I'm like, you're not even from here. It's incredible. So it back to I, and to this question of intuition, you don't think that it's in its inherent. So, in other words, if my life is to something governed by technology, by my phone, by my computer, by. All the technology embedded in, like every electronic object. You don't think that makes me trust machines more than my own gut? You can choose to. And I think, a lot of people are being guided to, to do that. But ultimately, you're giving away a lot of, freedom. Yeah. And and, you know, there's a there's a it's not just me saying that there's like, a huge tradition, of hackers and computer scientists that, kind of started, ringing the alarm bell, like, really long time ago about, like, the way things were trending, which is, you're more centralization, less, you know, diversity of competition in the market. And you, you have, like one global social network as opposed to many. Now it's actually getting a little better. But, and you had a lot of these people, you know, start, you know, the crypto movement. I know you were at the Bitcoin conference recently and you told them, CIA started Bitcoin. They got really angry on Twitter. But I don't know that. Yeah. But until you can tell me who Satoshi was, I have some questions. What? Actually, I have have a feeling about who stole us, but that's a separate company. No, it's, let's just stop right now, because I can't. I will never forget to ask you again. Who is Satoshi? There's a guy. His name is Paul LaRue. By the way, for those watching, you don't know what Satoshi is. The the pseudonym that we use for the person who created Bitcoin, but. We don't know. What's amazing, you know, is this is this thing that was created. We don't know who created it. He didn't he never move the money. I don't think maybe. There was some activity here and there, but like there's like billions, hundreds of billions of dollars locked in. So we don't know who the person is. They're not cashing out as, like, pretty crazy story, right? Amazing. So Paul LaRue. Yeah. Paul was, you know, crypto hacker in Rhodesia, before Zimbabwe. And he created, something called encryption for the masses, M4. And was one of the early, by the way, I think Snowden. Used the M4 as part of his, as part of his hack. So he was one of the people that really, you know, made it so that, cryptography is accessible to more people. However he did he did become a criminal. He became a criminal mastermind in Manila. He was really controlling the the city, almost, you know, he he paid off all the cops and everything. He was making so much money for. So from so much criminal activity, his nickname was Toshi with an L. And so there's, like, a lot of, you know, circumstantial evidence. There's no, like, cutthroat evidence. But I just have a feeling that. He generated so much cash, he didn't know what. To do with it, where to store it. And on the side, he was building Bitcoin to be able to store all that, all that cash. And around the same time that Satoshi disappeared, he went to jail. He got he got booked for, for all the crime he did. He recently got sentenced to 20 or 25 years of prison. I think judge asked him, like, what would you do if you if you would go out? And he's like, I would built an async chip to mine Bitcoin. As a look, you know, this is, strong opinion, loosely held, but it's just like, there's. So he is currently in prison. He's currently in prison. Yeah. In this country or the Philippines. I think this country, because he was doing all the crime here. He was selling drugs online, essentially. We should go see him in jail. Yeah, yeah. To check out. Sorry. I'm sorry. I just had to get that out of you. So I keep digressing. So you see, I and you know, you're part of the AI ecosystem. Of course. But, you don't see it as a threat, you know? No, I don't see how this threat at all. And I think and I, you know, I heard. Some of your, you know, podcast with Joe Rogan or whatever, and you're like, oh, we should nuke the data centers. And, I'm. Excitable. Yeah. On the basis of very little information. Well, actually. Yeah. Well, actually, you tell me, what is your theory about the threat of air? Hey, you know what? I always I want to be the kind of man who admits up front his limitations and his ignorance. And on this topic, I'm legitimately ignorant, but I have read a lot about it, and I've read most of the alarmist stuff about it. And the idea is, as you well know, that the machines become so powerful that they achieve a kind of autonomy. And they, though designed to serve you, wind up ruling you. Yeah. And, you know, I'm, I'm really interested in, Ted Kosinski's writings. His two books that he wrote, obviously, is to say ritually, I'm totally opposed to letter bombs or violence of any kind. But Ted Kozinski had a lot of provocative and thoughtful things to say about technology. It's almost like having live and help, which, you know, people make a lot of money. They all want to have live and help. But the truth about living help is, you know, they're there to serve you, but you wind up serving them in inverts in I kind of species of that, that's the fear. And I don't want to live. I want to be a slave to a machine any more than I already am. So it's just kind of that simple. And then there's all this other stuff, you know a lot more about this than I do, and you're in that world. But yeah, that's my concern. That's actually a quite valid concern. I would like decouple. The existential threat concern from the concern. And we've been talking about this of like like us being slaves to to the machines. And I think you Ted Kaczynski's, critique of technologies actually is one of the best. Yes. Thank you. Yeah. I wish he hadn't killed people, of course, because I'm against killing. But I also think it had the opposite of the intended effect. He did it in order to bring attention to his, to his thesis and ended up obscuring it. Yeah, but I, I really wish that every person in America would read book, not just the his manifesto, but the book that he wrote from prison, because they're just so at the least they're thought provoking and really important. Yeah, yeah. I mean briefly and. We'll get to existential risk in a second. But, he talked about this thing called the power process, which is he thinks that is intrinsic to human happiness. To to struggle for survival, to go through life. As a child, as an adult, build up yourself, get married, have kids, and then become the elder and then die. Right? Exactly. And he thinks that modern technology kind of disrupts this process and makes people miserable. How do you know that? I read it, I'm very. Curious. I like, I read a lot of things, and I just don't have mental censorship in a way like I can. I love, I'm really curious. I'll read anything. Do you think. Being from another country has helped you in that way? Yeah. And I also, I think just my childhood, I was. Like always different. I was when I had hair, it was all red. It was bright red. And my, my whole family is kind of, or at least half of my family are redhead. And, and, you know, because of that experience, I was like, okay, I'm different. I'm comfortable being different. I'll be I'll be different. And, and you know, that just commitment to not worrying about anything, you know, about conforming or like it was forced on me that I'm not conforming just by virtue of being different and. And being curious and being, you know, I'm good with computers and all that. I think that carried me through life. I just, I like, I get, you know, I get like almost a disgust reaction to conformism and like, mob mentality. I couldn't agree more. I had a similar experience. Childhood. I totally agree with you. We traveled to an awful lot of countries on this show, to some free countries, the dwindling number and a lot of not very free countries, places famous for government censorship. And wherever we go, we use a virtual private network of VPN and we use express VPN. We do it to access the free and open internet. But the interesting thing is, when we come back here to the United States, we still use ExpressVPN. Why big tech surveillance? It's everywhere. It's not just North Korea that monitors every move its citizens make. No, that same thing happens right here in the United States and and Canada and Great Britain and around the world. Internet providers can see every website you visit. Did you know that they may even be required to keep your browsing history on file for. Years and then turn over to federal authorities if asked. In the United States, internet providers are legally allowed to and regularly do sell your browsing history. Everywhere you go online, there is no privacy. Did you know that? Well, we did, and that's why we use ExpressVPN. And because we do, our internet provider never knows where we're going on the internet. They never hear it in the first place. That's because 100% of our online activity is routed through Expressvpn's secure, encrypted servers. They hide our IP address, so data brokers cannot track us and sell our online activity on the black market. We have privacy. ExpressVPN lets you connect to servers in 105 different countries. So basically you can go online like you're anywhere in the world. No one can see you. This was the promise of the internet in the first place. Privacy and freedom. Those didn't seem like they were achievable, but now they are. ExpressVPN. We cannot recommend it enough. It's also really easy to use. Whether or not you fully understand the technology behind it. You can use it on your phone, laptop, tablet, even your smart TVs. You press one button, just tap it and you're protected. You have privacy. So if you want online privacy and the freedom it bestows, get it. You can go to our special link right here to get three extra months free of ExpressVPN. That's expressvpn.com/tucker Express expressvpn.com/tucker for three extra months free. So Kaczynski's thesis that struggle is not only inherent to the condition, but an essential part, yes, of your evolution as a man or as a person. And the technology disrupts that. I mean, that seems right to me. Yeah. And I actually struggled to sort of, dispute that, despite being a technologist. Right. Ultimately. Again, like I said, it's like one of the best critique, I think we can spend the whole podcast kind of really trying to tease it apart. I think ultimately where I kind of defer and again, it just goes back to a. Lot of what we're talking about. My views on technology as an extension of us is like, we just don't want technology to be. A thing that's just merely replacing us. We want it to be an empowering thing. And what we do at Replit is we empower people to learn to code, to build startups, to build companies, to become entrepreneurs. And, and I think you can, in this world, you have to create the power process. You have to struggle. And, yes, you can. Yeah. This is why I am also, you know, a lot of technologists talk about UBI and universal basic, right? Oh, I know, I think it's all wrong because this just goes against human nature. Thank you. So I want. To kill everybody. Put them on the door. Yes. Yes. So I you know, I don't think technology is inherently at odds with the power process. I'll leave it at that. We can go toe to toe. Existential threat. Yeah. Of course. Sorry. Boy, am I just aggressive. I can't believe I interview people for a minute. I think we had dinner last night, and we. It was awesome. It was one of those dinners fast, but we we had about. 400 different threats. Yes. Amazing. So that's what's what's out there. I know, I'm sort of convinced of it. My make sense sense to me, and I'm kind of threat oriented anyway, so people with my kind of personality are like, sort of always looking for, you know, the big bad thing that's coming, the asteroid or the nuclear war or the AI slavery. But I know some pretty smart people who very smart people who are much closer to the heart of AI development, who also have these concerns. And I think a lot of the public shares these concerns. Yeah. And the last thing I'll say before soliciting your view of it, much better informed view of it, is that there's been surprisingly and tellingly, little conversation about the upside of AI. So instead it's like this is happening and if we don't do it China will that may I think it's probably true. But like why should I be psyched about it. Like what's the upside for me. Right. You know what I mean. Normally when some new technology or, or huge change comes, the people who are profiting from, like, you know, what's going to be great? It's going to be great. You're not going to ever have to do X again. You know, you just throw your clothes in a machine and press the button and they'll be clean. Yes. I'm not hearing any of that about it. That's a very astute observation. And yeah, I'll exactly tell you why. And to tell you why, it's like a little bit of a long story, because I think there is a organized efforts to scare people about AI. Organized. Organized. Yes. And so this this starts with, mailing list in the 90s is a transhumanist mailing list called The Scorpions. And these extra pins they make out of extra year or something like that. But they, they believe in the singularity. So the singularity is a moment of time where, you know, AI is progressing. So fast, or technology in general progressing so fast that you can't predict what happens. It's self, a self evolving. It just all bets are off. You know, we're entering a new world. Where you just can't predict it. Where technology can't be controlled. Technology can't be controlled. It's going to remake remake everything. And those people believe that's a good thing because the world. Now sucks so much. And we are, you know, we are imperfect and unethical and all sorts of irrational whatever. And so they really wanted to, for the singularity to happen. And there's this young guy on this, list. His name is Lazarus Koski. And he claims he can write this AI and. He would write, like. Really long essays about how to. Build this AI suspiciously, he never really publishes code. And it's all just prose about how he's going to be able to build AI anyways. He is able to to fundraise. They started this thing called the Singularity Institute. A lot of people were excited about the future, kind of invested in Hampshire. Thiel most famously. And he spent a few years trying to build an AI again, never. Published code, never published any like real progress. And then came out of it saying that not only you can't build AI, but if you build it, it will kill everyone. So he kind of switched from being this optimist. You know, singularity is great to like. Actually, I will for sure kill everyone. And, and then he was like, okay, the reason I made this mistake is because I was irrational. And the way to get people to understand that I was going to kill everyone is to make them rational. So he started this blog called Less Wrong. And Less Wrong. Is it like walks you through steps to. Becoming more rational? Look at your biases, examine yourself. You know, sit down. Meditate on the other rational decisions you've made. And try to correct them. And then they start this thing called center for Advanced Rationality or something like that. CFR and they're giving seminars about rationality. But the. Intention seminar about rationality, what's that. Like? I've never been to one. But my guess would be if you were to talk about the biases. Whatever. But they have also like weird things where. They have this almost struggle session like thing called debugging. A lot of people. Wrote blog posts about how that was demeaning and it cost psychosis. In some people. 2017, that community. There was like collective psychosis. A lot of people were kind of going crazy. And this all written about it on the internet. Bugging. So that would be like kind of your classic cult technique. Yeah. Where you have to strip yourself bare, like auditing and Scientology or. Yes, it's very common. Yes. Yeah. So yeah, it's a constant in cults. Yes. Is that what you're describing? Yeah. I mean, that's what I read on these accounts. Yeah. You know, they will sit down and they will, like, audit your mind and tell you where you're wrong and and all of that. And and it's, it's cause people used to stress on young guys all the time. Like, talk about how going into that community has caused some huge distress. And there were, like offshoots of this community where there were suicides, there were murders. There were a lot of really dark and deep shit. And the other thing is, like, they kind of teach you about rationality. They recruit you to high. Risk because if you're rational, you know, you're a group, are all rational. Now we learn the art of rationality. And we agree that AI is going to kill everyone. Therefore, everyone outside of this group is wrong and we have to protect them. AI is going to kill everyone. And but but it also they believe other things. Like they believe that, you know. Polyamory is rational. And everyone that. Polyamory? Yeah. Like like, you can have sex with multiple partners essentially. But they think that's I mean, I think it's, it's certainly a natural desire if you're a man, to sleep with more and different women, for sure. But it's rational in the sense how like, you've never met, happy polyamorous long term. And I'm doing a lot of them. Not a single one. So it might be self-serving. You think, to recruit more impressionable people into. Yeah. And their hot girlfriends. Yes. Right. So that's rational. Yeah. Supposedly. And so they, you know, they convince each other of all these, your call like behavior. And. Yeah, the crazy thing is, like. This group ends up being super influential. Because, you know, they recruit a lot of people that are interested in AI and the AI labs and the people who are starting these companies were reading all this stuff. So Elon. You know, famously read a lot of Nick Bostrom is, as I can have an adjacent figure to the rationality community. He was part of the original mailing list. I think he would call himself a, you know, rational part of the rational community. But he wrote a book about AI and how AI is going to, you know, kill everyone, essentially. I think he moderated his views more recently, but originally he was one of the people that are kind of banging the alarm. And, you know, the foundation of open AI, was based on a lot of these fears, like, Elon had fears of AI killing everyone. He was afraid that Google was going to do that. And so they, you know, a group of people. I don't think everyone at OpenAI really believed that. But, you know, some of the original founding story was that. And they were recruiting from that community. Yeah, so much so when, you know, Sam Altman got fired recently. He was fired by someone from that community. As someone who started with effective altruism, which is another offshoot from that community, really is, so the AI labs are intermarried in a lot of ways with this, with this community. And so it it ends up they kind of, you know, borrowed a lot of their talking points. But by the way, a lot of these companies are great companies now. And I think they're cleaning up house. But there is I mean it's I'll just use the term it sounds like a cult to me. Yeah. I mean, it has the hallmarks of it in your description. Yeah. And can we just push a little deeper on what they believe? You say they are transhumanists. Yes. What is that? What is it? I think they're just unsatisfied. With, with human nature. Unsatisfied with the current ways were constructed. And that, you know, we're irrational. We're unethical. And so they they start, they long for the world where we can become. More rational, more ethical by transforming ourselves either, by merging with AI via chips or what have you, changing our bodies. And, like, fixing fundamental issues. That they perceive with humans via modifications and merging with machines. It's just so interesting because. And so shallow and silly. Like a lot of those people I have known are not that smart, actually, because the best things. I mean, reason is important and we should and in my view, given us by God. And it's really important in being irrational is bad. On the other hand, the best things about people, their best impulses are not rational. I believe there is no rational justification for giving something you need to another person. Yes, we're spending an inordinate amount of time helping someone for loving someone. Those are all irrational. Now, banging someone's hot girlfriend. I guess that's rational, but that's kind of the lowest impulse that we have, actually. Well, wait. To hear about, effective altruism. So they think our natural impulses that you just talked about are indeed irrational. And there's a guy, his name is Peter Singer, philosopher from Australia. The infanticide guy. Yes. He's so ethical. He's for killing children. Yeah. I mean, so their philosophy is utilitarian. You know, utilitarianism is that you can calculate ethics. Yeah. And you can start to apply it and you get into really weird territory. You know, if you know, there's all these problems, all these thought experiment, like, you know, you have, you know, two people at the hospital. Requiring some organs of another sort. Person that came in for a regular checkup. You, or they will die. You're basically. You're supposed to kill that guy, get his organ and put it into into the other two. And so it gets. I don't think people believe that, per se. I mean. But they. But but there are so many problems with, there's another belief that they have but can I say that belief or that conclusion grows out of the core belief, which is that your God, like a normal person, realizes? Sure. It would help more people if I killed that person and gave his organs to, you know, a number of people. Like, that's just a math question. Yeah, true. Yeah. But I'm not allowed to do that because I didn't create life. I don't have the power. I'm not allowed to make decisions like that. Yes, because I'm just a silly human being who can't see the future and is not omnipotent because I'm not God. Yeah, I feel like all of these conclusions stem from the misconception that people are gods. Yes, is that sound right? No, I agree, I mean, lot of the you know, I think it's, you know, there I add roots to this fundamentally unsatisfied with humans and maybe, perhaps hate. Hate. Yeah. The humans. Well, they're deeply disappointed. Yes. I think that's such a. I've never heard anyone say that, as well, that they're disappointed with human nature. They're disappointed the human condition. They're disappointed with people's flaws. And I feel like that. See, I mean, on one level, of course. I mean, you know, we should be better. And but that we used to call that judgment, which we're not allowed to do, by the way. That's just super judgy. Actually, what they're saying is, you know, you suck. And it's just a short hop from there to you should be killed, I think. I mean, that's a total lack of love. Whereas a normal person, a loving person says, you kind of suck. I kind of suck, too. Yes, but I love you anyway. And you love me anyway. And I'm grateful for your love, right? Right. That's right. Well, they'll say you suck. Join our arts community. Have sex with us. But can I just clarify? Or these these aren't just like, you know, support staff at these companies, like, are there? So, you know, you've heard about. SBF and. FDX. Yeah. They had a what's called a molecule. Yeah. Right. They're all having sex with each other. Like just give in now I just want to be super catty and shallow, but given some of the people they were having sex with, that was not rational. Hahaha. No person would do that. Come on now. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. Well, so, you know, yeah. You know, it's, what's what's even more. Disturbing, there's, you know, another ethical component to their philosophy called long termism. And this comes from the effective altruists sort of branch of rationality. Long termism. Long termism. And so what they think is in the future, if we did, if we made the right steps, there's going to be a trillion humans, trillion minds. They might not be humans, that might be AI, but they're. Going to be trillion minds. You can experience utility. You can experience good things, fun things, whatever. If you're utilitarian, you have to. Put a lot of weight on it. And maybe you discount. That sort of like discounted cash flows. But you still, you know, have to posit that, you know, you know, if there are trillions, perhaps many more people in the future, you need to value that very highly, even if you discount it a lot, it ends up being valued very highly. So a lot of these communities end up all focusing on AI safety because they think that AI. Because they're rational, they arrived. And we can talk about their arguments in a second. They arrived at a conclusion that AI is going to kill everyone. Therefore effective altruists and rational community, all these branches, they're all kind of focused on AI safety because. That's the most important thing, because we want a trillion people in the future to be great. But, you know, when you're assigning sort of value, that high, it's sort of a form of Pascal's Wager. It is sort of, you can justify anything, including terrorism, including, doing really bad things. If you're really convinced that AI is going to kill everyone, and the future holds so much value, more value than any living human today has value. You might justify really doing anything. And so built into that. It's a dangerous framework. But it's the same framework of every genocidal movement. Yes. From, you know, at least the French Revolution to present. Yes. A glorious future justifies a bloody present. Yes. And look. I'm not accusing them of genocidal intent, by the way. I don't know them, but I. But those ideas lead very quickly to the camps. I feel kind of. We're just talking about people just generally. I'd like to talk about ideas about things, but if they were just like, you know, silly Berkeley calls or whatever, and they didn't have any real impact on the world, I wouldn't care about them. But what's happening is that they were. Able to convince, a lot of billionaires of these ideas. I think Elon maybe changed his mind about. At some point he was convinced. Of these ideas. I don't know if you gave him money. There was a story at some point it was dryer that he was thinking about. It, but, a lot of other billionaires gave them money, and now they're organized, and they're in DC lobbying for AI like regulation. They're, they're behind the air regulation in California, and actually profiting from it. There was a story in, part where's where the, you know, the main sponsor, Dan Hendricks behind SB 1047. Started a company at the same. Time that certifies the safety of AI. And as part of the bill, it says. That you have to get certified by third party. So there's there's aspects of it that are. Kind of let's, let's profit from it. By the way, this is all allegedly based on this article. I don't know for sure. I think. Senator Scott, Wiener was trying to do. Right thing with the bill. But he was listening to a lot of these cult members, let's call them. And, and they're very well organized. And, also a lot of them still have connections to the big air labs, and, some of them work there. And they would want to create, you know, a situation where there's no competition in AI regulatory capture, per se. And so. I'm not saying that these are all like. The direct motivations. All of them. Are true believers. But, you know, you might you. Might kind of infiltrate this group archive director in a way that benefits these, corporations. Yeah. Well, I'm from DC, so I've seen a lot of instances where, you know, my bank account aligns with my beliefs. Thank heaven. Yeah, yeah, it's kind of happened. Winds up that way. It's funny. Climate is the perfect example. There's never one climate solution that makes the person who proposes it poorer or less power for ever. Not one we've told you before about. Hello. It is a great app that I am proud to say. I use my whole family use as its for daily prayer and Christian meditation, and it's transformative. As we head into the start of school and the height of election season. You need it. Trust me, we all do. Things are going to get crazier and crazier and crazier. Sunrises are to imagine even what is coming next. So with everything happening in the world right now, it is essential to ground yourself. This is not some quack cure. This is the oldest and most reliable cure in history. It's prayer. Ground yourself in prayer and scripture every single day. That is a prerequisite for staying sane and healthy and maybe for doing better eternally. So if you're busy on the road headed to kids sports, there's always time to pray and reflect alone or as a family. But it's hard to be organized about it. Building a foundation of prayer is going to be absolutely critical as we head into November, praying that God's will is done in this country, and that peace and healing come to us here in the United States and around the world. Christianity obviously is attack under attack everywhere. That's not an accident. Why is Christianity the most peaceful of all religions under attack globally? Did you see the opening the Paris Olympics? There's a reason, because the battle is not temporal. It's taking place in the unseen world. It's a spiritual battle, obviously. So try Halo, get three months completely free at Halo. That's halo.com/tucker. If there's ever a time to get spiritually in tuning, ground yourself in prayer. It's now. Halo will help. Personally and strongly and totally sincerely recommended outcomes. Tucker. I wonder, like, about the core assumption, which I've had up until right now, that these machines are capable of thinking. Yeah. Is that true? So let's g through their chain of reasoning. I think the fact that it's. It's a stupid call flag thing, or perhaps. Actually a cult does not automatically. Mean that there are arguments. That's right. That's exactly right. I think it does. You you do have to kind of discount. Some of the arguments because because it comes from crazy people. But the arguing, the. Chain of reasoning is that. Humans are general intelligence. We have these things called brains. Brains are computers. They're based on purely physical phenomena that we know of their computing. And if you agree that humans are, computing and, therefore we can build. A general intelligence in the machine. And if you agree up until this point, if you if you're able to build a general intelligence in the. Machine, even if only at human level. Then you can create a billion copies of it. And then it. Becomes a lot more powerful than any one of us. And because. It's a lot more powerful than any one of. Us, it would one to control us or I would want it would not care. About us, because as such, it's more powerful, kind of like we don't care about. And we'll step on our hands, no problem. Right. Because these machines are so powerful, they're not going to care about us. And I sort of get off the train at the first chain of reasoning. But every one of those steps I have problems with, the first step is. The mind is a computer. And, you know, based on what? And the idea is. Oh, well, if you don't believe that. The mind is a computer, then you're believing some kind of, woo spiritual. Thing. Well, you know, you well, you have to convince me you haven't presented an argument. But, but but but the idea that, like. Speaking of rational. But. Yeah, this is what reason looks. Like, right? The idea that we have a complete description of the. Universe anyways is wrong, right? We don't have a universal physics. We have physics of the small things. We have physics of the big things. We can't really cohere them or combine them. So just the idea that you, being a materialist is sort of incoherent because we. Don't have a complete description of the world. That's one thing. That's a side argument I'm not going to. No, no. No, it's it's a very interesting argument though. So so you're saying as someone who I mean, you're a science, you're effectively a scientist. You just state for viewers who don't follow this stuff like the limits of our knowledge of physics. Yeah. So, you know, we have essentially two. Conflicting theories of physics. These systems can't be married. They're not a universal system. You can't juice them both at the same time. Oh, well, that suggests, a profound limit to our understanding of what's happening around us in the natural world. Does it? Yes, it does. And I think, this is, again, another error of. The rationalist types is that just assume that, you know, we so much more advanced in our science than we actually are. So it sounds like they don't know that much about science. Yes. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. I'm sorry to ask. You to pass. Yeah, that's not even the main crux of my argument. There is, a, philosopher. Slash mathematician slash scientist. Wonderful. His name is, sir, Roger Penrose. I love how the British kind of give the sir title. Someone who's accomplished. The. He wrote this book called The Emperor's New Mind. In the in the, in it's based on, you know, the emperor's new clothes. The idea of the idea that, you know, the emperor is kind of naked and and, in his opinion, the argument that the mind is a computer is a sort of consensus argument that is wrong. The emperor's naked. Eye is not really an argument. It's an assertion. Yes, it's an assertion that is fundamentally wrong. And the way he proves. It is very interesting. There is in mathematics. There's, something called girdles incompleteness theorem. And you know, what that says is, there are statements. That are true. That can't be proved in mathematics. So he constructs. Girdle constructs, like a number, system where he can start to make statements about this number system. So the. You know, he he. Creates a statement that's like. This. Statement is unprovable in system F for the where the system is f, the whole system of F. Well, if you try to prove it, then that. Then that seed me becomes false. But, you know, it's true because it's unprovable in the system. And Roger Penrose says, you know, because we have this knowledge that it. Is true by looking at it. Despite, like, we can't prove it. I mean, the whole feature of. The sentence is that it. Is unprovable. Therefore our. Knowledge is outside of any formal system. Therefore, yes, the human brain. Is. Or like our mind is understanding something. That mathematics is not able to give. Give it to us to describe. To describe. And I thought I the first time I read it, you know, it read a lot of these things. Like, what's the famous you were telling me last night? I'd never heard it. The Bertrand Russell self canceling assertion. Yeah. It's like this statement is false. It's called a liar. It's called a liar. Paradox. What? Explain why that's just that's going to float in my head forever. Why is that a paradox? So this statement is false. If you. If you look at a statement and agree with it, then it becomes true. But if it's true, then it's not true. It's false. And you do this, the circular thing and you never stop. Right? It's a broke logic in a way. Yes. And Bertrand Russell spent his whole, you know, big. Part of his life writing his book, Principia mathematica. And he wanted to really. Prove that mathematics is complete, consistent, you know, decidable, computable, all that. And then all these things happened. Girdles and complete. Theorem. Turing. The inventor of the computer. Actually, this is the most ironic piece of science history that nobody ever talks about. But. Turing invented the computer. To show its limitation. So he invented. The. Turing machine, which is the ideal representation of a computer that we have today. It's all computers are Turing machines. And he showed that, this machine, if you give it a set of. Instructions. It can. Tell whether those set of instructions. Will ever stop, will run and stop. Or it will completely stop or continue running forever. It's called the halting problem. And this makes this proves that mathematics have, undecidability. It's not fully decidable or computable. So all of these things were. Happening as he was writing the book. And, you know, it was. It was really depressing for. Him because he he kind of went. Out to prove that, you know, mathematics is complete and all of that. And, you know, this caused kind of a major panic. At the time between mathematicians and all of that, it's like, oh, my God. Like, our systems are not complete. So it sounds like the deeper you go into science and the more honest you are about what you discover, the more questions you have. Yeah. Which kind of gets you back to where you should be in the first place, which is in a posture of humility. Yes. And yet I see science used certainly in the political sphere. I mean, those are all dumb people. So it's like, who cares? Actually, Kamala Harris lecture me about science. I don't even hear it. But so also some smart people like, believe the science. The assumption behind that demand is that it's complete and it's knowable and we know it. And if you're ignoring it, then you're ignorant, willfully or otherwise. Right? Well, I my view of. Science, it's a method. Ultimately it's a method anyone can apply. It's it's democratic. It's decentralized. Anyone can apply the scientific method. Including people who are not trained. But in order to practice the method, you have to come from a position of humility. Yeah, but I don't know. That's why I'm using this method to find out. And I cannot lie about what I observe. Right. That's right. And today, you know, it's you know, capital S science is used to control and it's used to. Propagandize and like. You know, in the hands of. You know, just really people shouldn't have just dumb people with, you know, pretty ugly agendas. But. But we're talking about the world that you live in, which is like unusually smart people who do the stuff for living and are really trying to advance the ball in science. And I think what you're saying is that some of them, knowingly or not, just don't appreciate how little they know. Yeah. And, you know, they could through. This chain of reasoning for this. Argument. And, you know, none of those are at minimum, you know, a complete, and like, you know, they don't just take it for granted if you even doubt that. The mind is a. Computer. You're you know, I'm sure a lot of people will call me heretic and will call me like, you know, all sorts of names because. It's just dogma. That the mind is a computer. That the. Mind is a computer is dogma. And. Technology. Science. That's so silly. Yes. Well, I mean, let me count the ways the mind is different from a computer. First of all, you're not assured of a faithful representation of the past. Memories change over time, right? In a way that's misleading and who knows why. But that is a fact, right? That's not true of computers. That's right, I think. Yeah. But how are we explaining things like intuition? Yeah. An instinct. Those are not. Well, that is actually my question. Could those ever be features of a machine? You could argue that, neural networks. Are sort of intuition machines, and that's what a lot of people say. But neural networks, you know. And maybe I will describe them, just for the audience. Neural networks. Are inspired by the brain. And the idea is that you can connect a network of small little. Functions, just mathematical functions. And you can train it by. Giving it examples. I could give it. A picture of a cat. And if it says, you know, let's. Say this network has to say yes. If it's a cat, no. If it's not a cat. It's, you know, to give it a picture of a cat. And then the answer is no, then it's wrong. You adjust the weights based on the difference between the picture and the answer. And you do this, I don't know, a billion times. And then the network encodes features about the cat. And this is literally. Exactly how neural networks work is as. You tune all these small parameters until there's some embedded. Feature detection of, you know, especially in classifiers. Right. And this is not intuition. This is. Basically. Automatic programing the way I see it. Right? Of course, is that we can write code manually. You can go to our website, write code. But we can, generate algorithms, automatically via machine learning. Machine learning essentially discovers. These algorithms. And sometimes discovers, like. Very crappy algorithms. For example, like, you know, you know, all the pictures that we gave it of a cat had grass in them. So it would learn that grass equals cat. The color green cat. Yes. And then you give it one day a picture of a cat without grass and tails are like, what happened? All it turns out it learned the wrong thing. So, because it's obscure what it's actually learning. People interpret that as as intuition. Because it's not, the algorithms are not, it's explicated. And there's a lot of work now. On trying to explicate these algorithms, which is great work from companies like anthropic. But, you know, I don't think you can call it intuition just because it's obscure. So what is it? How is intuition different? Human intuition. We don't, you know, for one, we don't require. A trillion examples of cat to learn a cat. Good point. You know, a kid can learn, language with very little examples. Right now when we're training these large language models like ChatGPT. You have to give it the entire internet. For it to learn language. And that's not really how humans work. And the way we learn is like, we, combine intuition and some more. Explicit way of. Learning. And I don't think we've figured out how to do it with machines just yet. It. Do you think that structurally it's possible for machines to get there? So. So, so, you. Know, this this chain of reasoning. You know, I can go through. Every point and present present arguments to the contrary, or at least like present doubt. But no one is. Really kind of trying to deal with those doubts. And, and, my view is that I'm not holding these doubts, you know, very, very strongly, but my view is that we just don't have a complete understanding of the mind. And you can't you at least can't use it, to argue that, kind of machine that. Acts like a human but much more powerful can kill us. All. But, you know, do I think that, you know, I can get really powerful? Yes, I think I can get really powerful, can get really useful. I think functionally can feel like its general AI is ultimately a function of data. The kind of data that we put into it. It's the functionality. Is based on the data. So we can get very little. Functionality outside of that. Actually we don't get any functionality outside of that data. It's actually been proven that these machines are just the function. Of their. Data. The sum total of what you put in. Exactly. Again. Garbage out. Yeah. The cool thing about them is they can mix. And match different functionalities that they learn from. The data set looks a little bit more general. But let's say we collected all data of the world. Collected everything that we. Care about, and we somehow fit. It into a machine. And now everyone's building these really large data centers. You will get a very highly capable, machine that will kind of look general, because we collected a lot of economically useful data and will start doing economically useful tasks. And from our perspective, it will start to look general. So I'll call it functionally AGI. I don't doubt we're sort of had it in some direction like that. But but we haven't figured out how these machines can actually generalize and can learn and can use things like intuition for when they see something fundamentally new outside of their data distribution. They can actually react to it correctly and learn it efficiently. We don't have the science for that. So because we don't have the understanding of it yet on the most fundamental level, you began that explanation by saying we don't really understand the human brain. So like, how can we compare it to something because we don't even really know what it is. And there are a couple of, there's a, there's a. Machine learning scientists. Francois. Chalet, I don't know how to pronounce, French names, but I. Think that's his name. He, he he took a sort of an IQ like test. You know, where you're rotating shapes and. Whatever, and, an entrepreneur put $1 million. For anyone who's able to solve it using. AI and all the modern. Eyes that we think are super. Powerful couldn't do something that. Like a ten year old kid could do. And it showed that, again, those machines are just functions of the data. The more you throw a. Problem that's novel at them, they really are not able to do it. Now again, I just I'm not fundamentally discounting the fact that maybe we'll get there, but just the reality of where we are today. You can't argue that we're just going to put more compute and more data into this, and suddenly it becomes God and kills us all because because that's the argument. And they're, you know, going to DC and they're going to all. These places that are springing up regulation, this regulation is going to. Hurt. American industry. It's going to hurt startups. It's going to make it hard to compete. It's going to give China tremendous. Advantage. It's going to really hurt us based on these flawed arguments that they're not actually battling with these real questions. It sounds like they're not. And what gives me pause is not, so much the technology. It's the way that the people creating the technology understand people. So I think the wise and correct way to understand people is as not self-created beings, people did not create themselves. People cannot create life. As beings created by some higher power. Who at their core, have some kind of impossible to describe spark a holy mystery. And for that reason, they cannot be enslaved or killed by other human beings. That's wrong. There is right and wrong that is wrong. You know what's a gray hairs? That's not a gray area because they're not self-created? Yes. Right. I think that all human action flows from that belief and that the most inhumane actions in history flow from the opposite belief, which is people are just objects that can and should be improved. And I have full power over them. Like, that's a really that's a totalitarian mindset. And it's the one thing that connects every genocidal movement is that belief. So if it seems to me, as an outsider, that the people creating this technology have that belief. Yeah. And you don't even have to be spiritual to have that belief. Look, I, well, you. Certainly you certainly don't. Yeah, yeah. So I. Think I think that's actually a rational conclusion, but I. 100% agree. I'll give you one interesting anecdote, again from science. We've had brains for. Half a billion. If you believe in evolution, all that we have had brains for half a billion, years. Right? And we've had kind of a human, like species, for, you know, you know, half a million years, perhaps more, perhaps a million years. There is a moment in time. 40,000 years ago. It's called the Great Leap Forward. Where we see culture, we see religion. We see drawings. We see we saw like very little of that before that tools and whatever. And suddenly we're seeing this, this Cambrian explosion of culture. Right. And pointing to something larger than just like daily needs or the world around them. Yeah, and it's not it. We're not we're still not able to to to to. Explain it, you know. David Reich wrote this book. It's called, I think, Who We Are, where We came from. And it he talks about, trying to look for that genetic mutation that. Happened that potentially created this explosion. And they, you know, they have some idea of what it could be and some candidates, but they don't really have it right now. But you have to ask a question like what happened. 30 or 40,000 years ago, right? Where it's clear. I mean, it's indisputable that the people who lived during that period were suddenly grappling with metaphysics. Yes, they're worshiping things. There's a clear, clear separation between, between, again, the animal brain. And the human brain. And it's clearly not computation like we suddenly didn't, like, grow a computer reign. It's something else happened. But what's so interesting is, like the instinct of modern man is to look for something inside the person that caused that. Whereas I think the very natural and more correct instinct is to look for something outside of man. That caused that. I'm open to both. Yeah. I mean I don't know the answer because I do know the answer but hahahahahahaha. But I'll just pretend I don't. But at very least both are possible. So if like you can find yourself to looking for a genetic mutation or change like change, then you know you're sort of closing out. That's not an empiricist, a scientific way of looking at things. Actually. You don't foreclose any possibility, right? Yeah. Science. You can't. Right. Interesting. Yeah. And that's, that's very interesting. So, you know, I think that, these machines, I'm betting my business that on AI getting better and better and better, and it's going to, make us all. Better. It's going to make it all more educated. Okay. So. Okay, now, now is the time for you to tell me why I should be excited about something I been hearing? Yeah. So, this technology, large. Language models where we kind of fed, a. Neural network. The entire internet. And it has capabilities mostly around writing, around, information. Look up around, summarization, around coding. It does a lot of really useful thing and you can. Program it to. Kind of pick and. Match between these different skills. You can program these skills using code. And so the kind of. Products and services that you can build with us, are amazing. So one of the things I'm most excited about, this application of the technology, there's this problem called, blooms two Sigma problem. There's this, you know, scientists that was studying education. And, he was looking at different. Interventions to try to get, you know, kids to learn better, faster, or have just better educational outcomes. And he found something kind of bad, which is there's only one thing you could do to move kids, not in a marginal way, but in a two standard. Deviations from the. Norm, like in a big way, like better than 98%. Of the other. Kids. By doing one on one. Tutoring using. Type of learning called mastery learning. One. On one Turing is there is a key formula there. That's great. I mean, we discovered the solution to education. We can uplevel everyone, all humans on Earth. The problem is like, we don't have enough your teachers. To do one on one tutoring. It's very expensive. You know, no country in the world can afford that. So now we have these machines. That can talk. They can teach. They can. They can present information. That. You can attract with it in a very human way. You can talk to it. It can talk to you back. Right. And we can build, AI applications to teach people one on one. And you can. You can have it. You can serve 7 billion people with that. And we can. Everyone can get smarter. I'm totally for that. I mean, that was the promise of the internet. It didn't happen. So I hope this. I'm just going to save this for last. But I can't control myself, so I just know being from DC, that when, the people in charge see new technology, the first thing they think of is like, how can I use this to kill people? So what are the military applications, potentially, of this technology? You know, that's one of the. Other thing that I is I'm sort of very skeptical of this lobbying effort to get government to, to regulate it because, like. I think the biggest offender would be of. Abuse of this technology, probably government. Yeah. I think, you know, I watched your interview with. Jeffrey. Sachs. Who's like a Columbia professor, very, very mainstream. And, I think he got assigned to like, Lancet, sort of study of Covid origins or whatever. And he, he arrived at very, at the time, heterodox view that it was created in a lab and was created by the US government. And. And and so, you know, the government is supposed to protect us from these things, and now they're talking about pandemic readiness and whatever. Well, well, let's talk about let's talk about, how do we watch what the government is doing? How do we actually have democratic. Processes. To ensure that you're you're not the one abusing these technologies because they're going to. Regulate it. They're going to make it so that everyday people are not going to be able to use these things, and then they're going to have free rein on how to, you know, how to abuse these things, just. Like with encryption. Right. Encryption is another one. That's right. But they've been doing that for decades. Yes. Like we get privacy, but you're not allowed it because we don't trust you. Right. But by using your money and the moral authority that you gave us to lead you, we're going to hide from you everything we're doing. And there's nothing you can do about it. I mean, that's the state of America right now. Yeah. So how would they use AI to further oppress us? I mean, you can. Use it in all sorts of way. Like, autonomous drones. We already have autonomous drones. They could go. Got a lot, a lot worse. You can, you know, there's a video, and they're not real like that, you know, Chinese guard or whatever. Was walking with a dog with a robotic dog and a robotic dog had a gun mounted to a head. And so you can have robotic set of dogs with shooting guns, but little sci fi like you can be. Who is a dog lover? That's so offensive to me. It is kind of offensive. Yeah, yeah. In a world increasingly defined by deception and the total rejection of human dignity, we decided to found the Tucker Carlson Network. And we did it with one principle in mind tell the truth. You have a God given right to think for yourself. Our work is made possible by our members. So if you want to enjoy an ad free experience and keep this going, join TechNet Tucker carlson.com/podcast Tucker carlson.com/podcast. There was this huge exposé in this magazine called 972 about how Israel was using, AI to target, suspects, but ended up killing huge numbers of civilians. It's called the lavender. Very interesting piece. So the technology wound up killing people who were not even targeted. Yes. It's pretty dark. What about surveillance? I think that's recent. I. Boom. I think it could be used for several hours. I'm not sure if it gives a special advantage. I think the they can get the. Advantage by again of these lobbying groups are successful. Part of their you know, their ideal outcome is to is to make sure that no one is training. Large language models. And to do that, you would need to insert, surveillance apparatus at the compute level. And. And so it's a perhaps that's very dangerous. Our computers would like spy on us to make sure we're not training AIS. I think, you know, the kind of. AI that's really good at surveillance is kind of the vision. I would China sort of perfected. So that's been around for a while now. I, you know, I'm sure there's ways to abuse language models for. For surveillance. But I can't think of it right now. What about manufacturing? It would help with manufacturing. Right now, people are figuring out how to do, I invest in a couple of companies that. How to. Apply this technology foundation. Models to robotics. It's still. Early science, but you. Might have. Huge advancements. And in robotics, if we're able to apply this technology to. So the whole point of technology is to replace human labor, either physical or mental, I think. I mean, historically, that's what, you know, the steam engine replaced the arm, etc., etc.. So if this is as transformative as it appears to be, you're going to have a lot of idle people. And that's, I think, the concern that led a lot of your friends and colleagues to support UBI universal basic Income, like there's nothing for these people to do. So we just got to pay them to exist. You said you're opposed to that. I'm adamantly opposed to that. On the other hand, like, what's the answer? Yeah. So, you know. There's there's two ways to look at it. We can look at the individuals that are losing their jobs, which is tough and hard. I don't really have a good answer, but we can look at it from a macro perspective. And when you look at it from that perspective. For the most part, technology create more jobs over time. You know, you know, before alarm. Clocks, we had this job called the Knocker Upper. Yeah. Which goes to your room. You kind of pay them and was like, come every day at like 5 a.m., they knock on your ring. The village bell, right? Yeah. And, you know, that job disappeared. But like, we had, you know, ten times more jobs in manufacturing. Or perhaps, you know, 100,000 more jobs in, in manufacturing. And so overall, I think the general. Trend is technology just creates more jobs. And so. Like I'll give you a few examples how. I can create more jobs actually, you can create more interesting jobs. Entrepreneurship. It's like a very American thing, right? It's it's like America is the entrepreneurship country. But actually new. Firm creation has been going down for a long time, at least 100 years. It's been going down, although we have all this excitement around startups or whatever. Silicon Valley is the only place that's still producing startups like the rest of the country. There isn't as much startup or new firm creation. Which is kind of sad because, again, the. Internet was supposed to be this, you know, great wealth creation engine that anyone has access to. But the way it turned out is like it was just concentrated in this one geographical area. Well, it looked, I mean, in retrospect, looks like a monopoly generator, actually. Yeah. But again, it. Doesn't have to be that way. And the way I think I would help is that it will give people the tools to start businesses, because you have this. Easily programable machine. That. Can help you with programing. I'll give you a few examples. We there's a teacher in Denver that. You know, during Covid was was a little bored, went to our website. We have a free course to to learn how to code. And he learned a bit of coding and. He used his knowledge as a teacher to build an application that helps teachers use AI to teach. And within a year, he built a. Business that's worth tens of millions of dollars. That's bringing. In a. Huge amount of money. I think he raised $20 million. And that that's a teacher who learned how to code and created this massive business really quickly. But we have stories of photographers doing millions of dollars in revenue. So it just it's a it's a, you know. I will decentralize access to this technology. So there's a lot of ways in which, you're right, technology tend to centralize, but there's a lot of ways that people kind of don't really look at. And which technology can decentralize. Well, that was I mean, that promise makes sense to me. I would just I firmly wanted to become a reality. I have a we have a mutual friend who showed me name was so smart and a good, humane person, who was very way up into the subject and participates in the subject. And he said to me, well, one of the promises of AI is that it will allow people to have virtual friends or mates. That it will fill. You know it will solve the loneliness problem. That is clearly a massive problem in the United States. And I felt like I don't want to say because I like him so much, but that seemed really bad to me. Yeah, I'm not addressing those. I mean, we I think we, we have the. Same intuition about about, you know, what's, what's dark in dystopian versus what we can. He's a wonderful person. But, I mean, I just don't think he's thought about it or I don't know what, but we disagree. But I just I don't even disagree. I don't have an argument, just an instinct. But like, people should be having sex with people, not machines. Right? That's right. He'd like. I would go so far as. To say some of these applications are like a little unethical, like the, you know, preying on sort of. Lonely. Lonely man with. No. With no with the opportunities for, for a mate. And. Like, you know, it will make it so that they're actually not. Motivated to go out and. Yes. And date and get this girlfriend like porn. Ten. Yes, yes. And I think that's really bad. That's really bad for society. And so I think the applicant should look, you can apply, apply. This technology in a positive way or you can apply the negative way. You know, I would love for this. You know, doom called if instead they were like trying to, you know. Make it so that AI is applied in a positive way. If we had a call that was like. Oh, we're going to lobby, we're going to, sort of go out and you know, make it make it so that, you know. I as a positive technology, I, we all for. That. And by the way, there are in history, there are, you know, times where the culture self-correct. Right? I think there's some self-correction. On porn that's happening right now. You know, fast food. Right? I mean, you know, just generally junk, right? You know, everyone is like, Whole Foods. Is like, high status now. Like, you know, if there's a place. Called foods you can go to, it's right. And people are interested in eating. Healthy and chemicals in the air and water. Another thing that was a very esoteric concern even ten years ago was only the wackos. It was Bobby Kennedy cared about that no one else did. And now that's like a feature of normal conversation. Yes. Everyone's worried about, microplastics in their testicles. That's right. Yeah. Which is, I think, a legitimate concern. Absolutely. So what? I'm not surprised that there are cults in Silicon Valley. I don't think you name the only one. I think there are others. That's my sense. And I'm not surprised because of course, every person is born with the intuitive knowledge that there's a power beyond himself. That's why every single civilization has worshiped something. And if you don't acknowledge that, you just it doesn't change. You just worship something even dumber. Yeah, but so my question to you, as someone who lives and works there is what percentage of the people were making decisions in Silicon Valley? We'll say out loud, you know, not I'm a Christian, you're Muslim. But that like, I'm not, you know, there is a power bigger than me in the universe. Do people think that they acknowledge that? Yeah. For the most part, no. I thought. Yeah. Like I think most I don't. Know, I don't want to say most people, but, like. You know, the. Vast majority of the discussions tend to be, like, more intellectual. I think people just take for granted that everyone has like a secular, mostly secular point of view. Well, I think the, you know, the the truly brilliant conclusion is that we don't know a lot and we don't have a ton of power. That's my view. I'm thinking. Right, right. So like the actual intellectual will, over time, if he's honest, will reveal. This is the view of, like many scientists and many people who really went deep. I mean, I don't know who said I'm trying to remember, but someone said like the first gulp of science make you an atheist. But at the bottom of the cup, you. Will find God waiting for. You. That's Matthias Desmet wrote a book about this, supposedly about Covid. It was not about Covid. I just cannot recommend it, more strongly. But the book is about the point you just made, which is the deeper you go into science, the more you see some sort of order reflected. That is not random at all. Yes. And a beauty exhibited in, in math even. And the less you know, and the more you're certain that this is that there's a design here. And that's not human or, quote, natural. It's supernatural that that's his conclusion, and I affirm it. But how many people do you know in your science world who think that? Yeah, I can count on one on one hand, basically. Oh, interesting. Yeah. That concerns me because I feel like without that knowledge, hubris is inevitable. Yeah. And, you. Know, a lot of these conclusions are from hubris, like the fact that, you know, there's so many people that believe that AI is an imminent existential threat. A lot of people believe that we're gonna die. We're all gonna die. The next five years comes from that hubris. How interesting. I've never until I met you, I've never thought of that. That actually, that is itself an expression of hubris. I never thought of that. Yeah, you can go negative with hubris. You can go positive. And we're gonna. And I think the positive thing is, is good. Like I think, Elon is an embodiment of that is like just a self belief that you can like fly rockets and build electric cars is good. And maybe. Maybe in some cases it's delusional. But like, not not will kind of put you in a, on a, on a good path for for creation. I think it can go pathological if you if you, you know, if you're for example SBF and again he's, he's kind of part of those groups just sort of. Believed that he can do anything in. Service of his ethics, including steal and cheat and all of that. Yeah, I don't I never really understood. Well, of course I understood too well, I think, but the, the obvious, observable fact that effective altruism led people. To become shittier toward each other, not better. Yeah. I mean, it's such an irony, but I feel like it's in the name. If you call yourself. Such grandiose thing. You're typically. Yeah, horrible. Like the Islamic State is not neither Islamic or state effective. Altruists are neither Al-Qaeda. The United Nations is not united. No, that's. Boy, is that wise. So I don't think to your earlier point that any large language, model or machine could ever arrive at what you just said, the AI, because like the deepest level of truth, is wrapped in irony always, and I don't I machines don't get irony, right? No. Not yet could they and maybe I mean, I don't think I don't take as strong. Of a stance as you are. I'd like the, you know, the capabilities of the machines. I do believe that, you know, if you represented well, I don't know. I mean, I'm asking I really don't know what they're capable of. Well, I think maybe they can't come up with real. Novel irony that is like really. Insightful for us. But if you put a lot of irony in the data, they'll understand. They can ape human ion. They can. I mean, they're ape machines. They're imitation machines that are literally imitating, like, you know, the way large language models are trained is that you give them a corpus of tax and they. Hide different words. And they try to guess them, and then. They adjust the weights of those neural. Networks, and then eventually they get really good at guess guessing what humans would say. Well, then, okay, so you're just kind of making the point unavoidable. Like if if the machine says you have said that makes sense are the sum total of what's put into them. Yeah. Then and that would include the personalities and biases of the people. Yes. Putting the data in. That's right. Then you want like the best people, the morally best people, which is to say the most humble people, to be doing that. But it sounds like we have the least humble people doing that. Yeah, I think some of them are humble. Like, I wouldn't like I think some people working, I are really upstanding and good and want to do the right, right thing. But there are a lot of people with that, with the wrong motivations coming at it from fear and and things like that. And this is the. Point I will make is that. You know, free. Markets are good because you're going to get all sorts of entrepreneurs with different motivations. And, and I think what's what what determines the, the winner? It's not always the ethics or whatever, but it's the larger culture. Like what is the what kind of product is pulling out of you. If they're pulling the porn and the, you know, companion chat bots or whatever, versus they're pulling the education. And the healthcare. And I think all the positive things that will make. Our life better. I think that's really on the on the larger culture. I don't think we can regulate that with government or whatever. But if the culture creates demand for things just makes us worse as humans, then there. Are entrepreneurs that. Will spring up and serve this. So totally right. And it is a snake eating its tail at some point because of course, you know, you serve the baser human desires and you create a culture that inspires those desires and a greater number of people. In other words, the more porn you have, the more porn people want. Like, actually, yes. I wonder about the pushback from existing industry from the guilds. So like if you're the AMA for, for example, you mentioned medical advances. That's something that makes sense to me for, for diagnoses, which really is just a matter of sorting the data, like what's most likely. That's right. And a machine can always do that more efficiently and more quickly than any hospital or individual doctor. So like and diagnosis is like the biggest hurdle. Yes. Yeah. That's gonna like that's going to actually put people out of business. Right. If I can just type my symptoms into a machine and I'm getting a much higher likelihood of a correct diagnosis than I would be after three days, the Mayo Clinic like, who needs the Mayo? I actually have a concrete story about that. I've dealt with like a chronic issue for a couple of years. I spent hundreds, thousands of dollars on on doctors out of pocket, got like, world's experts and all. Hundreds of thousands. Of guess. And they couldn't. Come up with a right diagnosis. And eventually it took me like. Writing a little bit of software to collect the data or whatever, but I ran it around. I, I used the I ran the AI. Once and it gave. Me a diagnosis they haven't looked at, and I went to them. They were very skeptical of it. And then we ran the test. It turns out it was the right diagnosis. Oh that's incredible. Yeah. It's amazing. It changed my life. That's incredible. If you had to write the software to get there. Yeah, a little. Bit of software. So that's just we're not that far from like, having publicly available. Right. And by the way, I think that anyone can write. A little bit of software right now at Replit. We are working on a way to generate most of the code for you. We have this program called 100 Days of Code. If you give it 20 minutes, you know, do a little bit of coding every day in like. Three months, you'll be good enough coder to build, you know, a startup. I mean, eventually you will get people working. For you and you'll upscale and all that. But you'll have enough skills. And in fact, you know, I'll put up a. Challenge out there, people listening to this, if they go through this and they build something that they think could be a business, whatever, I'm willing to help them get it out there. Promotable we'll give them some credits and cloud services, whatever, just, you know, tweet at me or something and mention this, this podcast. Know how. What's your Twitter name aside? I am a sad. So. But there are a lot of entrenched interests. I mean, I don't want to get into a whole Covid poison thing, but I'm revealing my biases. But I mean, you saw it in action during Covid where, you know, I think it's always a mixture of motives. Like, I do think there were high motives mixed with low motives, because that's how people are. You know, it's always a broad base of good and bad. But, but to some extent, the profit motive prevailed over public health. Yes. That is, I think, fair to say. Yes. And so if they're willing to hurt people to keep the stock price up, they I mean, what's the resistance you're going to get to allowing people to come to a more, accurate diagnosis with a machine for free? Yeah. So in some sense, that's why I think open source AI people. Learning how to do some of the stuff themselves. Is, is is probably good enough. Of course, if there's a company that's building. These services, it's going to do better. But just the fact that this. AI exists. And a. Lot of it is open source, you can download it on your machine and use it. Is enough to potentially help a lot of people. By the way, you should always talk to your doctor. I talked to my doctor. I'm not giving. People advice, kind of figure. Out all this themselves, but I do think that, it's already empowering. So that that's sort of step one. But for someone like me, I'm not going to talk to a doctor until he apologizes to my face for lying for four years. Right? Because I have no respect for doctors at all. I have no respect for anybody who wise. Period. And I'm not taking life advice and particularly important life advice, like about my health from someone who's a liar. I'm just not doing that because I'm not insane. I don't take real estate advice from homeless people. I don't take financial advice from people are going to jail for fraud. So like, I'm sure there's a doctor out there who would apologize. But I haven't met one yet. So for someone like me who's just. I'm not going to a doctor until they apologize. This could be, like, literally life saving, right? So. To the question of whether there's going to be a regulatory capture. I think that the the, the that's, I mean, that's that's why you see Silicon Valley. Getting into politics. You know, a Silicon Valley. Yeah. Well, it was always sort. Of in a politics. You know, when I was. Yeah, I remember I came in. 2012, I was, early on in my time, there was, it was the Romney Obama debate, and I was case pauses. Yeah. Imagine. Debates. Between Romney and Obama who agree on everything. Yes. I. Didn't see a lot of daylight. And and people were just, like, making fun of Romney. So like, it was like he said something like binders full of women. And that stuck with Obama. And I remember asking everyone around me, like. Who are you with? I was like, of course Democrats. Like, of course. I was like, why isn't anyone here for Republicans? And they're like, oh, because they're dumb and only dumb people. Kind of. But for Republicans, and, you know, Silicon. Valley was this like one state town in a way. Actually, look, you know. There's like, data on, like donations by company for, for for state. There's like, Netflix is 99% to Democrats and like 1% to. Republicans. If you look up the. You know, diversity of parties in North Korea is actually a little. Better. Oh my gosh. It is more choices, even more honest media too. But anyways, I mean, you see. Now a lot of people are surprised that a lot of, you know, people in tech are going for Republicans, going for Trump, and particularly Marc Andreessen and Ben Horowitz, put out, two hour podcast talking about what they. Are the biggest venture capitalists in the United States, I think. I don't know, in one. Metric you would you would judge, but they're certainly on their way to be the biggest, they're the most, I think the best, for sure. And. They put out what was there, but I didn't. I should have watched, I didn't. Yeah. So their reasoning for. Why they would vote for Trump. By the way. You know, they would have never done that in like 2018 or 19 whatever. And so it's this, this vibe shift that's happening. And how was it received? It's still it's still mixed, but but I think, you know, way. Better than what would have happened ten years ago. They would have been canceled, and they would have no one would ever like no founder take their money. But it's like and I mean, again, I'm an outsider just watching. But Andreessen Horowitz is so big and so influential and they're considered smart and not at all crazy. Yeah, that like that. That's got to change minds. If Andreessen Horowitz is doing it. Yeah, it will. Have certainly changed minds. I think a lot I think. You know, give people some courage to say I'm I for Trump as well at minimum. But I think it does change my mind. They put out the arguments is, you know. They put out this agenda called little tech, you know, this big tech, and they have their lobbying and whatever, who's lobbying for little tech like smaller companies, companies like ours, but much smaller to like, you know, one, two person companies. And actually no one. Is your company would be considered little. In Silicon Valley. But but. I want a little company. Right. So, but, you know, let's call it like, really. Just startups that just started, right? Like, you know. Typically no. One is. Protecting them sort of politically, no one is really thinking about it. And it's very easy to disadvantage startups like you just talked about with the health care regulation. Right, are very easy to create regulatory capture such that. Companies can't. Even get off the ground doing their. Thing. And so they came. Up with this agenda that like, we're going to be the, you know, the firm that's that's going to be looking at for for that little guy, the little tech. Right, which I think is brilliant. And, you know, part of their argument, for Trump. Is that. You know, the, you know, I. For example, like the the Democrats are really excited about regulating AI. One of the most hilarious things that happened, I think, Kamala Harris was, invited to. Yeah, I safety conference. And they were talking about existential risk. And she was like, well, someone being denied health care, that's essential. For. Them. Someone, whatever. That's existential. So she interpreted. Essential risk as, like, any risk is essential. And so, yeah, that's just one anecdote. But like. Yeah, there was this anecdotal. She was like, I it's a two letter word. And you clearly don't understand it very well. And they're, they're moving very fast at. Regulating it. They put out an executive order that a lot of people think they. Kind of I mean, the, the tweaks they've done so far from a user perspective to keep it safe are really like just making sure it hits white people. Like it's about pushing a dystopian totalitarian social agenda, racist social agenda in the country. Like is that going to be embedded in it permanently? I think it's a function of the culture rather. Than the regulation. So I think the culture. Was sort of this woke culture. Broadly, right, in. America, but certainly in Silicon Valley. And now that the. Vibe shift is. Happening, I think I think. Microsoft just fired their. Did you. Microsoft? Yeah. I mean, it a huge vibe. Are they going to learn to code? Do you hate Microsoft and perhaps Hahahahahahahaha? So, you know, the, you know, I wouldn't pin this. On the government just yet. But it's very easy. Oh, no. No, no, no, I just mean Democratic members of Congress. I know for a fact applied pressure. Oh, they did. The labs like. No, you can't. It has to reflect our values. Okay. Yeah, yeah. So maybe that's. Where is is that from permanent. Am I always going to get when I type in who is George Washington. You know a picture of Denzel Washington. You know it's already. Changing is what I'm saying. It's already a lot of these things are being reversed. It's not perfect, but it's already changing. And that's. I think, just a function of the larger culture change. Yeah. I think Elon buying Twitter. Is. In letting people talk. And. Debate moved the culture to like, I think a more moderate place. I think he's got a little more, you know, a little further, but like, I think it was net positive. On the culture because. It was so far left. It was so far left inside these. Companies, the way they were designing their products such that, you know, George Washington will look like there's like a black George Washington. Yeah. Have you. That's just insane, right? It was like it was verging on insanity. Well, it's. Lying, and that's what freaked me out. I mean, it's like, I don't know, just tell the truth or watch the truth. I don't want to hear it. Don't comport with my, you know, desires, but I don't want to be lied to. George Washington was not black. No, the framers were. They were all white Protestant men. Sorry. All right. Yeah. So, like, that's a fact. Deal with it. So if you're going to lie to me about that, you're my enemy, right? I think so, I mean, you're. And I would. Say it's a small element of these companies that are doing that. Yes, but they tend to be the they were. The controlling element, those like, sort of activist folks that were. And I was at Facebook in 2015. And worked with Facebook. I worked at Facebook. I didn't know that. I worked on open. Source. Mostly I worked on React and React Native, one of the most powerful kind of wave programing user interfaces. So I mostly worked on that. I didn't really work on the kind of blew up and all of that. But I saw the sort of the cultural change. Where, like a small minority of activists. Were just like shaming anyone who is thinking independently. And it's Silicon Valley and it's like sheep. Like direction where. Everyone. Is afraid of this activist. Class. Because they can cancel you. They can. You know, I think one of the early shots. Fired there was like Brendan Eich, the inventor of JavaScript, inventor of the language that, like, runs the browser. Because of the way he votes. Or donates or whatever. Get get fired from his position as CTO, muzzle browser. And that was, like, seen as a win or something. And I was like, again, I was like, very politically, you know, I was. Not really interested in politics in like 20 1213 when I first came to this. Country. But I just. Accepted. I was like, oh, you know, all these people are Democrats. Liberal is what you are, whatever. But know, I just looked at that. I was like, I that's awful. Like, you know, no matter what his political. Opinion is like, you. Know, you're, you're you're taking from a. Man his ability to earn a living. Eventually he started another browser company. And it's good. Right. But, this, like, sort of cancel culture created. Such a bubble of conformism. And the leadership class at these companies were actually afraid of the employees. So that is the fact that bothers me most. Silicon Valley is defining our future. It that is technology. We don't have kind of technology in the United States anymore. Manufacturing creativity has obviously been extinguished everywhere in the visual arts, you know, everywhere. Yeah. Silicon Valley is the last. Yes. What's important? What's the most important? Yes. And so the number one requirement for leadership is courage. Number one. Yes. Number one, nothing even comes close to bravery, as requirement for wise and effective leadership. So if the leaders of these companies were afraid of like 26 year old, unmarried, screechy girls in the HR department, like, whoa, that's really cowardly. Like, shut up. You're not leading this company. I am like, that's super easy. I don't know why that's so hard. Like what? The reason I think. It was hard. It was, because. These companies were competing for talent hand. Over fist. And it was this sort of zero interest era and, and sort of, US economy. Right. And everyone was. Throwing cash at like, talent. And therefore, if you offend the sensibilities of the employees even to the slightest bit. You're afraid. That they're, they're going. To leave or something like that. I'm, I'm trying to make up an excuse for them, but it. Well, you would you. Could answer this question because you are the talent that, you know, you came all the way from Jordan. Yeah. To work in the Bay area to be at the center of creativity, insights. So, the people who do what you do, who can write code. Yeah. The basis of all of this are they I don't like they seem much more like you or James Damore. They just they don't seem like political activists to me. For the most part. Yeah, they're they're still, segment of this program, our population. Well, they have to be rational because code is about reason right now. I mean, this is a whole thing, you know, it's like, I don't think I mean, a lot of these people that we talked about are into code and things like that. They're not rational. Really? Yeah. Like, look, I think coding could help you become more rational, but it could very easily override that. I mean, that's the. Basis of it. I thought, if this is true and that is true, then that must be true. I thought that was the. Yeah. But you know, people are very easy, very it's very easy for. People to just, you know, compartmentalize. Right? I was like, I now I'm doing coding, now I'm doing emotions. Oh, so the brain is not a computer. The brain is not exactly exact. That's my point. I know, you know. So, you know, I, I'm probably, you. Know, responsible for the most amount of people learning to code in America because I, I was like a. I like, built. The reason I came to the US is I built this piece of software that was the first to make it easy to, code in the browser. And it went super viral. And a bunch of US companies started using. Am I including, Code Academy? And I joined them as like, founding and, you know, they had just started two guys, amazing guys that just started. And I joined them and we. Taught like 50 million people. How to code, like many of them, many millions of them are American. And, you know, the, the, sort of rhetoric at a time. What you would say is like, coding is important because, you know. I'll teach you how to think, computational thinking and all of that. I sort of like not maybe I've said it at some point, but I've never really believed that. I think coding is a tool you can use to build things, to automate things to. It's a fun tool. You can do art where they can do a lot of things with it. But, ultimately, I don't think, you know, you can, you know, sit people down. I sort of make them more rational. And you get into all these weird things. If you try to do that, you know, people can become more. Rational by virtue of education, by virtue of. Seeing that, you know, taking a more. Rational approach to. To their life yields results. But you can't you can't, like, really teach it that way. I agree with that completely. That's interesting. I just thought it was a certain because I have to say, without getting into controversial territory, every person I've ever met who writes code like is kind of similar in some ways to every other person I've ever met. Writes code like, yeah, not true. Yeah. Not a broad cross-section of any population. No at all. Well, people who make it a career. But I think anyone sort of can write a lot of code. I'm sorry. I mean, people get paid to do it, right? Right. Yeah. Interesting. So bottom line, do you see. And then we didn't even mention Elon Musk and David Sacks. Yeah. I've also come out for Trump. So do you think. The vibe shift in Silicon Valley is real. Yes, actually I would credit Saxon in originally. Like perhaps more than Elon because. Well, look, it's one party state. Yeah. No one watches you. For example, no one would ever watch anything. Sort of. You know. I was I don't. Want to overgeneralize. But most people didn't get any right. Wing or center right opinions. For the most part, didn't seek it. It wasn't there. You're swimming and just, you know, liberal Democratic, sort of talking point. I'd say sax, in the All In podcast, was sort of the. First time a lot of people started on a weekly basis hearing a conservative talk being David talks. Easing. And I would start to hear at parties and things like that. People describe their. Politics as sex, sexism, like this. Ugly. They would be like, hey, you know, I agree with you. And most of the time I agree with the, you know, Sachs's, point of view on all All In podcast. I'm like, yeah, you're kind of maybe moderate or center, right at this point. Yeah. Well, he's so reasonable. He's first of all, he's a wonderful person in my opinion. But, like, I didn't have any sense of the reach of that podcast until, I don't know, I had no sense at all. And he's like, well, do my podcast. Sure. Because I love David Saks. I do the podcast, like everyone I've ever met texted me, oh, you're on All In podcast. Like it's it's not my world. Yeah, I didn't realize that is the vector. If you want to reach sort of business minded people who are not very political but are probably going to like send money to a buddy who's bundling for Commonweal because like that she's our candidate. Yes, that's the way to reach people like that. That's right. And by the way. This is my point about technology can have a centralizing effect, but also. Decentralizing. Yes. So YouTube, you can argue. YouTube is the centralized thing. They're pushing opinions on us, whatever. But, you know, now you. Have a platform on YouTube after you got fired from Fox, right? Yeah. You know, socks, can have a platform. And put these opinions out. And I think, you know, there was a moment during Covid that I. Felt like there they're going to close everything down. Yeah. For good reason. You felt that. Way? Yes. And maybe there were. Maybe there's going to be some. Other event that that will, like, allow them to close it down. But, yeah, one of the things I really love. About America is the First Amendment. It just it's. Just that the most important, institutional innovation. In the history of humanity. I agree with that completely. And I wish I was really. Without it, too. I mean, it must be. We should really protect it. Like we should like we should be. So coveting of it, like, you know, we should be, you know, like your wife or something like that. Can you totally. Agree? Hands off. Yeah. Can you just repeat your description of its importance historically? I'm sorry you put it so. Well. It's the most important institutional. Innovation in human history. The First Amendment is the most important institutional innovation in human history. Yes, I love that. I think it's absolutely, absolutely right. And as someone who grew up with it in a country that had had it for, you know, 200 years when I was born, you know, you don't you don't feel it. It's just like, what's the First Amendment? It's like just part of nature, right? It's a gravity. It just exists. But as someone who, you know, grew up in a country that does not have it, which is true of every other country, this planet. There's only one country that has it. You see it that what you see, it is the thing that makes America America. Well, the thing that makes it so that we can change course. Yes. Right. And the reason why, you know, we had this, you know, conformist, mob rule mentality that people call woke, you know, the reason that we're now past that almost, you know, it's still. Kind of there. But. Well, like, we're on our way past that. Is because of, of the First Amendment and free speech. And again, I would credit Elon. A lot for buying Twitter and letting us talk and can debate and push back on the craziness. Right. It's kind of it's what's beautiful. I've been a direct beneficiary of it is I think everyone in the country has been. So I'm not curt and I love Elon, but I'm, I mean, sort of weird that like, a foreigner has to do that. A foreigner, foreign born person. You Elon appreciates it in this way. It's like it's a little depressing. Like, why didn't some American born person do that? I guess because they don't. We don't take it. Yeah. You know, take it for granted. I wrote a thread. It's like ten things I like about America. I expected to to do well, but, you know, it was like 3 or 4 years ago. It went super viral. Did Wall Street Journal covered it? Peggy Noonan. You know, called me and I was like, I want to write. A story about it. I was like, okay, it's like a Twitter thread. You could read it, but, you know, I and I just like, talk. About normal things, you know, free speech, one of them, but also like hard work, appreciation for talent and and all of. That. And it was starting. To close up. Right. I started to see, you know, meritocracy kind of like being less valued. And I think that that's part of the reason why I wrote the thread. And what I, what I realize is like here. Yeah, most Americans just just don't think about that and don't really value it as much. I agree. And so maybe you do need. You do need to I think that's absolutely right. I but why do you think I mean, I have seen I hate to say this because I've always said that my whole life that foreigners, are great. You know, I like traveling to foreign countries. I like my best friend is foreign born, actually, as opposed to mass immigration as I am, which I am. Arabs really. Like you, by. The way. Oh, well, I really like Arabs. We have thrown off the brainwashing. Just a sidebar. I feel like we had a bad experience with Arabs 23 years ago and what a lot of Americans didn't realize, but I knew from traveling a lot in the Middle East. Yeah, it was bad this bad. However, like, that's not representative of the people that I have dinner with in the Middle East at all. Like someone once said to me, like, those are the worst people in our country. And. Right. And no, I totally agree with that strongly. I always defend the Arabs in a heartfelt way, but, no, I, I wonder if. Some of the, particularly the higher income immigrants recently, I've noticed, are like parroting the same kind of anti-American crap that they're learning from the Institute, you know. You come from Punjab and go to Stanford, and all of a sudden, like, you've got the same rotten, decadent attitudes of your native born professors from Stanford. Do you see that? No, I'm not sure what's the distribution like. I mean, speaking of Indians, I mean, on the right on the right side of the spectrum, we have Vivek. And who's the best? Yeah, who's a perfect example of what I'm saying. Like, yeah, Vivek is thought through not just like First Amendment. Good. But why? It's good. Yeah. Well, I, you know, I'm not sure. You know, I'm not sure it's good. You know, I think it's. Yeah, I think foreigners. For the most part, do appreciate it more. But it's easy. You know, I talked about. How I just, you know, try not to be, you know, this conformist can't really absorb everything around me and and act on it. But it's very easy for people to go in these. One party state places. And really get, you know, become. Part of this, like, mob mentality where. Everyone believes the same thing. Any, any deviation. From that is considered cancelable offense. And, you know. You ask about the shift in. Silicon Valley. I mean, part of the shift is like, yeah, Silicon Valley still has a lot of people who. Are independent minded. And they see this sort of conformist type of thinking. And the Democratic Party, and that's really repulsive for them, where, you know, there's like a party line. It's like Biden's sharp as a tack Trumpist. Right? Everyone says that. And then the debates happen. Oh, unfit, unfit, unfit. And then oh, he's out. Oh Kamala Khan like I was like, right. It's like, you know, lockstep. And there's like no range. There's no there's very little dissent within within that party. And maybe Republicans, I think at some point we're we're the same. Maybe now it's it's it's sort of a little different. But this is what why people. Are attracted to to the other side. And so I. By the way, this is advice for the Democrats. Like if you want sort of Silicon Valley back you you know, maybe don't be. So controlling of. Opinions and like be okay with more dissent. You have to relinquish a little bit of power to do that. I mean, it's the same as raising teenagers. There's always a moment in the life of every parent of teenagers where a child is going in a direction you don't want and a, you know, it's shooting heroin direction. You have to intervene maximum force. But there are a lot of directions that kid can go that are deeply annoying to us. And you have to restrain yourself a little bit if you want to preserve the relationship. Actually, if you want to preserve your power over the child, you have to pull back and be like, I'm not going to say anything. That's right. This child will come back to my my gravitational pull is strong enough, and I'm not going to lose this child because she does something that offends me to death, right? You know what I mean? You can't hold too tightly, and I feel like they don't understand. I feel like the Democratic Party. I'm not an intimate. Of course I'm not in the meetings. But I feel by their behavior that they feel very threatened. And that's what I see. These are people who feel like they're losing their power. Yes. And so they have to control what you say on Facebook. I mean, what? Yes. If you're worried about people say on Facebook, you know, you've lost confidence in yourself. That's right, that's right. Do you feel that? Yeah. I mean. You know, then. Yeah. You know, there's Matt Taibbi and Michael Shellenberger and a lot of folks do, you know, did a lot of great work on on censorship. Yes. And the government's kind of, involvement in that and how they push social media companies. I don't know if you can put it just. On the Democrats, because I think part of it happened during the Trump administration as well, for. Sure. But I think they're more. Excitable about it. The really they really love. Misinformation as a term, which I think is as kind of a bias. Towards a meaningless. Term too, meaning a storm. All that matters whether it's true or not. Yeah. And the term mis and disinformation doesn't even address the veracity of the claim. That's right. It's like irrelevant to them whether it's true. And in fact, if it's true, it's more upsetting. Yeah. It's like everything what we talked about earlier is just making people stupid by taking their faculty of. You're trying to discern, truth. I think that's, you know, that's how you actually become rational by, like, trying to figure. Out whether something is true or not. And then, and then being right or wrong, and, and then that really, kind of, trains you for having a better judgment. What, what you talked about judgment. That's how people build good judgment. You can't outsource. Your judgment. To the group. Which I guess like, feels like what's asked. From us, especially in liberal circles, is that no, Fauci knows better. Two weeks to stop the spread. You know, take the job, stay home, wear the mask. You know, just like. Talking down to us as. Children. You can't discuss certain things on YouTube. You'll get. Banned. I sample you couldn't say the lab leak. Theory, right? Which is now the mainstream theory. Yes. And again, a lot of this self-correct it. Because of the First Amendment. Yeah. And Elon. Wow. That was, that was as interesting as dinner was. Last name a little less profanity, but I'm really grateful that you took the time to do that. Thank you. It's it's it's absolutely my pleasure. It was my. Thank you. Thanks.