[Music] What's up, Chris? Danny, good to see you. Good to see you, too, man. Yeah. Yep. Uh the last time we saw each other, we were at the Cosmic Summit. Yeah. Uh you guys had just rolled in and uh I I presented like first thing in the morning and I think I don't know what time you guys came out, but it was probably like 9 10:00, something like that. Something like that. And so I caught you guys in the hallway and uh I had my like my elevator pitch ready to go like I got to go talk with Danny man. We got to get this taken care of. And right when I was actually talking with Steve and uh and and right when I started like you know getting into it um George Howard shows up with Malcolm Bendall. So with his with his uh thunderstorm generators and uh yeah that kind of stole the show. So, oh my god, what a crazy freaking situation that is with that whole thunderstorm generator and all that stuff they got going on. Yeah, I was actually with you guys uh when we went to go see those thunderstorm generators. He was there telling us all about it. I got a couple pictures of them uh of you guys checking those things out. What were your thoughts? Wild man. I don't know. I don't know what to think of it. I know it's crazy. It's hard to comprehend what's going on there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's kind of where I was at with it, too. Um, I was really hoping to to get there and like just have the full picture and kind of understand the whole thing. Um, you know, I'm a I'm a science educator and so my job is to take like complex scientific ideas and and break them down so that, you know, 17 and 18-year-old kids can understand it. And and I'm just having a hard time with that one. Right. So, um, I I kind of get like the premise. So, I kind of understand like what what's happening with and why they call it like the thunderstorm generator uh where it's bringing in hot air from one side and cold air from the other side. And um and it was actually Bob Granier that kind of kind of helped me understand it a little bit better. Um with the with the ball lightning that's taking place inside of it and that's that's what's happening. Um but uh yeah, I don't know. I I didn't get the Yeah. I kind of Do you remember going to the mall when you were little and seeing and seeing like the rainbow salesman, the vacuum cleaner guys? Oh, yeah. Of course. They're still there. Yeah. I kind of felt like we're trying to get, you know, trying to get a rainbow sales. So So yes. Yeah. It was It was neat. Like I said, I just I just I was really hoping to leave there with like a much better picture of what was happening with that thing and and I didn't see it. Yeah. Yeah. It's definitely a really it's a lot going on there and there's there's a lot to understand and um yeah, we'll see. We'll see what happens. We'll see if I figure something out. But so so you teach where where do you teach? What do you teach? Well, so I teach in coastal Georgia. Um and I teach for like 23 24 years I've been teaching environmental science and earth systems. Okay. Uh and so you know what we're going to talk about today is like right down my alley. Uh you know it's something that I've been focusing on for a really long time. Um, and like I said, my job as an educator is to take those complex ideas and and break them down for high school kids understand. And even like like with the thunderstorm generator, you know, the same thing with the Carolina Bays, like once we get into it, it's like that's not adding up. Like they're not following those those scientific processes to come up with the uh, you know, a correct explanation for how they're formed. And uh, so that kind of started this whole thing off with me with the Carolina Bays. you know, that's what I, you know, I teach, like I said, I teach kids and, uh, you know, the whole thing is about the, um, you know, the scientific process and, uh, you know, that's kind of where I've been focusing on it with the Carolina bays. So, what are the Carolina bays? So, they're uh, elliptical depressions uh, that we find all over the eastern coastal plane uh, from from south um, you know, from just under New York all the way down through the Carolas through Georgia. There are a few in Alabama and then they kind of you kind of don't see very many of them until you get to around Nebraska. Uh and then they pick back up in Nebraska. And so you have these these elliptical shaped depressions in in in Nebraska. So they're all very similar similarly shaped. Uh they all have this elliptical uh orientation to them. The orientation itself is actually pointing uh towards the Great Lakes of Michigan uh which is kind of a telling sign of what they could be. Um they're they're elliptical and they're pointing towards the Great Lakes of Michigan. Yeah. Yeah. That's What do you mean pointing like like they are oriented towards they all have that that Okay. So they're like they're eggshaped kind of and Well, they're they are perfect ellipses ellipses. Most of them are you can actually mathematically um outline them and they they are perfect ellipses. Uh and the orientation itself have they actually been like measured? Yeah. Yeah. There's there's a guy we'll talk about um Michael Davis. He's been he's measured over 70,000 of these things. Yeah. And and measured them, you know, labeled them. He actually has a survey, the uh used to be called the Carolina Bay Survey, but now it's the Ovoid basins survey. Um because he started included some depressions that we find in Texas and things like that. They're not all Carolina bays. Plus, we got the ones in Nebraska, too. So, you know, why we really need to get away from calling them Carolina bays when they're, you know, found all over the place, right? So, right. So, what is the conventional explanation for what these are? Well, uh, so the conventional explanation is that they are well, well, first of all, there have been quite a few hypotheses on what they could have been. Mhm. Uh back in the 1930s, and I've got a I've got an image here, but back in the 1930s, um when we finally had people flying in airplanes and being able to look down onto the ground overall, uh they first discovered them uh in places like um like Myrtle Beach. Uh they started finding them in like the Kayfair River Valley. Uh and they they would start to take surveys. They would start to to take a bunch of pictures. And back then that's all they had was like aerial photographs. And then they would they pace them all together. Mhm. Um and even back then, this was back in the 1930s, uh and and they originally thought that these were created by meteors. They thought that this Yeah. that they were a cosmic event. Um George Howard has a story about his uh his boss when he was working in uh working on I think it was in the Senate. Um and uh his his his boss, the senator, had property that had a whole bunch of these Carolina bays on it. Uh and he told him the whole story about how Yeah. back in the 30s and 40s, man. They thought that these things were meteor holes. And uh they'd all go out and start expect, you know, looking for meteors, but nobody ever found any, right? And so that kind of um kind of, you know, pushed the thinking towards more of a uniformitarianism process, like, well, if they're not meteors, then they they must be, you know, something more terrestrial. It must be something, you know, cuz that's what uniformitarianism is, is that, you know, the the terrain changes one gust of wind and one grain of of sand at a time. Uh, and so the whole thought process shifted away from uh a catastrophic event uh to it being more of a uh terrestrial or uniformitarianism uh process to create these things. And that's kind of where they're at with it now, even even today, you know, 100 nearly 100 years later. uh they they still here these are some of the uh hypotheses that they had come along with you know from the 1930s to now um and there's there's a list of them here like spring basins um you know at one time is that in the very top right is that one of the Carolina base no it's not that's um what is that I think that's a crater I think that's actually a crater from that's an actual crater meter yeah um there are some people that think that they were beaver dams uh and and again we're still going back and forth this whole time from the 1930s until really the 1970s it was back and forth back and forth with uh terrestrial versus catastrophic um explanation for how they formed um extraterrestrial days. Yeah. Yeah. Uh so so you know they even some people even thought that they were beaver ponds that were like super flashed uh from a bolite event um that took place and and like flash steamed the uh the ground causing these some people thought that they were giant fish or or whales or something you know swimming around in circles and you know making nests and in the terrain of of South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia and uh yeah are there no there's no nothing that looks like this anywhere else in the world. Uh yeah, there I mean there are there are oriented lakes found all around the world and this happens a lot where a lot of times the oriented lakes get brought into the conversation to dismiss these Carolina bays being so symmetrical and uh you know I I I just the presentation that I gave this past summer uh was called pseudo Carolina bays because when you start looking at the Carolina bays themselves, they're so numerous. There's so many of them that uh uh you know they're the dominant feature like they are the dominant feature on the east coast. Uh I would say maybe even second to to like the rivers that flow along the coast. Um and so I you know I've got a bunch of examples. Can we see the ones that are used to dis to discredit the Carolina bays? The ones that they say that uh h and how how do they use those other ones that are and where are they also? So most of the time, so there there's a couple different kinds. Like I said, the presentation I gave this summer, I kind of went through all of them. Went through a whole bunch. Um and uh so so here's a list that I that I put together of of the different Carol or the different oriented lakes that often times get used as explanations for the Carolina bays. I'll go back later and talk more about like what the current is current hypothesis is. Uh but um they're not none of them are ellipses. None of them have raised rims. Yeah. So, we have a bunch of different types like this is a big one. The thermocarcake hypothesis is that um and we do find these. We you can see the images right here. We do find them up in the Arctic Circle um in Alaska. You find them over in Russia. You also find them down in South America like like very South America. Um but they all occur in places where you have perafrost. And so perafrost is permanently frozen soil. So, and that means that it's frozen like all year long. the only the very top layers thaw out during the summertime. The water pools in those areas and then the wind blows them and they they start to form these circular shapes. Um but I don't I wouldn't call any of those really elliptical. Now we this is an area in Alaska. That's wild. Yeah. Yeah. This is an area in Alaska. And I could see if if you were just, you know, scanning through these images, you're like, "Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's that's what formed a Carolina base." But the areas where we find these Carolina bays are nothing like this. And even during the middle of the ice age, even during the middle peak part of the last ice age, there was no there wasn't perafrost like this. Um, and so and that's that's the time frame that they were saying that these were formed, the Carolina bays were formed. Mhm. It really helps when you look at it with the LAR and it's something that I want to kind of focus on uh today is just the use of this LAR and how much it is should be progressing the research on Carolina Bays. So, this right here is uh is an image of um the thermocarst lakes in Alaska using LAR. And we don't see the same the same features that we see with the Carolina bays. Like we don't see the raised rims that you would see with all those Carolina bays. We don't see that perfect elliptical shape. Uh and the orientations are all kind of off and they kind of bleed in together, too. So, when you compare that to places like this, this is in South Carolina. It's close to McIntyre Air Force Base. Mhm. Um and again this is just using Google Earth which you know 20 years ago we didn't really have and uh so within the past 20 years we've had Google Earth and now within the past like 10 10 to 12 years we can add the LAR to the terrain itself. Oh wow. And now we see how many of these elliptical depressions completely cover everywhere. They're so random too. They're everywhere. So these are Carolina bays. Uh and and they're not all the same shape. They're all different and lit. Well, so this is kind of a it's it's it's almost the the the terrain is um the terrain is steep right here. So So the the Carolina Bay is formed a little bit differently here uh just because of how they we think that this these were catastrophic um um uh ice ejecta and we can get into that in a few minutes. But um but the terrain here having that steepness to it uh causes it to to deform as as it's being formed. Um another example that they often get confused with is uh the ply lakes or the or the um we find these in Texas. Mhm. Uh you also find them in places like Australia. Uh you always find them interesting. Yeah. Yeah. I always find them in river basins uh or areas where you had sheet flooding where where a tremendous amount of water flood flooded over the uh terrain like you find in Texas. Um here's an area in Texas is kind of close to this is the city of Amarillo. Um and when you look at the LAR of that area right now again these are ply lakes. These are oriented lakes that were created from water uh as water flowed over this this plane at the time. Right. So these probably formed before all of this. This was all underwater. Um a long time ago. Long long time ago. How long ago? I I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I don't know about Amarella how far up they but this is formed. And basically what happens is well I can go back to how they were formed here where you have it's usually in very aid areas and you have lower water tables. And so when it when it rains, the water pools up in areas and then it dries and so you get these cracks. And so the next time it rains, the water quickly goes into the cracks, fills it back up. Uh and then, you know, so so you do end up with these like circular depressions um that that we see, right? You know, here. Makes sense. But you also see that all of them have like a low point where there some of them still have water in them, right? Uh but yeah, those aren't Carolina bays, okay? their their um their play pier legs. Okay. Uh here's another area in South Carolina. Again, these are going to be Carolina bays. This is close to Shaw Air Force Base. I should probably stop focusing on like areas around Air Force bases, but is there any is there what is the to you? What is the biggest smoking gun that these are meteor impacts? I've always had a problem with keeping a firearm in reach and safe around the kids. A closet or a traditional safe is too far away. And I remember when I was a kid finding my parents firearms, and I don't want that happening to my kids. And this is what Stopbox USA has set out to solve. They sent me this Stopbox Pro, and I'm not looking back. The customizable five button pattern is mechanical and easy to open. And what a relief, it doesn't have to operate on a battery. It's flat enough to fit under your pillow for fast access. And the best part is safe around the kids. I love how well-built it is, strong enough for travel, and small enough to fit into any of my travel bags. There's absolutely no need for a separate bulky Pelican case. This is hands down the best solution I found, and I'm happy to have Stopbox USA sponsor this show. Stopbox is made in the USA, keeping jobs in America. Stopbox is also TSA compliant, so you don't need to carry a separate case. They also have a wall mount version and one for easy access in cars. No longer do you have to trade safety for speed and readiness. For a limited time only, our listeners are getting a crazy deal. Our listeners are getting 10% off your entire order when you use my code, Danny. And right now, Starbucks is also running a deal on their most popular bundle, the two pack, which saves over 30% and comes with free accessories and shipping. That's 10% off and a big bundle discount when you use the code dny at stopboxusa.com. Discover a better way to balance security and readiness with Stopbox. I don't think they are meteor impacts. What do you think they are? I don't think they are. So, so what I think they are, and again, I can go all the way back uh to that original slide with the uh the catastrophic versus the uh the um uniformitarianism explanation. Um I do think that they formed very quickly catastrophically. Um but now, like I said, we have better we have the the better uh technology now with the with the Google Earth, we have the LAR, um all these things added together. Yeah. Um, look at this. Penelis County. Yeah. Well, I I went ahead and made that for you. Um, this is Yeah, this is the area. This is here, right? This is What the was that? Oh, bless you. I was like, what was This is uh This is the area around St. Pete. Yeah. And um and again, this is just showing the importance of the lighter. I mean, there's so many people here, dude. Dude, there are so many people. One of the most populated counties ever. I swear, dude. Everywhere. It's like 3 million people here. I I can't believe it. after the pandemic is just filled up. But now after we had just got hit to by her two hurricanes, people are starting to leave again. No, they're they're there. I took it right down to the beach, man. They're everywhere. It's ridiculous. It's not nearly as bad as it was 2 years ago. I promise you that. Yeah. Yeah. So, anyways, uh again, this whole area, this whole area is completely urbanized, right? You've got houses, you've got uh highways and roads and and um you can't see anything that used to be there 200 years ago. It's just not there anymore. But when you click on when you use the LAR, even in areas like this that are super populated, it really highlights like the ground. It highlights what the ground actually looks like. And holy crap. Yeah. Now, this is all done by uh Michael Davis. Um he um he well, we'll talk about him later on because it's kind of a a big deal with some of these hypotheses that look how low that peninsula is. Look at Tampa Bay. That's where That's where Patrick's or or not Patrick um McDill Air Force Base is right there. Mhm. Got a nice golf course over there. Yeah. Um that would be all underwater. Yeah. Yeah. And it and it does go underwater when you have like hurricanes and things. Oh yeah. No, it was underwater a couple months ago. Right. Right. And you can actually use maps like this to see like, well, where are the safest places to be if hurricane's coming? That's wild. Yeah. Can you punch in on that a little bit? I can't with this. No, cuz it's it's an image. Um I could if if you wanted to. I mean, the access to this lighter. Look at that. that freaking cut going all the way through the peninsula. Yeah. Yeah. So that cut was formed the last time sea levels were a lot higher which was 125,000 years ago. It's called the emian. Um so 125,000 years ago sea levels were actually higher than they are today by about 9 mters. I think about 30 ft. Okay. Uh and that's 30 ft doesn't seem like a big deal, but when you start looking how flat these these areas are, that's a huge deal. 30 ft. My house is 30 ft above sea level. So it' be right at my house. Right at your door. Yeah. So, and and you know, I don't we're not going to dox you here, but you're probably somewhere on one of those areas. Yeah. You're probably somewhere on one of those higher up areas. And so, the what Michael Davis has done, you see that our studio is right at that like right on the ed like you see the outer barrier island there. It's like right right very far left all the way to the very edge by the Gulf. Okay. So, the barrier island is there and then immediately across the bay you have you have red. So, that's where we are right now. Yep. Yeah. So, yeah. Yeah. And I and I went down to um Indian Rocks Beach earlier and so so I was at the beach today, you know, and went up in elevation to get to the studio, right? Uh and you can see that with this uh what Michael Davis has done is he's taken USGS LAR and he has um colorcoded it by meters. Have you ever used a topographic map before? Yeah. Yeah. So topographic maps are they have lines and you have to know how to read the lines and each line is a certain distance above or below the elevation, right? And what he did is he actually made this this color code where each color is 1 meter higher. And so you go you start off with blue and you go 1 m 1 m 1 meter all the way up to 10 m and then it starts over. So as you're going from blue up to this next blue that's that's 10 m, right? So all the way around. So this blue right here is 10 m above sea level. If you keep going up you would end up at 30 m above sea or yeah 30 m above sea level. Oh okay. So interesting. So, it's really interesting because it shows you like not just where the elevated areas are, but if you know how to read it, you can actually measure how how high up they are based on the color codes. Mhm. Uh, which is super helpful. So, purple could either be below sea level or 9 m above sea level. Well, the blue is always going to be the sea level. So, the very bottom blue is like zero. That's that's But it's like purple at the very very bottom where you looking at at the bottom of your little graph. Oh, yeah. Well, that's because it it it starts back over here. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So, we start there. This is actually zero right here. And it starts back over here. So if you just focus on red, for instance, that red is right there. We see another red right there. So that's that's another 10 m above where the first red was. So right, and in these really flat areas, that's really helpful. Right. If you go to the mountains with this LAR, it's really confusing. It's just color, you know, colored all the way up. Um, but a lot of these areas where we find Carolina bays are super flat. Super flat. And so so having a a LAR like this that you can and I access with this this with Google Earth. You can go right on to Google Earth. Um it's you can actually it's free. All of all of your listeners can can log on to centto.org and uh download this program and use it with your your own Google Earth. It's it's really neat. So that's so crazy, man. Yeah. Yep. That's interesting. That big cut that it's going right through. A big river just going right through. Well, because it was a big river. It was, you know, last time sea levels were higher, water flowed through here. Mhm. And uh now the whole area has been lifted up. I have no clue what's here now. I can go back. Um they they looks like Oh, look at that. Yeah. Is there a channel there or maybe a ditch or something? I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. No, it looks like they're um there I think there is a little river that might flow all the way through there. Yeah. That's wild. It's probably a drainage ditch or something now. Yeah, it's probably drainage, right? Exactly. But that's only because it's so low that the water's draining through that anyways. Right. Right. So, and that big circular area is interesting, too. Right. So, this was a barrier island. You you said that a minute ago. That was a barrier island 125,000 years ago when sea levels were higher. Um, god damn, that's interesting. It is cool. Yeah. I would love to just explore the entire United States on the lidar. You can, like I said, centtos.org. He has the entire continental US colorcoded and map just like What is it? What is it? Centos. Centos. C I N T OS. Here, I think I got it. Yeah, I've got it on this slide right here. This is Michael Davis right here. He's the guy he Okay. He um is a computer scientist uh and and he's actually turned his processing skills towards geology and mapping these these Carolina bays using this ladder. So, you see all those red dots. He's actually gone in measured um uh oriented and and mapped every single one of these Carolina bays that that we find on the train. Yeah, it's it's it's really impressive. I and what did he find? What what's uh So you said Oh, going back. You said you don't think they're You don't think they're common impacts? I do not think I think that they're the result of a single comet impact. You mean it's ice? Not not common impact. I would say actually an asteroid impact, but um you think it's just ice fragments? Yes. Secondary ice fragments from Michigan. All of these have orientation back to the Great Lakes, back to Michigan, right? And uh so a comet hit or asteroid hit the Great Lakes ice cap and then ejected just tons of fragments of ice. That's what I or or something like that happened. Yeah. Uh and then I I'll get to that um just while I'm on it. I don't know if we're still showing that, but uh yeah, so this is the train that we see now that the LAR really helps when you get up to these really flat areas in the middle part of uh middle part of Georgia. And like I said, I do think that the these are the result of some kind of cosmic impact into an ice sheet at some point in the past. That's the debatable part to me is is like when did it happen? We can talk we'll talk about that, I'm sure. Um but yeah, you know, this this page right here is just uh you know, shows kind of the whole story written in the landscape where you've got the Carolina bays uh all on the east coast. The entire coastal plane is covered with them. Uh you go across to to Nebraska like this image right here shows you. All these are the Carolina bays. All the way on the other side, Nebraska, you've got these elliptical shaped depressions that are oriented in the opposite direction of the Carolina base, but they're all oriented to the same place on on a map. How so? Like these right here, if we line them up, they line up right above Michigan. Right above Michigan. Oh, you Okay. So, you're saying the shape of the ellipse is oriented towards the same direction. Interesting. Y Oh, wow. Go back to that last one. Oh. Mhm. Now again, a lot of tide. Yeah. The Lauren tide ice sheet is the name of the ice sheet that was over Canada. Basically, whenever we're in an ice age, and we go through ice ages over and over and over again, right? Uh and and every time that we go into an ice age, ice piles up on top of Canada and the sea levels drop tremendously. They drop really, really low. The last time they dropped, it was like 400 ft lower than it is today. Mhm. So you go down to the beach, take a boat, go out as far as you can go to until the death readers are even 400 ft lower and that's where the beach was. That's far. Yeah. And 20,000 years ago, that's where it was at. And it is far. It is far. Like this especially here cuz the Gulf is shallow. Yes. Yes. Yes. Gulf of America. Yeah. That's that's actually why I had to go to the beach today to get a picture of the Gulf of America. But um but Yeah. Yeah. So, and another interesting thing, too, is when you get to where they all cross, uh, this is the actual bedrock geology of Michigan. Okay. And, and I don't I don't to me that looks like a bullseye like that, the ringshaped bedrock geology. Each one of these different colors is a different type of bedrock. And and that's basically it's a basin. It's called the Michigan basin, right? And uh basins form they the the law of original horizontality says that like sand lays in flat layers like it's originally laid out flat and then if something were to lift it up or cause it to sink it has to happen afterwards. Uh and so for this to be a basin it had to have formed flat and then at some time after it was formed it was depressed down. And uh you know that's what I think I think that it was actually an impact over this whole area uh that caused this depression of Michigan uh and and caused the secondary icy ejecta to fly away and come crashing back down into the coastal plane and and pretty muchund uh 1500 km radius away from um Michigan. So other than the fact that all of these ellipses are angled towards one location where in the Lauren where the Laurent tide ice sheet was, what hard evidence is there that this was ejections from a a comet impact? Well, that's that's where we're at now. I mean, we're trying to fight for evidence for it. Um, you know, because obviously you've got the Carolina Bays, they're there. The the perfect um elliptical shapes of them should be very telling. Uh I'm actually right now working trying to get a paper published uh just showing that we can prove that these are ellipses. You know, we're we're using something called the le squared method. Uh we're we're identifying and and punching, you know, putting dots all around the rims of these things and proving that they're like time after time after time. Again, these things are are actually mathematical ellipses. And you don't find things like that very often in nature. Like I showed you a minute ago, all of those oriented lakes, very few of those would actually have identical orientation to each other. very very few of them. Is there anything any anything like the uh like like nano diamonds or any of the other materials that you find in cosmic impacts there? So we're looking um now they have found evidence of younger dry stuff in some of the rims of these Carolina bays. Um that that is one of the possibilities is that this could have formed at the younger dus. Um I I don't think so anymore and we can get into that a little bit later. Uh but I did for a long time think that this these were part of the younger dus event. You guys have been you've covered the younger draft and I I am on board that that happened. I am on board that uh we had major fragments bolides you know blowing up in the atmosphere. We find we do find lots of evidence of that. Um and there's been a lot of back and forth of that too and that's kind of what makes this a little bit more difficult is because there is a connection between the Carolina bays and the younger dus and the younger dus hasn't been proven yet fully right. Um, you know, most of us are like, "Yes, it it happened, right?" But until they It's really hard to prove that. Yeah. Yeah. And the same thing with this. If ice formed it, if if ice literally was it was ejected from an initial impact site, ice, you know, an icicle is the perfect murder weapon, right? You know, once that ice melts, what are you left with, right? Ponds of water. Yeah. And and that's what But there would But would wouldn't there also be fragments of the rock of the comet or the meteor? Like wouldn't there I If you could find it, then that would be awesome. But that's what I'm saying. Has there is there any evidence of any of that going into the Carolina Bays? We've gone looking for it. No. No. Now I think part of the reason is because nobody's looking. Like nobody's going into the the apex of these Carolina bays with We We tried. We actually went in I went with um like digging right into the center. You mean? Mhm. Yeah. Yeah. Uh and and I I have a whole collection of of sediment that can be sent off. We actually I went with um George Howard, uh Antonio Zamora, Michael Davis. Uh George Howard uh he was a guest on your show. Yeah. Uh uh he used to um he used to own a um a wetlands reclamation company. They would they would uh they would be contracted out to to re uh form wetlands and and one of his clients had a Carolina Bay on his property and Yeah. Yeah. And so and and he's big time into this kind of stuff anyway. He's actually I call him the godfather Carolina Bays. George started he mentioned it on the show with you that that's what got him into it to begin with was the Carolina Bays. Um, and so he's always been on, you know, trying trying to push the Carolina Bay thing along. Uh, and so he got permission from the owner to actually, you know, go out and dig this this Carolina Bay before they turned it back into a wetland. And, uh, we went out there with back hoes and, um, you know, just dug three huge trenches. And we just went down. We got he had some of his crew um, go down with ladders and and take samples like every like anytime we saw a strayation change, he would take samples out of that. We bag that stuff up. I took it back to my to my classroom and um you know I I created a lab. I actually got in touch with um with Alan West who's like one of the one of the top guys in the comet research group. Uh we developed a uh extraction uh protocol which is they already have an extraction protocol but we had to we had to make it high school ready you know because I was using my my students were were doing it and uh so I was working with like the the number one one of the top guys in the comment research group. uh we developed this plan and uh that that would make sure that we got the same results and uh we started sifting and we started getting all of those. We got tons of magnetic grains but uh the first sample we sent in we had three trenches. We had one on the top and I I don't have a picture of this one but uh we had one on the top, one in the middle and then another one at on the bottom of the Carolina Bay. Okay. Uh so if it was like if it was like one of these, it would be on the top middle and then one on the bottom. Yeah. And it this was a small one. It was one that you know we can actually get into. small is still huge. There was a whole farm there, uh, you know, that they were he was using for grown corn or something like that. Um, but anyway, so we went through the whole process of extracting magnetic grains and we sent them off and and nothing really stood out that it was like, you know, younger grass related, right? Uh, and it's super expensive, you know, it's it's it was a couple couple grand. I don't have that kind of money to to send these things in. George is the one who fronted it all to begin with. And like I said, we didn't get really promising results with our first uh goaround. So, we kind of put a put a pin on it. We halted it. Uh and so I still have like two I still have collection uh a collection set for the center the center trench and the southern trench that have that have not been tested yet cuz we just don't have the money to do it right now. Right. Well, I mean, at least for the younger dest, we do have some pretty solid hard evidence. Like we have the they've dug into the black matte layer and found like the nano diamonds and like what is it? Aridium or something they found there. Platinum. Platinum. That's what we were looking for. We were looking for because that's kind of that one is the smoking gun. Like if you can find platinum is a rare metal on Earth, but it's super common in in space uh u space rocks and um yeah, they're finding that whole blood just I mean the the the we have the white sand stuff. Like there's so much compelling hard evidence to point to something happening around the 12,500 whatever the younger dest, 800 and something years ago here. Yeah. Yep. Um, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so, so you know, there there's a lot of evidence for that. They do find that evidence in some of these Carolina Carolina bays, but they're like in the rims of them. A lot of times these are archaeologists that do this research. Um, Chris Moore, and I've got a I got a picture of him on here, too. But Chris Moore uh is he's one of the leading I think he is right now like the leading common research group guy. Uh, and he's in he's a geoarchchaeologist out of South Carolina, maybe North Carolina. Okay. Um, I actually went and helped him uh on a dig. That's that's Micah Hanks there in that picture. Uh, and we are we're actually looking for uh Clovis and and and post Clovis um sites and things like that. But he's found evidence of of platinum and things like that in the rims of some of these Carolina bays. Uh, which is compelling, but not really for the formation. It just means that they were those rims were there while they were being occupied and they're finding the platinum there around the same place that you would find like the closed people. So it sounds like the Clovis people were using these and they were and that's what he was that's what he says that they were really good um water fowl hunting locations and so they would go in there looking for ducks and whatever swans or geese or whatever and um they find they even find uh gallstones um in piles where they were processing out the the water fowl and then the stones would be left behind. They used to just throw them away cuz they thought they were pebbles and then somebody was like, "Wait a minute, these are actually like they were from the inside of water foul or from the inside of ducks or something." And so Oh, wow. Yeah. Yeah. So, they were being used by the Clovis for for uh for hunting at that time. Um which is kind of a it's a kind of a strike against the Carolina base being a uh you know, being related to the younger dus. And right now, like I said, what they're finding with with the younger impact hypothesis is that there probably weren't very many direct impacts into the ground, but they were thousands of bow lights blowing up in the sky. It's kind of like, you know, we go through every year we go through air bursts. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like we we have shooting shooting stars, we go through meteor showers, right? uh and we can plan for those. You know, we have uh right around the end of October into uh into November, there's a there's a really interesting meteor shower and it's and it's related to this because I think that that's the one that caused the younger trias. Uh but we go through it twice. It's the um torid meteor. Yeah, the torid meteor stream. So, we go through it at the end of June and then we go through it at the end of October. Um, and they think it was actually the June passing that there was just a just instead of it being like like flakes of sand that were burning up in the atmosphere, there were chunks of stuff just blowing up in the atmosphere. We just went through a really thick patch. Didn't this last for like a thousand years? Well, the the younger dryest lasted for a thousand years. Yeah. Like it it like 1200 years. When I first started, when I first was introduced to the idea, I thought like, okay, it was like a onetime event. But now it seems like, no, maybe it was like kind of like what we went through in Florida this past summer where we got smashed by two hurricanes in a row. Maybe that happened for a thousand years. Yeah. Yeah. Like every every summer we got smashed by meteors or comets. Yeah. Yeah. And and you know that there could that could have been exactly what happened. Uh they're finding evidence that Yeah. this wasn't a one-time event that there were multiple air bursts. Um, I always forget the name of this place, but they're finding uh in the Middle East. Um, it's it's either Abu Herrera or Tel Aam. It's it's one of the two. One one was a bullet event that took place during bibl biblical times. The other one was much older, like during the dry time. And I I always get the two mixed up, so maybe we George was talking about one um and that was the one that took place during like the biblical I think it was the Tal Hamom, right? The one where the one at Jordan Valley, the Sodom and Gomorrah one. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that was a little bit more recent than the Young Adas event. But there is there was another very similar event that took place in that area, right? Um you know 12,800 years ago and where literally they they find melt glass like surrounding you know villages and like people blasted up against walls and it's it's pretty insane. Yeah. Um and and you know so these things happen you know we haven't had it happen in a really long time. Uh the last like big bull light we had was back in 2012 in Chelubanks. Um that's the one in Russia that not not the um Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Not the one that blew out like the whole forest, but like the one that blew up over a town and shattered all the glass and was falling on people. We were we were watching that in here a couple months ago. That was in like the '9s, I think. Right. Yeah. No, no, no. That was 2012. Yeah. Can you find out what that was, Steve? Uh find out the uh when that thing when that happened. Chela Chelly Chichaloo. No, no, that that's the that's what he was talking about. The older one. Here it is. It's the Chel Chelab Banks. Chalia. And I may be saying it wrong. Chelia Banks meteor air burst. That's the one that blew out a bunch of windows. And Right. Right. We got There's the video. Yeah, there's videos of people like on the highway in Russia videoing it like holy And this was a small one. This was a small one, you know. Imagine having uh Are we going to show the video? Cuz imagine having this happening, you know, thousands of times all across the horizon. That's probably what was happening, you know, and a thousand times the size. Like those things go what, like 40,000 miles an hour. Yeah. This is insane. Like, [Music] yeah. I don't know. Can you get sound on it? Speck in the sky soon streaking across the horizon followed by an almost apocalyptic scene. A blinding flash of light. And then all hell broke loose, right? Dizzying explosions, shattering windows, knocking these office workers to the ground. These students were lucky. They all thought this was it. Like they all thought that's it. We're done. So imagine that happening over. I mean, they probably thought it was like like war or something for like your first your first if that happened here, my first example. Okay, Russia sent a nuke. Yep. We're done. Yeah. The last thing I would I mean that the common impact would probably be like the last thing I would Exactly. Exactly. And so and then the last time Oh my god. And this is the last This is you know this one was recorded and that's that's great. Back in two uh back in 19 What year was this? 2012. Yeah. 2012 2012. Oh wow. Yeah. I'm try to find the raw video. Yeah. That's it. Yeah. Yeah, the chi, how do you pronounce it? Chelia Chelabinsk. Yeah, I've heard it pronounced different ways. Um I I don't I'm not fluent in Russian, so 2012. There's also a theory that the world was supposed to end in 2012, right? Maybe. Yeah, that's true. Maybe maybe we got lucky with that one little I think that one was about to play that play that simulation on the top or it And the thing about this one is they came out of nowhere. Like this wasn't even part of like a known meteor stream. It was just a rogue meteor. A little baby one. Yep. Like they weren't even tracking it. They had no clue it was on this way. God, man. So yeah, like that could have been the one that took out Imagine if that was the one that took out the dinosaurs. Like the size of that. Oh golly. Which was like what how many miles wide was that? That one was like 11 km. So you know that's a big It was a city sizer. I mean, city about the size of a city, you know, and it came down and uh it caused all kinds of stuff just south of where we are right now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Down in Gulf of Mexico. Um um that's um the Chiku Love Crater. Yeah. And they just recently, I think last year, uh found another crater off the coast of Spain that goes back 65 million years. Really? So, this may have been a multiple impact that that took out the dinosaurs, too. Wow. Yeah. I don't think these things travel. Like I I think that's like a misconception that a lot of us have is that these things are just zinging around in space. That one kind of was, but uh but most of these times they're in orbit around the sun and we just happen to cross the path with that orbit. Uh you know, it used to be a comet, the tail was stretching across and and all that debris. Um you know, we just go through it. We just go right through it. Right. You know, we're moving, it's moving, and we just right through each other. And it causes all kinds of devastation. Um Oh, this is it. 10 kilometers wide. How many miles is that? Uh, something like eight eight miles. Whoa. Yeah, it's just Well, that dates back to like 65. Doesn't even look like anything. Like if I was looking at that that aerial shot, I wouldn't even imagine that was a crater. Yeah. Well, it's the same thing with the Chisu crater, the one the, you know, the one that gets credit for taking out the dinosaurs. Um, the only way they the only reason why they found out that that was a crater was because of the cenotes. Have you have you been down to Mexico? Like down to uh No. Um like the the ancient Mayan ruins and things like that. A lot of those ruins were built around cenotes which are uh these these like limestone caves that go straight down. They're full of fresh water. Um I've seen people do they scuba dive that crater. Yeah. all kinds. There's all kind but there's a bunch of them and they formed this like really neat arched um like semicircle and uh they they realized that that was actually the rim of the the impact that took out the dinosaurs that that the fracturing of the ground uh underneath the limestone that had built up above it allowed water to seep through and over time it's fresh water that that dissolves limestone that creates caves like that. And so it was a quick access for water to to go through the limestone and form those cenote caves. And so that that really neat arch shape is is was you know you go to the center of that shape and they found the crater. Wow. Yeah. And that was like the 1990s right. Yeah. That was I was in high school you know the the whole um Alvarez uh black mat uh black rock layer you know finding that's when they were finding aridium. They're finding really high levels of aridium all around the planet. Uh it was father and son team. and the Alvarez's and and they were telling everybody, you know, hey, this there was an impact. This is what we think took out the dinosaurs. We found it all around the planet and and everyone was like, no, no, no. You find us a crater and then then we'll talk. And it was like the the 1990s, early 1990s when they finally discovered that that that Shiku love that little semicircle in Mexico was part of that crater. And they're like everyone's like, "Okay, all right, you got us." Did they ever like dig like if you go way down beneath that crater, is there is that freaking asteroid still down there? Um, no. But there's like completely shattered rock. Like if you go to to the into um into uh the the Chiku Lub uh and and dig down, they call it Brussia. Uh it's it's a type of rock that's just completely shattered and then resolidifies. Um and that's just full of that. Um so when that asteroid hits the ground, it breaks up into a million pieces. It doesn't stay solid. I I don't know. Yeah, I don't know. I'd imagine I'd imagine it does like get completely destroyed. It liquefies. Yeah, big enough. remember it liquefies and then just ejects into the atmosphere and gets thrown everywhere. Yeah. Holy And a lot of times a lot of time this actually What is it? And what are they made of? They're made of um mostly iron, right? But then there's a lot of a lot of those other rare earth metals like uh like the aridium and platinum and things like that. And um so again, this is but that's a completely different impact. you know, when when you have something slam into the ground like like what kill the dinosaurs, I mean, that creates a whole chain of events that that blocks out the sun for months and it kills off all the plants and then all the plant eaters die and the animals. And so that was why we had that like massive massive um uh extinction level event at the dinosaurs, which was good because that allowed mammals to become the most dominant species on our planet and we're kind of mammals. So, right. Well, leave apparent some some people think the reptilians are still running the show. Yeah. So, but back to the younger dus like that is kind of what what the younger dus it's the same story like we're finding platinum in dirt layers that hasn't turned to stone yet but it would form into a it is a black mat you know we have this black mat we're finding aridium there uh and so there is some really interesting um uh you know connections between the dinosaur killer and the younger drius but right now we think that the the um you know the real effect of the youngeras was from multiple multiple bolides and not really big impacts into the ground. I do think there's evidence of some impacts on the ice sheet higher above Michigan. Uh there's a couple places Randall Carlson and I did a podcast a couple months ago and we kind of highlighted a couple of these places that uh could possibly be younger destact sites and there's like three of them in a row. It's kind of neat. Um and uh one's like St. John, another one's uh I can't remember the other two, but but they're they're all like in a row right across Canada. Um, but I don't think that the Carolina bays were formed during the younger drias. I don't think. And why not? When when do you think they were formed? So, well, okay. So, there's two main hypotheses for how these Carolina bays formed. Uh, one is is at the younger Dryas and and one of the main proponents for that is Antonio Zamora. He'll be at uh the Cosmic Summit with me this this summer. We're actually going to present together. I'm kind of kind of let Are you going to you going to be there this summer? I'm not sure. Yeah. Well, if you can't make it, it's going to be a great time. Yeah, we had a good time last year. Yeah, that was fun. Um anyway, so Antonio Zamore and I are going to be there um together next year and his main thing is that these things happened at the younger dus and he's got evidence, but a lot of the evidence is dependent on the younger dus being proven correct. Uh you know, things like the the mega mammal extinctions and things like that. that's where he's, you know, and um so that so he's he's got that idea 12,800 years ago, 12,900 years ago that there was an impact into Michigan and it was big chunks of ice that came flying out of uh Michigan and as they came cr they actually went up into suborbit uh froze solid and then came crashing back down. And these uh ellipses are actually the cone uh the the cone of depression as as the ice re-entered the earth there. And so they come crashing back down. The the violence of an of an impact like that even of ice cuz we're talking about so it was raining. That's his football stadiumiz chunks of ice propaganda fields coming down onto the coastal plane of of of North America. Jesus Christ dude. Yep. Um, and a lot of these a lot of these chunks of ice had rocks frozen in them, right? Because that's what Grand Randall talks about these giant boulders that are in the Midwest that are that come from came from Canada or the East Coast. Yeah. Yeah. they came but those those those came rafting down out on you know from from valleys and things like that and it came rafting downh onto those areas and then so then that ice big chunks of ice that that uh were carrying these rocks that melted and then you were left behind with these with these um big uh these big rocks just kind of hanging out everywhere. Um the I'm not sure cuz we're talking about in the middle of Michigan there was probably a really big sheet of ice there. Uh, and the only analog we really have for that now is either Greenland or Antarctica. And when you look at pictures of like Greenland and Antarctica, you don't see a whole bunch of rocks laying around. They're on the bottom, but it's almost I mean, you have like a mile of just white ice all the way up to the top. And and I think that this cuz I do agree with Antonio's like impact hypothesis. I do think that there was an impact into the ice and that it did eject the ice away from that location. They went up and then came crashing back down. Mhm. I don't think they were quite as solid as he hypothesizes. I think that this cuz cuz glacial ice forms differently anyways. It doesn't form like you take like ice and put it into an ice, you know, into the freezer and it freezes solid. Um glacier ice is forms when you have like annual snows that just pile up and then they get squished down. They get piled up and they get squished down. Oh, really? Yeah. And so you create what's called a fern. F I R N. Uh and that's that's when um uh all that snow just builds up. gets squished down uh and it so it's globular. It's kind of like plasticky. Uh and then it eventually turns into um turns into glacial ice. Uh so it's already it already has like forgiveness. It like bends and it molds and it has like I use the term plastic cuz that's the term that that's a geological term, but it it molds and moves around and and um so if it were if there was an impact into that ice, it would behave differently. It's already under pressure. It's already, you know, it's already globular. And so I think that would be highly fractured and they would send out and you'd have these like globs of of frozen debris coming crashing back down. Um and it would be highly f so I think when they came crashing back down uh that they that's kind of what formed that ellipse. That's why they're so shallow. Like I said when you look at images of these there they're super shallow in the center of them. Uh and it's because I think that that stuff came down just kind of crashed out and and that's that's what gave you that that um ellipse with the raised rims. Mhm. Um, again, he thinks that they were solid and so that they were actually entering the ground and it was the cone that creates that and then there was viscous relaxation where the the the earthquakes caused it to shake and and uh and settled back out. Um. Oh, okay. Yeah. So, the earth So, the earth shaking made these things perfectly round. No, no, no, no. The the impact So, so again, we have a paper right now that we're trying to get pushed through, but uh it's the the cone of of uh what's you call it? the um conic section. So, so we have different conic sections when something enters a a uh an unconsolidated material which is mostly sand and clay and stuff like that. And so whenever the object enters the flat plane, it creates a con. If they were coming straight down, the conic section would be a perfect circle. If they're coming in at an angle, which these would have been, the conic section would be an ellipse. If you keep going, you'd end up with like a hyperbole. And you know, you end up with these. There's like four different conic sections. These are all elliptical. We think that they're cones of depression coming in at an angle. Ah, I see. Right. Right. Right. Okay. Um, and again, I do agree with that. The the the physics backs that up. Yeah. So, here are the cones of depression. Yeah. And, uh, again, you can see the where the ellipses are. They're at an angle. They're entering the plane at an angle. Oh, I see. Look at that. That is fascinating. So again, you know, if you imagine something entering into that flat plane, the the you know, the cone itself is is the is the object entering in and then it's it seals itself into that into that terrain. Mhm. Um yeah, it's amazing we can't figure out how to get like some sort of big drill out in the middle of those things and just drill down for like we had Okay, so there's a couple things. One, we had heavy equipment like we had a a B uh a a front end what do they call that? the front end loader, an excavator or whatever. But yeah, um and and we dug as far as that thing went down and it started filling up with water. Uh we got as much, you know, cuz you hit the water table, too. And so the water start filling this whole thing up. We got as much sediment as we possibly could. Um you know, we we kind of know where the apex would be. Like we kind of know where you should probably dig, right? Um but you know, we how far do you dig? We don't know. Like I said, I don't think that these things made it all the way down to the to the focus point of that ellipse. You know, I think they went all the way down. think that's something, you know, I think that whatever happened caused it to um to dissipate the energy and and then, you know, you still end up with the cone of depression, but the energy is dissipated because the material, but um So, when do you think these things were from again? Okay. So, so the other hypothesis that I that I'm looking at is um Michael Davis, the guy who who did all this liar. Yeah. Um he thinks that these happened um during the mid plyosine transition. Um the mid ply. Yeah. The mid plyosine trans. Now, this is a lot long ago, 786,000 years ago. This is the mid plyene transition is a real thing. Like it's we basically have a chain of events that completely changed the earth. Um, literally before the mid plyene transition, uh, we were going in and out of ice ages like every 41,000 years. And something happened right around that time that caused a change in oblquity of the earth that caused the uh, the ice ages to stretch out to 100,000 years. And we have this recorded in in ice ice core data. So we started going from we were going from 41,000 years going in and out of ice ages to now going 100,000 years in and out of ice. I'll show you a graph here in a little bit where where you can see that. Um so I mean a change in oblquity is kind of a big deal. That's one that's one of the Melankovich cycles, right? You've got procession um oblquity and eentric. So it knocked this thing knocked the earth off its tilt. Listen, I'm not you said it, not me. I That's the idea. I I think it could be the idea. Yeah, I think it could be. Yes. Jesus. Um I mean something happened. Something happened to cause the Earth's oblquity to change, to stretch out our ice age cycles. We also find all kinds of other evidence. Um, we find, um, a big one for me, uh, and you kind of mentioned this a minute ago, uh, whenever an impact hits the ground, uh, it it's going to send up melted rock or melted parts of itself. Uhhuh. And and and so it melts and but it sends these these um they're called tectites. It's kind of like meteorites, but they formed from the ground, from the earth. Uh, and we find a a tectites that date back to 786,000 years, that date back to the midping transition. And it's a mystery. They don't know where they came from. Where do they find them? They find them all over Asia. They find them all in uh in Australia that are 800,000 years old. 800,000 year old tectites. Yeah. And they're found I I was just, you know, you can go look up tectites and and they find them all over the place. Um they um and again, they don't know exactly where they came from. Uh, now one of the guys, there's different types of tectites. That's that's a good example of one right there. Um, that was probably an a tectite found probably in um the Philippines or something like that. Wow. Um, but it's there's a huge strewn field where where you find these things and most of it's actually in the ocean. Like most of the strewn fields actually under the water and so there's a ton of tectites that are still there. Um, they do. Yeah, this I think I just saw this uh just the other day where they found they were just finding like dozens of them. 800,000 years old just chilling right there on top of on top of the dirt. Yep. Yep. And it's really they're really kind of neat because they they actually show the they were melted. They were flying through the air when they solidified. How do they actually know it was 800,000 years old? Uh it's from where they find them in the strata like where like that was just sitting on top of the dirt. Well, that dirt's been eroded away. They find them in other places that are in in that location. Another thing that they've done is they actually there's a guy who has tested those uh with um stronium and roodium uh dating. Yeah. And and they date back to well actually let me rephrase it because they date back to the rock layers being Jurassic of age. Um but that's not when they're formed. Like the rock that formed the sandston that formed them were Jurassic age rocks. Uh but they that's what formed the tectites. What's interesting is if if we look back at the uh the Michigan basin, the center of the Michigan basin right here, this pink rock right there, that's all Jurassic Age rock. And so so if this was an impact and and and we had sandstone, which most of that is Michigan sandstone, uh if that was ejected from that location, it would have gone into orbit, solidified, and then came back down on the other side of the planet. One of the guys that's working on this is um Tim Harris. Uh here's Tim right here. Uh Tim is an engineer. Uh he he used to work for Loheed Martin and uh and Boeing. Um and some of his mentors were like literally rock he's a rocket scientist himself. Uh but a lot of his mentors were like the rocket scientists during the cold war. And uh they use the same impact physics for like ballistic missiles uh to to track where we find these tectites all the way back to their source. And and he's been putting out papers left and right um but they just don't get taken seriously. He go what's his name? Thomas Harris. Yeah. Thomas Harris. Yep. Yep. Yeah. He actually um um he came to visit a couple years ago now. uh his son was uh going to be a first mate on a on a on a a ship like a yacht that was sailing from Savannah up to New York. They're from New York and uh so he drove it was like right right during co he drove his son down and uh called George and he's like is there anybody in this area that that's Carolina Bay related cuz I I like to I'm down here I'm going to be camping and stuff. He's like just and he's like so he gave him my number and I was like dude Carolina base come on you can come stay at my house. Yeah. And so he came over and u we we you know kicked back with a few beers that night and then we were talking about all kinds of stuff. There was a really cool connection with the AA tech tites um because uh the the Mr. Tet like the guy who who um is known he used to work for NASA uh his name's Hal Pavmeer and he's like he is like the tectite king like he knows all about these tectites. Um Hal Paval yeah how Pavvenmire he's he's passed away now. Uh, in fact, my wife met him at a gym. Hold on a second. That sounds familiar. Is this the guy Chris Bledo was talking about? Yes. Same guy. Same guy. I just I just contacted uh Matt uh Matt Bell. I was like, "Dude, you got to you got to talk to uh somebody who knows how because there's there's connections with Hal Pavmeery that need to be explored." Yeah. And he's from here. Did you ever meet the guy? Okay. So, my wife met Hal at a Gem and Mineral show. Completely unrelated. She was there. She was bored. She saw this guy. Uh he called him. She called her over and uh she started cuz he had a big map of Georgia. He's uh again a big tectite guy. And one of the tectite strewn fields is right across Georgia. They call them Georgia. Yeah. He wrote a book about tectites, didn't he? Yeah. I have a signed copy of it. Yeah. Um so, so that strewn field in Georgia is from the Chesapeake Bay impact that happened 30,000 30 million years ago. Um so anyways, but he had this picture of Georgia. My wife came up, started talking to him because we have property right on the fall line which was on the map and uh she started talking and his eyes got huge when he found out we had property there because where he was looking at if they can find Georgia there would completely expand his research into a whole another county and so he was super interested in that. Um they exchanged he she gave him my number he called me we had like three or four conversations and trying to find a time where we can meet up to go tech uh techtight hunting uh and it just he ended up passing away and it never happened. Like I'd call him like, "Hey man, I'm going up to the property. You want to come?" And he's like, "I can. I'm going up probably to see Chris Bleto or somebody and uh and and it never worked out. We never got a chance to meet." So Wow. That's bizarre. And if you search this guy on the internet, you can't find there's you can't find much. I know that's you. Yeah. Like I said, I emailed Matt and I was like, "You got to you guys got to find something on this guy because he he's connected to everything. I don't know what the deal is. I don't know. Like he is connected with all of these different things. Alien abductions. Chris told me something that he said that when he asked him about the moon, he said that there's ancient mushroom structures on the moon. Really? That's what his That's what his daughter told me. Yeah, that's what he told his daughter. Oh, Chris Bto's daughter. There's a really There's a really neat video of um his daughter, Bleo's daughter, um playing the piano and she's a great piano player. Yeah. Yeah. And then she teaches and it's he's one of the reasons why she became so good at the piano. He gave her like 20 bucks and then gave her one of the most difficult songs to play, you know? I was like, "Here's 20 bucks. You need to learn the song next time I see you." Oh, really? And and she learned it and and then he passed. She actually was like a memorial to him. Uh you can find it on TikTok. It's a neat little video. Um but yeah, again, when I heard that name and actually I think the I'm referring to Matt Bell's episode with him that just came out this week. Um um he started he didn't mention how by name, but he talked about, you know, this guy that's a, you know, expert. He he he may have said how. We talked about him for like 30 minutes on here. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Well, he just mentioned Techt Tits and I was like, "Oh, he's got to be talking about Hal Pal, right?" Right. Right. Yeah. Yeah. So, anyway, so, so again, that conversation that I was having with Tim Harris in my backyard, Hal came up and and I was like, "Dude, I got a I got a couple tech tites from Hal." And I and I went up, got him, and showed him. And he's like, "Yeah, man." And then um Tim showed me like the the um the plasma scarring and things like that from from when these things were in the sky and how much electricity was, you know, part of the impact that actually created these things. and you can actually see them. That's what causes the pot marks in the tectites themselves. Um and uh and again and and he was in contact with Hal uh and and Hal was like, you know, you guys might be on to something with these things being from Michigan. Uh and so so they were they stayed in communication, too. Again, there's a lot of really interesting connections that keep coming up with Hal. I think he definitely needs to be uh you know, checked out a little bit more. I think I think there's a really neat So you got he So he thought these tectites could have been from Michigan. That's that's what Tim told me. I Yeah. Yeah. Again, when I was interacting with how I wasn't this far into tectites yet or I wasn't this far into Carolina bays yet. I was I was researching them, but I wasn't this far into researching them. Okay. Uh and so anyways, the connection with the with the tectites leading back to Michigan was like, "Oh, this, you know, these guys might be on to something." Uh and and um you know, if these things did happen 786,000 years ago, we should be able to kind of, you know, come up with some better evidence for that. And I think I did find some some better evidence that may suggest that they're older uh and closer to that 786,000 year year of which is what uh the Paleo Atlantic shorelines. What we were just looking at earlier, we were looking at the um the the uh ancient barrier islands like here of Penllis County, right? All up and down the east coast, we find that shoreline. There are almost zero Carolina bays below those shorelines. Zero. Below the shorelines below them. Yeah, I'll show you I'll show you some evidence of that. Um, yeah, if you go But back when those things hit, the sea level would have been 400t lower, right? Um, well, it just depends on when they hit, right? Yeah. So, so well, if it was ice being Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, so if they happened at the younger dus, this is part of the big if it happened during the younger dry. If it happened at the younger dus, then sea levels would have been 400 ft lower or or somewhere in it was they were rising during the time beginning of the younger dus. Um, there is an exact number. I can't remember what it is, but even if it was half that, 100, you know, 200 feet lower. Yeah. Um, if it happened at that time, sea levels did not come even close to our current shoreline. We should find Carolina bays all the way up to the beach. We should find Carolina bays across the coastal plane, all the way to the beach. Mhm. And and again, we don't. And that that to me was a big deal. Um this is an image right here that shows uh the the um ice ages. So So this shows the ice age. This is where we are currently. This is where we are at the peak of our last ice age. That was 20,000 years ago right here. Right. The last time sea levels were as high as they are today. This is this is marine oxygen isotope stages and relative sea level. So that line that you're looking at right now is sea level. This line down here is sea level. This line up here is um the isotopes that they're getting out of the ice cores. Oxygen isotopes. Yes. Yeah. Yep. So they're using the Greenland ice cores and the Antarctic ice cores. Okay. And they're cross referencing the two to come up with this chart. Okay. I got it. Right. And so and and we have stages. That's interesting. Yeah. M MI mis stages. Marine isotope stages. We're in one right now. Like marine oxygen isotope stage number one right now. If you go back uh again, this was a that was the peak of the glacial last glacial cycle when we had like 2 miles of ice on top of Canada and the oceans were 400 ft lower and about about 100 yard or 100 miles farther away. This is the peak of the last one that you have your first this one right here. Yeah, that's the peak of the last ice age which is was how long ago? Uh 20 25,000 years ago. Okay. And all the way on the right, where is that? How far a go? All the way over here. This is 800,000 years. Got it. So this is within that 786,000 years. That's why this is actually really good data. So here we have the um the peak of the ice age. This right here was the last interglacial like the last times temperatures were like they are today and they were warmer than they were they are today. More ice melted uh during that time than had melted today and sea levels were higher than they were today. And that was 125 around about 125,000 years ago. The MIS MIS stage was 5e. Wow. So we're like so at the very very far left is where we are right now. Yes. Right here. The last time sea levels were at anywhere close to where they are today. So there they are the pretty much pretty damn close to the highest they've been in the last 800,000 years. Yeah. There's uh one other place right here at 11C uh that was actually higher. You can actually see right here. For whatever reason it might go. That's terrifying, dude. Cuz those peaks don't last very long. Hey, you're you're telling me you just you just got a uh a climate change uh uh uh YouTube uh warning. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They don't last very long. And we've been in one for you know 10,000 years. They last it looks like they last like what like like 40 years maybe. No, no, no. I mean these are I mean these are these are thousands of years. Oh, those are thousands. Oh, they last a couple like 40,000 50,000 years. Yeah. But but regardless, you're right. They don't last that long in the long in the big picture. It's nothing. No. No. And in fact, we're I I think we're nearing the end of this one. And and if you look at the historically, they go up, they go down, they go up, they go down. We have been up for 10,000 years. Completely off topic right now, but they they're up for 10,000 years already. It's got to go back down. And then there's only one thing worse than global warming. Global cooling. You got it. You got it. You can't feed you can't feed 8 billion people, right? No. with with uh reduced growing seasons and things like that. So, that's actually a huge problem and and work everyone's freaking out. Agriculture goes to Yeah. Yeah. Everybody's freaking out about the the beach homes uh when when we got to be woring about feeding a people. Yeah. Right. So, anyways anyways, off topic there. That's terrifying. It is. It is. So, so yeah, I I think that we actually see evidence of of these last few interglacials in the landscape. We do see evidence of it. They're actually well dated. You can actually see in this image right here, they they have names. You've got the Pamlico, you've got the Talabid, you've got the uh uh I can't remember how to say that one. Wikamo. Yeah, the Wikamico. Wamiko. Yeah, I don't Yeah, the Taliban and the Palico are the ones that are important to me because they're the ones that happen here and here. Uh and again, I think that the impact happens somewhere back here or I I'm leaning towards this as being a possible date uh from from what Michael Davis and Tim Harrison. So, does does conventional science agree that all of the like what do they say the explanations are for all of these drops in climate? Okay. All right. Oh, for the drops in climate like for for the crazy variations, these jumps and these fall like uh like those vertical spikes. Yeah. So, overall it's the Malankovich cycle. So, overall it's the Earth's place in space and and you know where the sun and the earth are, right? So, the Malikovich cycles you've got those three of them. You've got procession. That's the uh um I'm sorry. Eccentricity is the the shape that the Earth takes as it goes around the sun, right? It's not a perfect circle. It does go more more circular, but it's more of an oval. Yes. It's more elliptical actually, right? And uh so sometimes we're closer, sometimes we're farther away. That affects the climate. Um the oblquity is the tilt of the axis, right? And and so that's what gives us our seasons, that's what gives us uh you know, the winter, that's what gives us the summer is the is the shape. or the the tilt of the axis as we move around the sun. Um, and so that tilt changes. It goes from like 24 and a half degrees to like 22.1°. Right now we're at 23 and a half degrees, but it's moving. You know, it does move. And and the cycles are really long. Like I think the um eentricity cycles are 100,000 year cycles. Um the um the oblquity is uh 41,000ear cycles I believe. M um and then you have the procession which comes up a lot with like Rand Carlson's talks and things like that but that's that's the great year wobble. That's the wobble of the earth as it's as it's as its axis is which is like 26,000 years or something like that. Yeah. Now it's 26,000 years. Yeah. Um so so those three things together sometimes you're a little bit closer or sometimes you're a little bit farther away while the angle's farther. And how much of a variation in temperature is that from the very peak of the spike to the very bottom of it? Um I'm not sure. It's usually I usually hear it's like 20 20° difference. 20° difference. But that's a big deal. You know, you drop 20° and I think that's usually Celsius. So that could be like a really big deal. Yeah. Um but so anyways, when this happens, we end up with these when the sea levels are higher, we end up with shorelines, uh you know, the beach, the beach that was formed during that interglacial. And uh we end up with a series of beaches as we go up from the current beach down here up to like the the beach that was formed 200 20 million years ago or something like that. So you end up with all of these different scarps and these different uh ancient barrier islands. And what really got me was uh looking at images like this and and it was actually I I came about this with a discussion I was having with Michael Davis um because he was trying to tell this back when I used to think that this was a younger dus event. Mhm. Um he was he was explaining that these Carolina bays are really well ingrained into the uh environment themselves and that they they maintain that shape really easily for a really long period of time. And uh and then he used a term that it's because the coastal plane is pool table flat all the way to the beach. And and I was like Michael it's it's not pool table flat where I live in coastal Georgia we have ancient barrier islands. Like you literally go up 20 mters and then you know you're up on the sand hill and there's whole another ecology there. there's a whole different type of ecosystem. Mhm. Um and and and I went I pulled up his images, I went to Google Earth and and uh pulled up his image and when I clicked over to the liar to show him, what I really notice is where you don't find the Carolina bays, where they're missing, right? You find the Carolina base on the tops of those ancient barrier islands, but you don't find them below them. So where where are they here? All these red dots. This is this is panned way out. But again, this was the reason why I'm using this right here is because um this is actually from a a field trip guide for geology class for Philadelphia State University. And so they would actually take a group of students to the beach on Sapalo Island. I I usually um spend about a week on Sapalo every summer helping grad students. Uh so I I'm very familiar with Sapalo Island. There's actually a really cool um shell ring like right here. Uh uh shell minimum from the Native Americans that live there. Like really like older than the Egyptian pyramids. It's really cool. Yeah. Yeah. Really old. Um and it's right it's like right there. So anyways, um he would take a crew here. They would check out the you know the erosion and how the beach forms and you would look at the dunes and the uh you know the different types of ecosystems as you go across the barrier island. Um and then he would they would get back on the ferry. The ferry would take you back over here to Meridian and they would drive and they would stop at these different places. And this was one of their stops. It was like right here. Yeah. Stop one right there. Uh, and that was the ancient barrier island. So when I click on the button, you know, that's the barrier island that was formed 125,000 years ago. You go back up, this is the barrier island that was formed 400,000 years ago. And so you end up having this like time frame of of when sea levels were higher and where those Carolina or where those um where those uh um beaches formed. Uh and again, you find these red dots. Those are Michael Davis tagged those. Again, if you look a little bit closer, here's this is actually up closer to Myrtle Beach. Okay. Um, and this is that first picture I showed you of the black and white one. This is that area today. Um, and you can see these well- definfined Carolina bays uh that are up here in this area. This is actually a preserve now. So, so there's no construction. There's no golf courses being built here like that. It's all it's all wildlife habitat. Uh whereas all of this down here has been like really worked over with with um urbanization. But but what I like about this area is that where the beach is right now, the last beach was right above it. Like the the last time and when you click on the liar, you can see like all of these bays right here. This is the highest point on this map. You actually you're kind of going up and then back down right here. Uhhuh. And then you go back up and then you go way up and then you go back down and then back down. So, it's you're going up and then back into I can't remember what river this is back here. There's a big river back there. Um, so this whole area right here was a barrier island 400,000 years ago. This is where we find the most well- definfined Carolina bays in this picture as well. Right. So, all of these are really well defined. Mhm. The last So, so a million years ago, this whole area was was underwater. A million years ago is when we had um the Penn uh scarp form. So, and that's that's like 70 m or 70 ft above the current shoreline. What is that? The penalway. The pen hollowway is the the beach from a million years ago. So, it was the barrier islands that are formed 1 million years ago are called the Pentaho and it was super hot then. So, there was no not much ice. Yeah. I mean, yeah. Yeah. Definitely. Sea levels were higher, so it was a lot warmer. And like I said, sea levels were were way up during that time. Okay. But that also means that all of this area was underwater, right? And and so everything that you see in the landscape has to be younger than a million years, which is good. That gives us a baseline, you know, to So stuff would survive under under the ocean for 100,000 years. The Carolina base? No, I don't think so. No, no, no. As a matter of fact, I don't think they survive the interglacials. And that's kind of the point is that whenever the sea levels rose and formed those shorelines, that erased the Carolina base cuz you got to remember like right now we this is the beach, you know, you surf, right? Yep. So, you know, the wave action is pretty constant, right? You have tides that come in and out every single day. You've got waves that are constantly lapping up on the beach. Um, and you've got things like long shore drift that's constantly moving the sand down the beach, right? So, whenever the shorelines, whenever the beaches, whenever the oceans rise up to this point, there's all kinds of erosion here, right? And it's just flat. It's just flat sand, right? Got it. So, so the last one was here. And, and I can actually, here's where I marked it. Um, this right here was a barrier island 125,000 years ago. All of this was exposed. But this was a backbay. This was where you would find like the inter coastal today. Okay? Right? And so this is wiped clean from 125,000 years ago. But I also think from 400,000 years ago when this was a barrier island and this was the upper part of that barrier island. So that has been above sea level for at least 400,000 years. that has this has been above sea level for a million years. A million years. Yeah. The shoreline. Well, the the regression that took place a million years ago, left that all everything dry, right? And then the last time it happened was 400,000 years ago. This was still a barrier island during that time. And then 125,000 years ago, all of this was exposed, including this right here. Okay. Yeah. So, like for instance, like this area right here on the very top. Yep. It's in blue. Um I think that this was these were underwater 100 uh 400,000 years ago, but this barrier island protected them. Uh and and this was a marsh. I think this is like a salt marsh. Okay. And and so a really easy way to check for this and we just need somebody to go out and do it. Uh is to do some core samples in here. And if there's marsh mud in the middle of all these then that's I mean that shows that they were there when that marsh was there 400,000 years ago, right? And that's huge because again that's older than all the dates that have been coming up so far. Like even the the convent we didn't even get into the conventional creation of these Carolina bays. Uh but theirs is you know they would have happened between the last ice age like like 1,200 years ago to about 100,000 years ago. They say that during that time during the last ice age cycle was when all these Carolina bays were formed. I'm saying that this shows that they're older than that. like they're older than even the what the radiocarbon dates are coming back with or what the um what the uh uh optically stim stimulated luminescence dates are coming back with. This shows that they're older than that and so they then they would have to be older than that and if you know they're they're being worn away by those rised rising seas during that time. How far south do they go? What's the southernmost Carolina bay? Um I find them close to where I live. Um they they get really sparse as you get farther down into Georgia, but you do find some. Um there's some around like Sylvester, Georgia. You the first one I ever heard of was in Valdasta, Georgia. And that's that's right. That's like what maybe 2 hours north of here. Okay. 3 hours north of here. No, it's definitely more than 3 hours. Valdasta, right? It's right on the It's right on the Georgia border. If you go right up 75, you go right through Valdasta. Yeah. I don't know how fast you drive, but like that's like 5 hours for me. Is it? So, um, anyways, right right when you cross the board, now it does get confusing and it was part of that that pseudo Carolina Bay thing because that part of Florida, you go through all of those sink holes, like it's all carst topography and so you have a bunch of sink holes. Uh, and and so a lot of the geologists would mix the Carolina bays in with being carsted. Like there's actually like carsted sink holes under the ground and that's that's what formed them. But this whole area shows that that's not that's not right. Okay. Um, but where I first heard about Carolina Bays was in Valdasta because they have a u a Carolina bay there called Graham Bay. Uh, and you can actually So, really it's a wildlife management area. So, and they have a a really pretty boardwalk. Um, and uh, you know, the reason why they call them Carolina bays has nothing to do with water. It has nothing to do with like a a bay in an uh, you know, on a on a coast or something like that. It's they call them Carolina bays because of the bay trees that grow within them. Um bay is they're like like old bay that you would use in like crab oil and stuff like that. That's that's where those plants grow is in in these Carolina psy I mean it's just a low swampy area. So So it's not all of them obviously. You know I I showed you million or thousands of them that don't have bays in them but the ones that do hold water usually do have it's they're low oxygen. there's low, you know, um, not a lot of flow to it. And so, it's a really good place for them to grow. You also find some really cool carnivorous plants in a lot of these. Um, if you go like in North Carolina and Virginia, you're going to find like the Venus fly traps. That's cool. Really? Yeah. If you go to like the ones in South Georgia, you can find a lot of pitcher plants, uh, which are just swampy plants anyways. But they really like the Carolina Bay habitats. Uhhuh. Yeah. The ecology in the Carolina bays are fascinating. Carnivorous plants. What a what an interesting Yeah. like the the soil is so poor that they have to like trap bugs to get the nourishment that they need. So that's so wild, man. Mhm. I would love to see a a Venus fly trap. I don't think I've ever seen one in real life. Yeah, you could buy them. You can uh I think we bought one at Lowe's. What? Yeah, they had them. They had them for sale. Yeah, he's We need to get a Venus fly trap for the studio. Utilitarian plant at Lowe's. Oh my god, that would be so cool. Yeah, eat all the flies in here. So, um let's go and talk about the uh the uh current like academic hypothesis for these Carolina bays again because I I do think, you know, that they are they have a cosmic origin. Like I think that there was an event looking at the evidence. Um and and what's interesting is, you know, you've got these two guys. You've got Michael Davis and Tim Harris, and you've got Antonio Zamora. Um and they're just they're two completely different hypotheses. And Michael Davius thinks that it wasn't chunks of ice, but that it was like a cavitated ejecta regalith blanket or something where a who? Yeah, exactly. So, so an asteroid hit the ice sheet and and just a blanket of of sand and water and and and and ice just kind of washed over and away from the impact site and then it was and it was more like um like you know like uh paint bubbles like when you're painting and it pops and you end up with like an elliptical shape. Yeah. uh he thinks that that's what for Carolina base. I I to me I don't think you would get like that um that precise with the you know the elliptical shape of them if that were the case. So I think it's a combination of two of those. I think that it's you know Antonio Zamore is more on board or I'm more on board with his hypothesis of of the actual ice chunks crashing down at least at least the outer edge. Obviously, I think the middle part of where this would have happened completely vaporized, but it would have been the edges that came, you know, coming out. It came crashing away and then came came down onto the ground that formed that. But what again, I think there's a lot of evidence that suggests that the time frame has to be a lot older. Uh, and and um Tim Harrison and um and Michael Davies have a pretty good idea of that mid ply scene because something big happened during that time. Uh and it hasn't been hasn't been solved. And and so we have two mysteries now cuz keep you know there's no m make make no mistake about it. You know the Carolina bays are a mystery like they we really don't know even even the academic scientists will tell you you know we really not sure this is our best hypothesis right uh and so when you start looking at all of the different hypotheses you know you got to start you know pulling and taking what you can from those to kind of get a better picture. Mhm. Um right now they think that the Carolina bays were formed um by wind and water. I mean basically it's an aolon lustrian hypothesis uh and and sometimes they add other things too like a like a solution a dissolved uh solution underneath there and water tables that rise and fall and things like that but but really you know right now the the dominant academic hypothesis pretty much uh you know being used by guys like uh Christopher Moore Dr. more is um is that it was wind and water that the glaciers themselves were just blowing air off the glacier across the the northern u North American coastal plane. Yeah. And all of the Carolina bays would have been ponds and and it would have been swirling these ponds into these perfect ellipses and then they just stopped. Um that's that's what they think. And and it actually all goes back to a guy um named Ray Kzawski. um he was a geology um PhD candidate uh somewhere in in the Carolinas and um actually probably says it right there. Uh no, it don't say it. Anyways, he um in 1977 he put together a a uh PhD dissertation uh where he got a sand table uh kind of like what we what we have right here, but it would be full of sand. He made a B-shaped depression in the middle of it, filled that B-shaped depression with water, and then took a fan and blew it across the water in one direction for 15 minutes. Went to the other side of the table and blew it across the opposite direction for 15 minutes. He did that for 4 hours. Wow. Well, I mean I to be honest, I don't know why. Like I don't know what he was trying to achieve because, you know, that's there wind doesn't work like that, you know. Well, the only reason I could think that he would like take the the sand and go back and forth like that is to show like seasonal variation of winds. Maybe. Maybe. I I I really don't know. Still interesting. Well, it is interesting, but this is what he got. Like this image right here uh is is what he got at the end of this experiment. Uh and he made a really cool oriented lake. And I showed you images of oriented lakes earlier. Mhm. Uh and and his what he was trying to do in his dissertation was to prove that the Carolina bays were oriented lakes. And to prove it, he he took this bowl shape of water and created this football shape. Um, now from the very beginning, I mean, he started with a bowl shaped depression full of water. Mhm. Um, you know, that's that's what a crater is. I mean, if you take a perfectly round bowl shape, I mean, you look at the moon, it's full of craters. It's full of B-shaped depressions. Then he filled it with water and then blew air across it back and forth, you know, for for four hours. Right. It's there's so many variables like environmental variables that are left out of this explanation uh that it just it I it baffles me that this is still like this right here is like the the go-to for Carolina Bay hypothesis for the academic hypothesis. Um you know 1977 dissertation that was never peer-reviewed. It was never published anywhere. You know went into some guy's office and uh they gave him his PhD. He went on to become a oil and gas uh geologist I think I think I think in Texas. Never went back to Carolina bays. Never wrote another paper. That was it. And and this is what they used. In fact, Christopher Moore has a paper. It was actually a a presentation that he put together for a a conference titled Kazawarski was right. And and he had this whole thing about you know how wind and water and things like that were were they call it catabatic winds that the winds were blowing off the glaciers. the the the air above a glacier is really cold and it's dense and so it it blows off the glacier in in a direction away from the glacier. Uh and he's saying it's those winds that went over those ponds to form those perfect ellipses. Right. And he's done a lot of work on on a specific bay called Hearnen Bay. Uh and he went through and did a bunch of, you know, OSL dating and things like that on H. Hearnen Bay. Yeah. They actually think that Hearn & Bay has migrated um that it actually started here and had migrated to this point right here. Uh it's all it's all in that paper. Mhm. Um the problem is again when you start looking at it. So here's H Hearnen Bay right here. This is using Google Earth and you can see I pinned Hernand Bay in the middle. This is the one that they did they've done all those studies on. Right. Okay. Uh and again aolon lustrian that this had to be been a pond and had to have been a pond for so long that wind and water had blown it into a perfect ellipse. That that would have had to take thousands of years and then it stopped and then it was a perfect ellipse. But when you look at the lidar if that's true then it has to be true for all of them. It can't you can't just pick one, you know. It has to be every single one of those would have had to have been lakes. Again, this is all farmland today. This is all high and dry. These are rivers. These are all rivers of the past. But when you click on the lidar, you see how many or how extensive these Carolina bays are. And and they all have this. You like I said, using that le squares method, we can go on and we can pick points all around this rim. Yeah, it's interesting, isn't it, man? It's super it's super compelling, you know, especially, you know, I know you said you don't think it's from the younger dus, but um it's interesting to me how um you know, conventional science and and academia has not sort of done more research into the younger dus hypothesis and and tried to either validate or invalidate it. Yeah, I that's and that's the whole point like that's the whole reason why I got into this. Yeah. Back in 2015, I got I got a master's degree in geoscience. Um, I started a a like I wanted to to teach a college level geology class. Uh, I don't the timing was ironic because that's also the same time that um Randle Carlson first went on with like Joe Rogan and uh and and you know I was like hold on you know and he started talking about you know a lot of things that made a lot of sense about the younger dus and I was like so I started focusing on and that's kind of why I went back to the Carolina Bays at that time and then you know here we are today talking about them. Um, but yeah, I I definitely think that this was a catastrophic event that these were all created at the same time. Um, and uh, you know, now, like I said, I do have the credentials. You know, I have the background now. I've I've taken for some of these guys, I've have taken more college level geology classes than any of them. Yeah. Uh, you know, like I said, I have I have two minors from from Philadelphia State University. That's where I went to school. That's where I first saw that first Grand Bay. Uh, and even then, back then, I asked him, I was like, "What how did you know how did it form this ellipse?" cuz cuz you really when you first go to Grand Bay, you go to the top of this tower. It's like 100 foot high and you can just see the whole swamp all the way around you. It's really kind of neat, right? And it looks like it's circular and and I remember asking the professor, I was like, you know, how did this form so, you know, such a neat circle? And he's like, well, it's actually an ellipse and and uh he told me all about the wind and the water hypothesis and things like that. I was like, really? And he said, but there is also this other hypothesis. This was back in the year, this was 2000, right? You know, right? And and uh it's really interesting because I got interested in it. I went to the internet, which back then it wasn't Google. I can't remember what it was, but um I Googled or I or I typed in Carolina Bays and it actually brought up George Howard's website that he talked to you about on this show. And so I I read I read his paper on on Carolina Bays and then I kind of like I said, I kind of didn't really think about it. I just always thought they were kind of neat. And then back in 2015, I got back into it hardcore. And yeah, and it was because of papers like this 1977. I'm I'm I was born in 77. So 47 years ago that paper was written and that is the backbone. That is the bottom bottom assumption on a whole stack of assumptions that's been built on top of it and I think it's way incorrect. I think that there's there's way too many environmental variables. Can you do a peer review on it? Uh it was it was never published. So yeah, it wasn't a published paper. So you can't do a peer review on a published paper that's ever been published. Has anyone you or I mean George has published papers on this, right? Uh yeah. Um I don't know about Carolina Bays. He's published a lot of papers on on the younger Dryas. Oh, okay. And then that's again to be quite honest, like I said, it's I was totally on board with these Carolina Bays being part of the younger Dry story. Um I I was on board with Zamora's ideas. I was like, man, I think this is right. I think this is what's happening. Um uh Carlson was connecting the Carolina Bays to the younger dest. That's what got him involved with it. George was. Uh, again, I'm kind of I'm kind of the odd man out now, you know, cuz I'm like, I don't think that they are, guys, you know, and I'm showing you why, you know, but I I get a lot of push back, you know? It' be convenient if it was going to go dry, right? It'd be a lot more fun. Oh, you're not even kidding, man. Like, it felt like somebody punched me right in the stomach. When I when I when I was showing Michael Davis out and I saw where they weren't like there were none of them below that that uh that shoreline I was like like actually I had to go on earlier today cuz my last video during that time uh that because I do have a YouTube channel it's called the dabbler's denon uh the last video I put out was in October and and that's when I found those paleoic shorelines and I was so sick to myself. Yeah. That I didn't post another video until like February. I was like that's good man. Good for you. Yeah. I had to take instead of just you know grift would just continue with the grift and just try to like keep letting I caught myself doing that. I actually caught myself I made a video about about um Michael Davius. It's actually called the Delm Marva conundrum because you actually actually have a picture of it. You have um you have what I'm talking about these shorelines in the um uh Delm Marva Peninsula of you know Delaware, Maryland and and uh Virginia. So here here so this is part of the Delm Marva Peninsula and um again it's all farmland now. You you actually have this highway that runs up in the middle of it but it's it's beautiful farmland if you ever driven up this way. It's it's really pretty. Um and where is this? This is uh this is the Chesapeake Bay right here. Okay. Got it. This is the Atlantic Ocean. This is actually like the Outer Banks area. Got it. Um so and you know they got the Chesapeake Bay tunnel. I don't know if you ever driven up that way but they got a tunnel. Yeah, I've been through it. Yeah. Yeah. And so you come back up farther down. But what's really neat about it again when you click on it, you can see where the Carolina bays are. They're all right down this central peak. Now remember this, you got to kind of get used to the colors, right? Yeah. So blue is sea level. And then as you go up, the colors change. And then this next blue is 10 m up, right? So this is low, this is high, then back down low. Right? It's confusing as hell. It Well, you get used to it. I promise. Right. So yeah, cuz some people look at this and they think it looks like a valley, but it's actually the peak of Delm Marva Peninsula. That's why the highway's there. So it's at only the highest parts and then it's at the red part, too. Okay. So here, this is where it gets interesting because uh again the the way that I'm looking at this, the hypothesis would be that the sea levels rose, it washed the bays away, and then it went away, right? And so basically there's kind of like a rule that you don't find Carolina base below 30 ft in elevation because that's how high the sea levels rose 125,000 years ago. 30 ft higher than today. Right. Mhm. And then the sea levels dropped. Uh so you shouldn't find any Carolina bays below 30 ft. But we do find some like right here. Right. Now what I found was interesting and again I call this the exception to the rule is that this whole area is subsiding. this whole area, the whole Delm Marva Peninsula is actually sinking. It's just slowly sinking. It could be it could be isostatic rebound. It could be just tectonics, whatever. Um, but it's slowly, I mean, really slow. It's it's measurable. You can, you know, they they do studies on this. Um, a lot of it has to do with the extraction of fresh water and it's causing it to sink. Oh, really? Yeah. I mean, that's that's kind of speeding it up a little bit. But, so you do find Carolina bays that are a little bit lower. My point of bringing this up though was um I was arguing with Michael Davis about this and and I caught myself grifting because I was like you know oh this this could have been like a a major flood or something at the young dry that caused it and I have a video about it and I was like I had to go back later. I was like that's that's not what happened man. This was the ocean came up. the ocean came up, washed this stuff away and and and the whole area has been sinking since then, right? Yeah. You also find areas like um Charleston are actually rising, too. So, this is another exception to the rule. You find areas around Charleston, South Carolina, uh where you should find Carolina bays if they were formed at any time in the past, right? Uh especially at the younger dest because this whole area was high and dry during the younger dus. So, you should find Carolina bays all over this this area of South Carolina. But they're not there. No. When you click on it, you'll see like there's some at the very highest points. Yeah. Like there's a couple really nice ones right there and a couple up here. Um all of this area you should be able to see them. These are actually all this area is higher than 30 ft. So we should even see them if if they were formed 400 thou or you know 78,000 years ago, right? But I think what happened was when when you push the time frame back to the mid plyosene that allows for a tremendous amount of time for geology to take place. You know, rising and falling of seas and things like that and tectonic uplift. And that's what's happening here is um they have this area is slowly but surely being lifted up. Um they have earthquakes or Charleston's well known for having earthquakes. Uh, and so that that whole area has been lifting up and and this we should see Carolina base here, but they're not because it's slowly rising. So interesting, man. Yeah. Yep. Can you imagine if we had one day some sort of like chat GPT that could travel through time and tell us what was going on? Hey, that would be awesome. That's going to happen. It's got to happen. Yeah. I got a question. Yeah. So, can't you uh run it through a simulation like like propose a give like make a computer? Yeah. Simulate like an ice impact instead of a rock. You could Yeah, you can. There's a guy out there um he's he's not very known at all. Like he's just some guy on the I don't even know what he does, but he's really really good at computer animation and and using those I'm terrible at computer programming stuff. I I I'm awful at it. Um but he's been putting together um simulations of of an impact and what would happen and then um I can't remember his name is it's DS and I always have to go back and look at it. Um he's got a YouTube channel. You could probably probably click on it. Um and the problem is he he took a bunch off too. Yeah. He had a bunch of really cool stuff and then people started like checking it out and then he took it off. Why the hell would you take it off? I don't know. Here. Here's a good representation of it. Like you could also simulate the wind like that dude's dissertation and and and Oh. Oh, I see what you're saying. Yeah. Yeah. You can disprove or prove the wind as well. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Yeah. So, right now what he was what he was discussing was the impact uh would go through the ice and the explosion itself would come from the bottom. And so the the ice cap itself is is exploding from the bottom of the impact and the ice is spread that way. And so it's kind of a neat Oh, okay. Yeah, it's kind of a neat way that he's kind of going about it. Again, I have no idea what he's using and how he's doing it. Mhm. But it is they are neat simulations on how how to do that. And you're and you're right, uh, Steve, you know, there there should be ways that you could, you know, go through and find what would have to happen, you know, what exact criteria would you need to make perfect ellipses with wind and water like that. Mhm. Um and and I again what I tell you know some people that are arguing about it I'm like you know do you if you had like as unlimited resources and and had a lab and you can you know do do you think that you can make a perfect ellipse with with wind and water? Right. And even if you did, could you make another one right next to it? And can you make three or four of them side by side? And then take your whole experiment and take it outside. Are you going to be able to get the same thing? and and you know the the variables that go into to one of these um you know one of these experiments is there's just so many things that could happen to change I mean everything from like the soil type um you know the vegetation all of that would be a variable that would give you a different that's that's you know one of the main things we teach about in in in school is you know the scientific method and and using the scientific method and uh you have to account for your variables and and that's wasn't done and they haven't really touched it since 1977. Now, I can go to the beach today. We can go right now uh go back down to uh Indian Rocks and uh and and kick some water right out of the ocean onto the ground and we within 2 seconds we can make Carolina Bays. M That's interesting. Yeah, man. It looks just like that. Yep. I mean, we can go I mean, the the substrate's the same. It's it's sand, you know, the coastal plane is mostly sandy. the dude I mean the people who have researched this in the past though it's not likely that they were like multiddisciplinary where they like studied the cosmos or like the history of streams right even Kazawki went on to become an oil scientist you yeah like we have the luxury today to like watch all these amazing YouTube videos and listen to Rand Carlson for hours talk about all this you know wildly interesting that these guys had no access to you know yeah back then when they when they came up with their ideas right yeah I think if they just had LAR if they just had LAR. Yeah, they would look at that like I don't know why when LAR became like accessible why every geologist on the planet didn't come back and look at these Carolina bays and be like hold on guys we got to go back and reexamine these because there's no way wind and water created these there's no it's impossible it's impossible right and that's a hard word you know when you say something's impossible there is no chance that this could have happened 70 plus thousand times if you go to Wikipedia by the way they say there's half a million of them oh really there's not there's not you you know, it's just this it's it needs to be reexamined. It needs to be it needs to be, you know, put into geology books. It's not even I've got a a slide here of a handful of geology and earth science books that I have access to in my own classroom and not one mention of Carolina bays. Not even one. Not even one. If you go to a uh you know a university um my my graduate level books, not one mention of Carolina B and they are so dominant, man. They are so everywhere and and nobody talks about them. people live in the middle of them, have no clue that they're there, right? And and it's I think there's a really neat story there. I think there's a really neat story that needs to be finished and it's not. It's Yeah, it's totally fascinating. It totally And it needs more attention on it, which you know, you're doing a great job of getting the word out, you and Randall and and George. Yeah. And uh you know, hopefully we can get some people to start digging into this. Yeah, that's the goal. That has been the goal from the beginning. I'm not the guy like I I I I'm not the one that want I'm I'm a huge introvert. I there's going to be people that I work with that are going to see this episode and they're going to be like, "Dude, I had no idea you were into that." I'm serious. I'm serious. And uh you know, I I'm not the guy to be to be doing this. I want to see grad students. I want to see, you know, new geology professors. I want to that's my that's been my target audience from the beginning of doing this. You know, I I wasn't about growing a YouTube channel. It wasn't about, you know, going off to do conferences with uh with Randall and those guys, which is awesome. It's been a really neat, you know, side, you know, side event. But yeah, dude, that that event is what was wild. That was really cool to see all those people all those people get together. And uh I'm super glad that I went first, though. And I'm also glad that you guys missed it because I don't think I'd be here if you saw. You'd be like, "Oh yeah, we got the Carolina base. We got that figured out." That's funny. Uh but yeah. Um but yeah, I'm glad I went first because like I said, I'm I get I got super nervous. You know, the first year I did it, um, that was Cosmic Summit 23 was in a big area, you know, and like everybody was in the same area and um, and we had some technical difficulties during mine. The power went out on it and I was like, "Oh my god." Oh Yeah. Yeah. So, I was like really nervous. Uh, last year it was much better and I went first so I didn't have time to get nervous. It was good. Yeah. That's great, man. Yeah. Yeah. Cool, man. Well, thanks for coming and uh, where can people find your YouTube channel and all that stuff? So, my YouTube channel is Dabbler's Den. I have not taken anything off. Like I said, I I got the gut punch uh and I completely changed my mind. I put disclaimers uh on that. Uh but um but yeah, I I you know, YouTube is where you can find me. I've I'm on Twitter. Dabler's down on Twitter. Um I Facebook is is mostly for like family and friends and stuff like that. I don't don't really use Instagram very often, but okay. Uh Twitter and and and you know, comment on on some of the videos on YouTube. Um, and that's where you can find me. Okay. Beautiful. Yeah. We'll link everything below. Mhm. And, uh, what do you got, Steve? Patreon. Uh, yeah. We got we got a few questions. You want me to read some here, then finish, uh, on Patreon? Let's just let's just do it on Patreon. Sounds good. That's it. Thanks again, man. Appreciate it, folks.