The general gonna experience. You and I have some shared interests, clearly, in the world of UFOs, but I want to talk. Most people know of you because of big, low aerospace. They know that you're this billionaire investor and you're a very successful businessman, but you have a deep fascination with UFOs. Yeah. Yeah. Sure do. How did this all get started? Back when my, when I was about three years old, which would be about 1947, and actually a May of that year, my grandparents had a very close encounter. It was dramatic. And they were taking an afternoon, evening drive, in the late afternoon, up into the mountains and coming on back down to Las Vegas. And they saw what appeared to be at first an airplane on fire. And the object became closer and closer to them and they pulled off to the side of the road. And at one point then it filled up the windshield and I thought they were gonna die. And the last second, it shot off and disappeared. And I learned of this story when I was probably 10 years old. And because I was three at the time, and my mother had told me the story. So I approached my grandfather and he wouldn't talk about it. Now, after all these years, like seven years have gone by, because I was intrigued with it. And so went to my grandmother and she only would say a few words, but she wouldn't talk. So I got the story from my mom and they had my grandfather had to sit on the side of the road there in the car for a while to recompose himself. And because they thought they were gonna die and then he finally was able to drive on back to Las Vegas. So that was the beginning for me. Did he ever describe what he said it looked like a plane on fire, but what was the shape of it as it got closer? I don't recall any kind of shape that was described. The other described. I don't recall that. But they just knew it wasn't a plane. They knew it was something crazy. That's right. So in the family, in the family, the family had an event. And I lived right next door to my grandparents. And the family had an event that kind of started things at that date. For me, other personal things came later. But for the family, that was a big deal. So this was, you said 47. 47. And 47 was the time of the Roswell crash. 47 was the time there was a lot of UFO activity being observed worldwide. And the speculation is that this had to do with the nuclear bombs that were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and all the tests that United States had done. And Russia had done and that there was a lot of interest in, obviously, in that, well, actually Russia hadn't dropped any bombs by that time, right? It was after that. But that there was interest in our species by extraterrestrials, because they let all these crazy assholes or detonating nukes. Let's go take a look at them. Right. Well, you had so-called Foo Fighters during the war. These lights that were following bombers and the tail gunners were the ones that saw the most often, of course. And then that happened through the war. And then, of course, Roswell, but for that was kind of Arnold, right, in about June, June-ish. And then, July 8th was Roswell. And there's a direct uptick, though, from the Trinity experiments, right? I think I gather- my feeling simply is that without any kind of other evidence or proof that that was a huge stimulus. So this was around that time, and then you would heard about this as a part of family discussions. And so that sort of ignited the fire initially. Yeah. And I started asking my friends, as I say when I was about 10, have you any reports in your family of anything? And by golly, a couple of my close friends told me things that they had never told me before. So that wasn't necessarily an exclusive event, is what I'm saying. Other people in Las Vegas had seen things at close proximity as well. Now, your relationship to this is obviously something that you've carried for so long. It's been an obsession of yours for so long. It started with this. But what personal experiences, if any, have you had? Well, when I was probably seven or so, seven or eight, I used to have- well, I chalked up all my life to just being silly dreams. And I had maybe five or six of these dreams. And I could never make sense of them. And I would be laying in bed on my side. And typical dream, always the same. There would be three short, somebody, some things, and kind of monk, robe. And so I couldn't see any face, couldn't see any appendages. And these three, whatever, were standing there. And they were not too far from my eye level as far as the heights and so forth. So the child size? Yeah. And so there was nothing in a, I was an avid comic book reader, but there was nothing in the whole genre of comic books that related to that or movies. And we didn't have television in Las Vegas till 53 or 54. And even after that, it was terrible broadcasting. At first. But so it made no sense to me. And so over my lifetime, I never mentioned it to anybody, including my wife. You know, it's funny how you keep things secret and just kind of for no good reason. Maybe I was being embarrassed to talk about it. But I finally thought, well, you know, maybe it was just dreams. Maybe it was something else. And so that was the first event personally that I had at that time in the subject. When did you start to connect the idea of these tiny people or human-like things with extraterrestrials? Well, years later, when I began to start my process as a researcher and as a student in the subject and began to talk with people who are, who made it their business to be experts in abductions. And the more I got into the field and sat writing out questions for the researcher, for the therapist who would be asking the questions and I'd be sitting there watching the process. And just over time, I thought, well, you know, maybe there was something more to it. But I'm better off not knowing anything, so I'll just block it off and forget about it. Yeah, we talked last night about John Mack a little bit. The Harvard great guy. Yeah. And he did a lot of these sort of hypnotic regression sessions with people where they describe very similar scenarios. Well, yeah, a multitude of different situations. The induction phenomena was very proliferate and the population is seemed like. Even we did a survey called the Roper poll and we repeated it three times so that the margin of error was really reduced to like one, one and a half percent. And abduction researchers came up with the 10 questions. And so they, we distributed that. And the conclusion was of fairly relatively sizable percentage of the population had some kind of experiences according to them, according to the researchers and according to the poll. I am not qualified to speak to the accuracy of whether the questions were that relevant to the conclusions or not. But that's what they said. And so, and I had in my own research found people that I put them through regression. I'm not personally, but I found a hypnotherapist that could do that. And I found a number of people just hear their scatter around, maybe somebody in my own staff. And they would come up with these stories and these events. One of the criticisms of John Mac and hypnotic regression in general is that the idea that you can put, the idea that you can put a memory into someone's head, that you could suggest things and you could create false memories. And this was something that I've read in criticism of his work that this style of hypnotic regression and bringing up these very specific scenarios to a bunch of different people. You can sort of help create, especially in people that are easily influenced or people that are open to suggestion. You could put these false memories in their head. And so, especially when you're dealing with something as fantastic as a UFO or alien abduction or visitation or something like that. Oh, that's definitely possible. There's also something called screen memory, but dealing with the first power suggestion. That's absolutely true. My experience was with different hypnotherapas, they went out of their way. In fact, maybe if they did make a suggestion, it was just the opposite. They might say, okay, you're on board this craft. Where's the lighting coming from? Is it coming from the corner or of the room that you're in? Oh, there were no corners. They'd be corrected right away by the person being hypnotized. And so they went just the opposite direction on purpose to make suggestions to maybe coax the person to come that direction and they wouldn't do it. The person wouldn't do it. Now screen memory is different. The supposedly if somebody has a very close encounter with supposedly somebody that's ET, you leave that, that the memory turns out to be entirely different. And that's put into you consciously. And you we call something entirely different than what actually happened. Maybe you saw deer, two deer on the road or something of that sort or maybe there were owls or whatever. So that's what's purported to be catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.