We're here in Gainesville, Florida at UF home of the Gators and we're here to student only Lecture by a little be the base God The first time here it's one of few rare lectures. He does it college universities around the country and We just drove three hours to get here. So we're gonna see if we can scalp some student IDs We're gonna see if we can sneak in Here's your self to the there's some of us exterior you want to say what I mean by that is an exterior You're still on first and I'm not going to sell by feelings You know, we all are a big deal with just a bit of like that But don't live for somebody else, you know, be flowers in this country. This will make you happy You know, I think long walks and so You know, they set up a purpose of living definitely I feel like the first thing Just all being in here to gain as well as the year something new Which is automatically so everybody's here to automatically be like a BS something Obviously forward danger on artists has plenty of their music because the poor foundation Why music has power to help is You You know really take everything Just and I'm so good. You know this is music to me and I cannot get inspired by that Everything Oh With that sometimes that's not going to necessarily be making it by a meeting or not making it by a meeting. But when you're not in trouble, I've had to build this work school with them. Because so, you know, take love everybody that is a part of your network. And also, if you have 73 people in that problem, I think that's extremely important. You have 73 five. You know what I'm saying? That's 73 five. That's 73 wins. We'll transfer into four people. Our physical connection is the fourth one, and you know, that ain't work. What does this mean? You tell it about that. You know, because one big is, I think, the biggest question here, the first is, whenever the hares of a company, what is not going to figure out how big it is going to be. What is not going to be, what is not going to be showing that, once again, you know, compare ourselves to the input of the history of the thinking of no one in favor of the person. Anybody. Because when you compare yourself, when you do the thinking of caring yourself, feel better, or when you compare yourself in your mouth, yeah. The main thing is, when that's not going to compare ourselves to being about your thinking, it's both good is, who is to compare yourself to your cat. So, you know what I'm saying? We used to be. But I think that almost like me. You know, I definitely made me a couple months ago, made my two months ago, because you know, because I'm sorry, I'm doing this, and I'm just scraping it off on myself, and being on my side. So you know, it was like, but I did like, I'm just, you know, I'm just extremely rare, because I have a lot of it. I'm really happy about it. You know, you know, you know, you know, for me, once I started getting here for myself to hold self and accomplish some things. You know, I feel bad, I feel like this, is a problem. You know what I'm saying? I'm just like, like, and once again, be safe, I'm like, this is not about me. I don't take that. I'm like, you know what I'm saying? I'm like, we're talking about all of this. I'm talking about all of the other kids. Everybody has to say, they used to be happy about you and accomplish it in your life. And I think you should write it down. And you don't have it. Exhale your name. I had it somewhere where you can change your mind still and improve your mind yourself because my kid, that always like, but there's a daughter saying that you're like, I was like, I'm not going to stop, you know what I'm saying? I was like, I was like, you know what I'm saying? So I know it's just like, I'm continuously taking your past to yourself. Thank you, to your day. But just take a minute and a couple of time here, we're going to hold on to this energy, ready, once again, we have a friend who knows what I'm trying to hear. You know what I'm doing? I'm a little upset and the letter goes for a whole life. But I just can't everybody but all of a sudden you wrote your book like, I said, oh, I said, I said, oh, he said, well, I thought this if you said, I thought that it's still mine. Don't be scared You know, I'm just not clear because I don't know. Hey, you know what I'm saying? I'm just going to say, I feel good. Good afternoon, my taste salty. Yeah, but what I'm going to do is I think no one can go and salt the crap out. You know what I mean? Let's blow the arms down, blow the nose down. It's just like that. I'm talking a lot of water before I take a beer. That's very interesting. That's a great argument. I mentioned like art or just being able to make a few bits of this. Lil' B.F. And like to give it to you, I like to. You've got to make sure the chocolate is not to leave you to buy the one on everybody. As a store, everybody has a child. You know, everybody, everybody is extremely powerful. It is either, you know, we support them, we promote it or just let it go. You know, everybody is really special. That was it if I came up and said this stuff in the field. And to what is your current opinion on the public school education system? Yeah. I think definitely we should focus more on the arts. I think first of all, I want to say thank you, babe, Scott. I love you. I'm going to make a positive in the face of a grand favorite. I definitely think I think about your impressions. That's very normal. I just feel it's different. And I feel it's me. So I think if they look, it is very, sure we control what we are taking. You have to continue. I think to go through the roots of figuring out the simple things in life. And I'm going to show you a good team with the simple things as well as stay focused on your major goals and short-term goals, but they can tip with the simple things in life. Striving for more of them. So, guys, I just want to come out here and really appreciate it. Really appreciate you following me on Twitter the other day. That's what I'm going to say. I think that's the moment that you're working with the one and only chance. Yeah, babe, the congrats for that to be a chisel, right? I'm currently working with the first party party for this reason. But you know, the newest, newest and amazing experience. He's a real artist. Just seeing him free style being him free style. And his seat chills really free style and sounding just amazing. I think you love him. And I definitely have ready to do something with him. You know, I guess you can get yourself a little bit. of a good, nice guy. Sorry, we start starting. I just have him in free. I just want to see who gets the weight. He's taking a little bit of his face free style too. All right, check his time. Check his time. Then he can't stop me. The weight of the cue beat is sweat chef. Took it like a little beat. Then he can get about OK, look, because he got the middle bars. He's a person who's working and all those best. He's a good blowman. And you know, a little beat. He's got enough play. He was a cool hand. Let me say a go. He's a student. He's a spray blow. There's a bunch of our kids. And really everything that I can to make him feel good. I think that's my biggest goal. And that's a walk by a very important point of being more specific. Building a school. I think that's very great. One thing that really started. The issue is kind of like exploding. It's really different. You know, I feel like the life has that, you know, we need to have a few of the terrorists in life. And the reality is, through is really the love that people still need. You know, stick with it. Like, at least there's much music that they have. You know what you're doing, babe. You got your book tape. How big are they? You got the title of the army. You know what? There's been slowly with surely. You know, I've got a few questions. I feel like I do. There's a big problem with this. I'll just get this bar down. So I'll turn it out the title. The kid from Tyler. I want to work too far too far too far too far. I'm too glad this man is the title. It is what they're going to like. It's been with me for years. So I know what's the right one. I can't quite interpret. It's what it is. I have two questions for you. First one, I'm very interested in why I come to a distance. I'm just at the same room. You know what I'm saying? I have someone who is there for me. I'm not here. But my next question is, with all your, you know, your basic music who makes days throughout life. I'm thinking, what do you plan on with this team? Yeah. So, you know, I appreciate that, you know, this person in the mouth game was actually a big step. So I never officially released no one officially with an official album. Yeah, like everything about career is big steps. I've definitely worked my official album after about five or six years. So maybe this is so what I want to do right now is focus on getting some things together. Focus on also musical class that I need to complete to get, be geared for that. So I'm thinking this year, 2017. So you know, this year, 2017. I'm going to work. What are you thinking your plus is it has been there in your whole life? Yeah. My core positivity has always been there. I think I just kind of made me a little weird on teenage years, but I was finding myself. But I think it's always still positivity. You know, like she always feels that no, as long as I have a person, you know, I always have, I think life's in two places. When we year, I already have to buy politics, to politics and school and a crisis. Yeah, you know, I appreciate how appreciate the volume of the career. You know, you started moving back so long. You know, you've already said, I'm just like shouting about all the time mentioning how everything that matters. I just want to know, like, what do you think is the biggest contributing factor that you've been able to laugh so long at the end of that? Just thinking, I don't think it can be actually love the music. I don't know. I love music. I think that's a good question for me. I just love music. I support artists at all times. You know, I just love, you know, I think it's great. You know, real street violence and air friends are happy to do the job. You know what I'm saying? I guess it's a good thing. It goes. It is all love. We're living to the marketing and the brand-based God. It's something that people just ride behind will love you. And how do you think you've been able to differentiate yourself? Your people at Kanye, Kendrick, J. Cole, they have a very different marketing technique, they're more very different. So how what was your source of inspiration when it came to your branding and your marketing as little be-in-based God? You know, just thinking about questions now. That doesn't have a really unique, a personal marketing and branding material. And creating and agreeing personally, providing that love to you, you know, like that. It's just so exciting for me. It's about two views. That's a big thing. If you got 30 top readers, that's huge. I mean, just make sure that you continue to support the people that support you, you know, show love. And you're quite sincere here. Everybody wants to do it. I want to see it. I want to be on my stand. So if not just say, I will be making a place now. One, two, rarer things. What does it mean to you guys for him to come here to that? Everything. Everything. We don't fair part of ways. We love him. He's spread to positive message. Is everybody's... He's like, well, he revolutionized the hip-hop game. Whether you agree with it or not, Lil B is the man. He's the best guy. You know, lower soul happy and healthier. Lil B is the most amazing. And honestly seeing Lil B in person, meeting him, touching him, as honestly, taking my life. And now I want to do great positive things with him. It shows, you know, even when you're big, when you make a big, you're able to kind of come back and give back to the people and kind of still contain and hold the same positive message. Stay true to yourself, say... And, you know, he just does his music for himself. He's like, he loves it. He does it because that's the way he wants to do it. You know, you can't do nothing but respect that. I'm wanting to come up. It's hot. It's hot. I want to come up. What's your what's your right name? Hip-hop dude. To me, it means to have your mind open to creativity. To be open to every kind of rock there is. To really listen to a deeper message that he has, I say. To be open to the silliness that is wrapped. Not take it too seriously and really just take the lyrics for what you want it to be. I've been defending little beasts since Juan Thompson's. Since he'll be with a major event, and the people are saying, oh, he'll be. He's whack. He's not serious. I go, that's the best part about it. A lot of people saw her something. He definitely had emotions going around the room. A lot of positivity. People opening up. They're just grateful, man.