the Joe Rogan experience. Now I know that Jimmy is... Of course he did. Yeah. Yeah. And I don't know Jimmy personally. I like the guy without knowing him. You interviewed him. Very nice guy. Yeah. That's what I thought. Yeah. I'd like to get him out in the field with me and show him some stuff firsthand. I think he would love that. Yeah, he would. I think he would. I think he would. Giant fan of your work. I'd like to hear that. Well, I'm a fan of his work, but I don't happen to agree on this one. Well, I mean, I don't even know if he agrees. I think he's just speculating. Yeah. I mean, I think he doesn't have a rigid perspective on this. Yeah, you hear you can see there's the recats. What is interesting though is look at this. You've got this structure up here that terminate. To ten, I forget how you're past that. Ten. I knew how to pronounce it. But anyways, that's an impact crater there. There's one here we can actually if we go back. The ten, ten, um, crater in Mauritania. That's impact and the ten memachat. I that's it. So what's interesting though, check this out. There's one. There's two and here's the recats structure. They followed in a perfect alignment. Mm. But what's the explanation there? I don't know. Could just be coincidence, right? Could be coincidence. Yeah, good. One things that he said about the recat structure was that around it, the white appears to be salt, which could be. And I mean, see, the rim rock. This is late cretaceous about 90 million years old. So at that point, it was below the ocean, right? So it's been uplifted. I think this thing is about 14 or 1500 feet above sea level. If memory serves me correct. So it's been eroded. You see this whole thing here is like an erosion. You had a massive amount of water that came down over this. And most likely is what exposed this thing to the surface was probably buried. Let's see here. Oh, so right there is, you know, from Plato, that's the ring to Sadie of Atlantis to scale. The concentric rings. The concentric rings. So this is the actual scale superimposed onto the recats. So it's much smaller. Much smaller. Yeah. But Plato's scale was based on what? The stayed. It was based on the stayed, which is roughly 607 feet. It's where we get the word stadium from. Oh, wow. Yeah, because that's, that was the length of a stadium in ancient Greece. So when you look at Plato's version of the sorry, take down this detour, but I was just curious. When you look at Plato's version of Atlantis, is there an area of the world that seems likely? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You better watch my six hour presentation. Okay. Yeah. No, but I look, it's detailed. That's why even in six hours, you know, I can't really spell it out. In the podcast, I did the first nine episodes, two hours each were devoted to, I thought, well, let's kick it off with Atlantis. 18 hours of Atlantis, 18 hours of it. The last episode nine was devoted to the recats structure. Wow. So I ate eight, eight hours, so 16 hours. But we had some chatter and things like that. And there's maybe maybe more like 12 or 14 hours. So you know, Johanna James is no, she is a British actress who started doing this pot. She's really cool lady. She's very interested in all this kind of stuff, very smart, extraordinarily beautiful. She went on and did a, she does these like 20 minute, 30 minute little vignettes of things that she's really interested in having to do a lot with, you know, ancient cultures, all the kind of things that, you know, Graham Hancock is, you know, she reads Graham Hancock. She became a fan of mine and she devoted one of her little 20 or 30 minutes segments to, she said, I watched all 10 hours or 12 hours of Randall Carlson's programs on Atlantis. So she did this like 30 minute little synopsis of it. Really did a great job. So we reached out to her, I invited her on. She came on, we did a live stream a couple of weeks ago with her as a guest and just really fun lady. She's also does comedy. Yeah. And she's very intelligent, very gorgeous. What can I say, you know, and smart and interested in all this kind of stuff. So, you know, there we go. Anyways, so she was very interested in the whole Atlantis thing. And so because of that, there was a lot of feedback and people wanting to know more. And so I thought, okay, now the 10 or 12 hours I did, what I'm going to do is I'm going to try to condense that down. So a couple of weeks ago we did the first three hour live stream where I basically started breaking down Plato's account, line by line. What did he actually say? Let's look at the geology. The oceanography, the astronomy. And see if it lines up if it matches up. And so I think there's one place that pretty much is not all the details, but when you look at all of the areas around the planet that have been proposed for Atlantis, I think there's one place that fits the majority of his details and that's the sunken Azores plateau. And I say sunken because we know it's sunken. And it's right along the mid Atlantic Ridge. In fact, since we're on this subject and I wasn't even thinking we'd get on this subject, there's the Azores plateau right there. It straddles a triple plate junction which you have the European plate, the African plate, and the North American plate here. Well, it's up near Novoc, Novoc, go show? Yeah, it's far north, it is. But notice over here, it's really almost the same latitude as Spain. And I would say that if there's any place on the planet that is most consistent with Plato's account, that's it right there. And why is that without doing an 18 hour presentation? Oh come on, Joe. Can't we have pizza brought in? We can. No, that's why in a nutshell, God, where do I even begin? So I was afraid you were going to ask that. But we can look very quickly, I guess, like give you the five minute version, which is that there is evidence that there was a massive subsidence along the mid Atlantic Ridge. We actually talked about this a little bit and I think in our very first discussion we had, which was what? Seven, eight years ago? At least. Yeah. Yeah. And we, so we talked about this a little bit. Geophysics shows that there's horizontal movement, lateral movement of the Earth's crust because of continental drift, but there's also vertical movement. And that is the result of isostatic compensation. That's called isostacy is the vertical movement of the Earth's crust. I can show you I should have a slide right here that will help to really illustrate what it is. Let me back up to, let's see, should be right in here. Yeah, here we go. Okay, so now this is the shore of Hudson Bay. Now this is where the ice sheet was the thickest. Right? Now what are you seeing there? Hudson Bay is up here. These are shorelines because when the ice was removed, the land started rising back. So here's sea level, land is rising back. And the land is rising because of a lack of weight of the ice? Yes. Right. So you're sitting on a soft cushiony chair right now, right? Are you? Yep. Okay. So your ass is causing isostatic depression of that cushion on your chair. Right. And if you set up, you'll have isostatic compensation. Mm. Right. So that's what that is along many, many, many lines. Yes, those are all shorelines. Here's another view of it. Wow. Here's another view. Wow. That's the land rebounding a couple of thousand feet after the ice was removed. Now the ice was removed and all of those trillions of tons of weight, where did it go? In the Atlantic Ocean. Now you look, the thinnest crust on the earth is the mid Atlantic ridge. And if you look at it, you'll see that there are transform faults, which should show up right here. The transform faults are these vertical fault lines that are, would you would say, orthogonal or right angles to the ridge itself. Here you can see very clearly the triple plate junction and how the azores plateau. Okay. Well, since the 1940s, the first expedition in 1948, there was a, well, a, a, a, a, a a, when they started doing, a dredge samples from the, from the floor of the Atlantic Ocean, which coincidentally, the name of the ship was the Atlantis. They dredge core samples and they pull up the core samples from two miles down a mile to two miles down and they look at those core samples. And what you had was, for example, shallow water creatures living. They weren't living. They were now, you know, they had been drowned. and they had creatures like that had, that typically lived under a hundred feet of sea water. And now they're a mile, mile and a half below. And they're on the flanks of this, of this place right here. So these are fossils that they're finding. Yeah. So in their finding fossils that ordinarily you would find in some place that was very shallow. Very shallow. Very shallow. Yes. A relative of a shallow, a hundred feet. Yes. Um, so this is, this is the basic idea here. This goes back to the 60s. It says right here, the possible tectonic implications of glacial eostatic. Now, eostatic is the rise and fall of sea level correlated with the increase and decrease of glacial ice. So if the ice is increasing sea level is falling and we call that eostatic sea level fall, if the ice is shrinking melting sea level is rising. So that's a eostatic rise. So that's the meaning of that. When you see glacial eostatic, that means the rise and fall of the sea level as a result of glacial growth or melting. Okay. Uh, and it says here, sea level fluctuations have received only minor attention in connection with such problems as ocean floor spreading. The purpose of this report is to point out that late place to see in sea level data suggests that the ocean basins have responded ice aesthetically and by a significant amount, particularly concentrated along the mid Atlantic ridge. So, um, and the so I mean this I've got so much here. I'm just going to grab a couple of these things here. Yeah. So they dug up these cobbles, which are the cobbles are, um, so a cobble is basically a stone or anything that's lithified that's roughly between a pebble, a pebble and a boulder. I think to 11 inches about about the size of a volleyball, now you're in a realm of boulders. A cobble is in between pebbles and boulders. You know, like a heard of cobblestone streams. Yeah. This size rocks basically. So, so they say here, the Atlanta screws are in great meteor sea mountain rise from a broad ridge or plateau. It's extends from the mid Atlantic ridge. Blah, blah, blah. Let's see. Um, so about a ton of flat terapod limestone cobbles was dredged from the summit area of one of these sunken, uh, that what they're calling the sea mounts. And a sea mount is like a flat top mountain, right? Like the top of the mount has been sheared off. Okay. So they pulled up these limestone, right? These limestone cobbles, they dated them. One of the cobbles gave an apparent radiocarbon age of 12,000 years plus or minus 900 years. The state of lithification, how, how much it is turned into rock. All of the limestone suggests that it may have been lithified under sub aerial conditions. In other words, in the atmosphere. That's what that means. It may have been lithified under sub aerial conditions in the sea mount may have been an island within the past 12,000 years. Wow. So I mean, we could go through again hours of this kind of research and why it's been pushed off to the side is anybody's guess, but it just doesn't fit the paradigm. Hmm. Yeah, basically, now this doesn't prove that there was any civilization here, but we can make a very strong case that a large section of the azores plateau was above sea level during the late glacial maximum. Does it coincide with Plato's account of trade and of travel and of the way? Well, we have no way of knowing. See now there we have to make a leap of faith, which is this. And if we look right here, you'll see, you can see it very clearly and you can see the straits of Gibraltar here, which was ancient known as the pillars of Heracles. And you come here to a group of islands and then you get to the azores plateau. And here these down here are those sea mounts, those truncated sea mounts. So really all you have to do, here's the leap of faith you have to make. You have to go. We don't get into anything like flying spaceships or crystal ray guns or anything like that. I just go by what Plato says. What he's describing is a maritime culture that had navigational abilities, something along the lines of the Minoan or the Phoenician culture, maybe by an order of magnitude. So now all we have to do really is assume this, which to me is not so pseudo scientific that we couldn't even consider, which is that somebody, some group in the Ice Age had enough navigational skills to sail from Europe to islands right here.