Joe Robin, fine. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night! All day! Think they're having me back? Good, see you, my brother. Oh, yeah. Always. Great. I'm good. It was a fun ham, you had the club, man. I was terrified. I was fucking terrified. You just look like you were back. No, I thought that's it. I've been away for too long. I'm going to sack. Not in the news, that's going to work. They'll see me. They'll go. He was wrong to come back, fuck him off. You're on with a gun. It was so nice. It was so nice. You were telling the story. I said, hold these thoughts. Yeah. Well, I didn't know we'd never spoken about it. No, tell me the story. Well, that's why I came to America to start. I got off at a job hosting a Catholic podcast. And they fired me. As I packed up everything in Adelaide. Just like two and a bit years ago, I had the kids and the wife. And on the way to America, I got fired. And they said, well, still pay your rent. It's in Stubenville, Ohio, beautiful Appalachian town. Just outside of Pittsburgh. And yeah, it's where we were three months. I was there. So what did they see that they fired you for? Oh, a lot. They made a compilation. Not the guy who showed up. They were right to find them. They moved out of the other way. Because it was a good, clean Catholic podcast. And then the business manager was like, there was a sketch about Stuben, someone in the throat with an AIDS needle. They're like, he uses the word can't all the time. They're like, this is a sponsorship nightmare. Get him out. So I say, OK, but they still said, we'll pay your rent for three months. And you can figure something out. You still got a visa. And I was terrified. I was just in the kids. With kids and a wife. Three kids, no job. I didn't have the money to go back home. Oh my god. I couldn't afford to go back home. Oh my god. And I didn't know that I had been past at the mothership, because I didn't know how the system worked. So on the way in to go to Stubenville, where I was like, I'll figure something out. I stopped in at Austin to see Shane. Shane said, go and do the mothership open, Mike. I did it. Adam Meagat said, if you're ever in town, come back, pay for sports. I didn't know that. I was past. I didn't know I could work here. Oh. I just thought he was like, I could audition again. And then so I had three confronting months in the snow. Beautiful part of the world. It was the most terrified I've ever been in my... He says that as an Australian. That's from Ohio. I loved it. I loved it. It was the most beautiful part of the world. I loved it. I went back and watched that while it's a West Virginia. Yeah, that's where it looks exactly like that. Well, that area is gorgeous. It's... I was God's country, but also so abandoned by like the potholes are crazy. I saw real heroin addicts. So I'd never really seen heroin addicts before. Just sleepy people. I saw street prostitutes. That's still going on. And this is a small town, right? This is a small town. This is... I went there. There are Catholics have moved there to try and like fix it. It was within Martin was from. The Wu Tang clan kind of started out there. They're starting out. Not, yes. But I think it's like the rizzes aren't he lived there and they moved out there. And then they got involved in rap in the Pittsburgh. I got asked for this on Bill soon. I believe I'm right about that. I don't have a mural for them. Wow. But it's great. Yeah, there's a lot of Catholic content creators there. And they're trying to take over town. I went there originally because my new polity is like my favorite magazine. And I got to meet the guys who made it. I was so excited. So how did they hire you? Wu Tang's reserve company. I got a chance. I got in Bill. Wow. And they all come over to visit him. This, he discussed a largely undocumented era of his life in which Pittsburgh played a role. Wow. And that's one of the first conversations we had. I was like, you said something about Pittsburgh that wasn't flattering. I said, I love Pittsburgh. You're like, you don't know anything. You're a foreigner. You don't know anything about America. Pittsburgh is a horrible place. I don't know. I thought it was good. It's just a little depressing. Do you see the thing about a lot of those industrial kind of towns? There's not a ton of options for people. Now, Pittsburgh, more so than the place that you were in. But when you get to a place where there's not a lot of options, and then you see real poverty, this is poverty with no solutions. You know what I mean? Not Pittsburgh. It's just outside of Pittsburgh. I was more f**king with you. No, I saw things in West Virginia that were pretty confronting. And like, you know, that like cake, and some of it's great. Some of the things from the poverty, one to drive through cigarette shop. I loved having drive through cigarette. I was just like trying to get the kids to sleep. My wife's upset because I got her in a foreign kind of like again, she never signed up. Let's move to America. She was like, we got for three months. Right. I'm unemployed. I better quickly figure out how to be a stand up comedian. I was busing out of Steubenville. I was like, I caught the, I went, I got it. Someone gave me a lift to Pittsburgh. This is when I saw the worst stuff. I got a lift to Pittsburgh. And then I caught the Greyhound from Pittsburgh to Cleveland. To open for Sam Talon who let me, who, who, unbelievable, let me open for the bus. I met him in Australia. Such a good go. And, but like that bus trip from Pittsburgh to Cleveland was, the most upsetting. Oh man, I was, people are spitting on the ground at the bus station. I like an immigrant, like an illegal immigrant woman came and tried to give me a phone. I remember that vividly. Give you a phone. She tried to give me a free phone. She's like, you can have this because she said, she said, you're on benefits. Everyone on benefits gets a free phone. It was some like policy. She just assumed I was on benefits because I was at the Greyhound bus station. And she was illegal. I don't know if she was illegal, but she had a strong accent and like a weird dress and and a baby on her back and a sack full of phones. A sack full of phones. She had like a sack of phones. So she was somehow in charge of distributing prephones to people. I'll never truly know what that was about. Boy, I would have investigated further. There was, oh, she's scared. I was just scared. That's fucking... Huge African guy sitting on the ground. Oh, you were a phone. And then after that, I sat next to a guy who's having a full psychotic episode. I think we follow each other on Instagram now. He's got my list Instagram. Really? He told me the secrets about Crispin Y. That he was a good man. The wrestler? He killed his family. Yeah. But this guy tried to tell me only he was... It's like burnt. He said, he only killed his family to send them to God and you can't blame a man for that. Oh. It's like... Alright, this is only a three hour bus trip. We're gonna get through this. We're gonna be fine. Oh boy. Oh man, but I did enjoy my time in that photo. Why are you probably enjoying it now that it's over? Oh, you survived. You make a good point. Yeah. If you asked me at the time, yeah, there's some things that are not fun while they're happening, but are really fun once you got through it. I mean, I remember the people I met along the way. Ah, I remember driving to Austin and like... It was like spring was... Like the further south we got, the more lush it became. Yeah. It was like, fuck, I might be okay. And then someone let me stay in there. I didn't have a house to stay in. So my podcast listeners friend, let us stay in there. With your family? With my whole family. Let us house it for them. Oh, they were in Japan. Oh my God. That's crazy. The whole time it was like, if I don't get past it to my relationship now, I don't think people should come here and live in their cars with their family. But it does, you know. But let's a fire under your ass. What? Well, that's the thing. It's like if you're forced into action. Yeah. Like you had no... Not just yourself. Like you could go, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Yeah. And people who do not have children do not understand the drive that it gives you to protect and care for those little people. It's kind of crazy. So if you'll find something... Well, I don't understand how people do it without... Like I'd meet men who are really driven and motivated, and I have no kids. But they're like, every day, they're working. I don't know what their motivation is before I had kids. My closest. What do you think I'm buying? They're in a game. playing a game. Yeah, they're just playing this game of accumulate the most stuff. Be able to brag about the most stuff you have. So much rather. Why down? I would rather not do anything about it. But not really because you love doing comedy. I loved doing comedy, but I never before I had kids was trying to do comedy that people would enjoy. Do you know what I mean? I think that is also though because you were living in Australia and there's limited options. Right. I know. Australian system is very different. It's very, it's mostly festival driven. It's festival driven and it's to have much greater extent. I've thought about this. It's like industry driven. Like industry. Yeah. We don't have which industry? Like manages an agent which is one role in Australia. But they are deciding who's succeeding and TV people are deciding who's succeeding. Whereas like in America, everybody is on the road. Everybody has one or two opens. And there's a whole lineage of who brought who up in the business. Like Dan Soder had Nick Mullen, Tim Dylan and Shane Gillis opened for him. Like those were his openness. Right. And not because they were successful or someone wanted them to thrive. He just thought they were funny people. Right. And they got to be his openness. And I don't know who you were opening for. But you have people who come up and well, I didn't get to really do it. I didn't have it that way. I do it that way. But I didn't have it that way. I didn't really come up with anybody where I opened for anybody. But I had a very weird path to success. You also, you got to go to LA and just be in the milky. Like there's a scene there. There's a lot of people. I came out to LA with a job already. Okay. I was on a sit comma ready. You started in Boston. Yes. Started in Boston. Look, it's very embarrassing. How lucky I am. I'm like one of the luckiest people that's ever lived. Like it's stumble upon success after success. So when I was six years into comedy, I was already on TV. So I was three years into comedy. I was basically barely getting paid. I was barely a professional. Like I was getting some spots and bars and stuff like that. I was making money. But I was driving limousines. I was doing odd jobs, doing different things. And I was also still teaching at the time. I was still teaching talk window for the first maybe six months or so when I was 21. I think I kept teaching. And then I eventually had to quit because I realized I could not commit to doing both things. I don't want to half-ass my students. Yeah. And I don't want to have. So for the first two, three years of comedy, barely, you know, I'm barely a comedian. Just trying. I'm trying to do it. I'm getting some laughs men and manager as an open miker. And he brought me to New York and he's still my manager today. Wow. The best. I didn't know that. Yeah. It's total luck. Total luck. You asked her a super handsome guy. I've seen, I've seen you then. I was boy pretty. You look like a fucking different person. It's not worth it. It's crazy. But also a lot of those comics you started with who maybe took longer. I'm going to say hideous, but they don't. They didn't look. Well, that definitely helped me get on television. It definitely helped me get on television. So I did the MTV Half Hour Comedy Hour in 1993, I believe it was. And next thing you know, I had a development deal. Next thing you know, I was on a sitcom and living out here. I mean, living in Los Angeles. But do you think it doesn't happen for people? Do you think there's anyone in America who has a good work ethic and is really talented that it doesn't work out for and comedy? What is it work ethic? You have to have a health issue. Hell, issues or a really horrible relationship. Those things could do you. Or like you could have a drug problem. Yeah, that'll do you. Gamble, you money way. That could do you into. Yeah. There's a bunch of things that can do you in. But it's crazy. Like that there are like not a lot of undiscovered geniuses in America in the same way. Like people will want to make money off of you if you've got it. Yeah, but there's some people that are just really horrible at marketing. Like Brian Holtzman. For instance. Yeah. Right. We had to kind of like force Brian Holtzman into the modern era. Yes. Like and he's always been a comics comic and he's always been a guy that we would all sit in the back of the room at the at the store and watch. But he was always getting these terrible spots. And it wasn't until we broke because he never went on the road. He never went on on. I started out together. So at the store together at 94, we're both like I think he came in 93 and I came a year later. And he was working for like Pan Am or something. He was a dog catcher for a while. Yeah. He was a I think you might have been a meter maid. Is he there at the moment? I'm in St. Himmies. Yes. He's there all the time. Okay. He lives up here and off the time. I don't know if he goes back and forth, but he lives out here all the time. He's the best. We I went to church with him. I don't know if I should tell this story, but we went to church together once. And it was really lovely. He took me out for breakfast afterwards because he's Catholic. And it was so funny because the priest at the end, like gave the announcements and one of the things he was like, they're doing a parish. They're doing like, uh, what do you call it? Like a, like a talent show for everybody. He's just announcing this to the whole like 300 people and Brian goes, he goes there every week. They go, so if anyone's got a skill, if anyone's a juggler, anyone's a comedian, come and do that for the talent show for everybody. And he, he gave no impression that he would be doing it. But I love you fucking spoon fast, Japs. I know he would be terrified and upset if he had brought that. He's the sweetest man. And right. I don't want to give that away. People don't know. He's a jazz. He's a lovely man. He's a great guy in real life. He always was always was like I've known him forever. So we were we so he's what I would say is like an undiscovered genius because he was just fucking killing it. But never one on the road. He only worked the store. I rarely saw him even at like the laugh actor, the improv. I don't, I don't know if I could ever recall seeing him at those places. But he had to consciously make the decision not to go on the ride. Well, it's hard because it's not offered to you. You know, it's like, how do you do it? If you just do all your sets at the store, you kind of have to have someone take you with them. Right. So what I, what happened with me is I mostly did the road around New York and Connecticut. So when I moved to New York and I guess a 91 ish. Yeah, so probably 91 ish. And so when I moved there, the real money like to be able to pay bills was in the road. It was not in New York City. New York City did not pay pay very well. You can get a lot of spots. But also I was really new. So maybe I couldn't have got a lot of spots. But I could get a lot of spots doing gigs for like John Schuler. He had a whole Connecticut run that you could do. There were great gigs. They paid like 300 bucks a night. Or you could do Gonzo at a bunch of New Jersey and those paid really well. Did this collapse at some point? No, I'm still probably some sort of a network of road shows. There's a, Louis has a story on someone's podcast about like crashing his motorcycle and then like a bubble burst. I don't know if he was speaking a bubble burst. He was like comedy all of a sudden, clubs started the clubs. Well, there's been ups and downs with that. There was, I came in to comedy in 88 and apparently in 84 in Boston, it was even better. Yeah. Like there was like a peak and oh my really? Because I came in it was amazing. There was clubs everywhere like nah, he missed it. So there's always been this like up and down of clubs closing club. But like New York is on the rise right now. There's a bunch of clubs that have opened up in New York. New York's comedy right now is fucking doing great. I hope, yeah, I hope I can figure it out. What do you mean? Well, I was in, uh, last time I was in LA, the spirit was so I was never in LA for it being great. But I've heard all the stories about everyone's, what's the car at that back of that thing? And that's this gig and that gig. And then I was, everybody like has no sense that it's ever going to work for them. Like no one's even bothered to, it's like three podcasts to know right now that people don't know. I don't want to talk it down. But like here, everybody is so hopeful in Austin. And I can look at like, Peyton made it. Like last night, I'm looking at that green room of like all of these people have money in a touring and they came here and they got to do it. Like and the hope and the adventure and when I was in LA, everyone was just, you might have picked a bad night. But it's also like the comedy store has always been that's like it's getting better. Yeah, it is getting better. Well, it's definitely getting better because Rose is running it. Yeah, she's awesome. But I think the comedy store has always been a top down vibe. And if there was a bunch of like big name national acts that were really cool and fun to hang out with, then was a great vibe. And when they're gone, it always felt empty. It always felt weird. This is how it was with me in the 90s when I was there. And I think that's how it is now. We're all out here now. Yeah. You know, and it's like, and then people kind of feel abandoned so they feel sad. You know, and then they get a little mad at you. Look, I think it's like me doing a hostage. And so it develops a stupid rift, which is the dumbest thing ever. We're all in the same team. And also you can work here too. Like it's so dumb. Yeah. Like, but the rift is a real thing. But it's like you have to be around a bunch of people that are having a good time to have a good time. You can't be the only person having a good time. And the rift can be good. The rift can motivate people to have you seen in Lameez or should we? No, what's he doing? He's gone hot on New York people and saying fuck all of them in Austin's number. He's trying to, he's doing the same thing they were doing to him. Absolutely. I think New York is fucking. I think he gets very uncomfortable. You're uncomfortable. There's so many great comics, Norman and Soder and fucking Andrew Schultz and David tells the best live. I don't know. Anyone great. I don't see how you could have kids. Gaffigan raised all his kids there and he's super clean. Yeah. And he's super clean. Catholic guy. Yeah. I don't know how he's got some money. First of all, he's got some money. Money has got to help send him to a nice place to go to school where they're not going to get eaten. I think the trans thing is done in the schools. Yeah, it's dropped off significantly. I had really, because we were homeschooling. And I was just aware because my dad's a teacher and he would, he would say, I don't want to get him in trouble, but he would report. He would report that the numbers were developing. And I think there's a social phenomenon. It seems to have like, now everyone just says they have an anxiety disorder. Well, um, you know what it dropped off? Like noticeably when Elon bought Twitter, would you stop pumping the content? Well, all of a sudden you could say whatever you wanted. Yeah. And so you could make fun of it now. And then people realize, oh, this is a completely falsely propped up narrative. Well, so I mean, do you smoke some girls? I quit all nicotine. You have, you have alcohol. I have a drink. Get you some alcohol. All right. If I could have a whiskey, I quit all nicotine. What happened? I just have an hot palpitations. I was doing it a lot. I had a problem. I cannot do a little bit. I see you'll just like you'll be backstand. You'll have one cigarette and you're fine. Yeah. I can't. And I never smoke outside of right before a show. I don't, I mean, I, but I'm a little paloutte. Yeah, I can't do that. I know how to shut things off. And I also regulate like like, uh, I realize like when I, when I have an issue, like the nicotine pouches, I can just stop them. I've gone on vacation and just not take them and I'm fine. I think, but I think it's my biology. It's almost time for spring break. So maybe you're headed to the beach or maybe you're taking the kids on a road trip or maybe you're just taking some extra time for yourself. No matter what, you deserve a break and a reset and AG one can help. AG one is your daily health drink. Just one scoop combines your multivitamin, pre and probiotics, superfoods and antioxidants to help support a healthy immune system and digestion. Plus it travels really well. So you can start working it into your routine even when you don't have just slip a few travel packs into your luggage and have a nice flight. I've talked about AG one for a long time. And it's not just me. I know a lot of people enjoy it. It's very easy. It's very convenient and you deserve to take care of your health. Visit drink AG one dot com slash Joe Rogan. And for a limited time, get a bottle of omega three vitamin D three K two. And an AG one flavor sampler for free in your welcome kit with your first subscription. That's in $111 value at drink AG one dot com slash Joe Rogan. I was quitting going back when I went back to Australia and I came off nicotine at the same time. I think that was the closest to serious unpleasant. Really? I think I have to go through it. But man, there was a lot of shouting at the family. What the fuck it down. I was not a half. How long did it last? It was from month. I was a real bad. Wow. Real bad. That's crazy. For me, um, I don't know what it is, man. I just, I could just put it alone, leave it alone and I'm fine. And now I monitored myself. Like I went on vacation for like eight days with the family. And I said, I had no nicotine pouches. Let's see what happens. You were fine. See if I was crazy. Yeah. I was waiting. Nothing. Nothing. Nothing. Was it you with the pouches? Was the pouches? I loved the patches. And also, I mean, I got on the patches to get off the cigarettes and then I had to go on the cigarettes to get off the patches. Then I was having cigarettes and patches and the gun. And my heart would start to go and my mood would like way up and way down. But it was like a lot See, I get addicted to things. Yeah. Like doing things. Um, like real bad. Like, uh, you can use to get addicted archery. Sure. But the thing about archery is you can only do it so much. Archery is good because it's, you know, my bow is 80 pounds to pull back. Yeah. And so if I'm pulling it back and I have another one, it's 90. And so when I'm pulling it back 80 pounds, you can only do that so many times. You know, I could do that maybe a hundred times in a day and my fucking shoulders blown out. If you're hunting, done. I mean, you're not shooting very often, but you wouldn't be able to get so tired that if you know, no, no, no, when you're hunting, first of all, you're jacked up with adrenaline. Like, like you could pull a branch off a fucking tree. You're, you're so jacked up with adrenaline. You're just trying to stay calm. Like when you're about to pull you about, the bow comp pulls back effortlessly. It's like, it's like, you don't even notice that it's, it pulls back so easy. You're so ramped up. You're not even thinking. How often you do in that? Bow hunting? Yeah. Seriously, only a couple times a year because I'm elk hunting, you know, and if I get an elk. Yes. Okay. It's September, September and October, those are the time. But in Texas, we hump pigs sometimes. We have a lease out here. So we'll go and hunt with a few of my friends from Archery country, shout out to Tyler and my friend Evan from Black Rifle Coffee. We'll go out to Oh, they're everywhere. Okay. They're infested wild pigs are all over Texas. Thank you. There's millions of them. Like literally millions of them. Like one time they opened up a highway, like they've built this new highway and the day it opened up, they had like this fucking ridiculous amount of excellence because people were hitting wild pigs because there were so many wild pigs out there that they're just crashing into them on the road. But this new highway. Yeah, because the pigs had never seen cars before on this spot because they hadn't finished the road yet. And then all of a sudden there's cars everywhere. These wild pigs are just getting fucking with today. Where did they get because in Australia when they have a kangaroo problem and it's something she's got place. Thank you. God bless. They um, they getling gum them from the sky. If you say do that here, they do that here at a helicopter. You could do it if you want while you're in town. I'll set it up. You know, I would feel I would feel guilty. Yeah, that would be not a sporting way to start hunting would be the machine. Yeah, because it's a necessity hunting. Right. Um, I want to eat what I kill. If I kill something, I want to eat it. Yeah. And the thing about these wild pigs is they're gunning down 20, 30, 40 of them in a day. They're doing them out of helicopters with machine guns. There's a bunch of companies that do it. There's there's a video of Ted Nugent and this guy named Pigman. Pigman is like a famous bow hunter that lives in Texas. And they're called a pork ellipse now and they're in a helicopter. Ted Nugent and Pigman in a helicopter and they gun down like 240 pigs and a half hour pod. Uh, not podcast hunting show. It's gonna be a great podcast. He's gone. He's gone. Yeah. He's a pig killing. The same as Brian. He's named Brian. Sure. It's pig man. Just kills a lot of wild pigs. And but it's a necessity. Oh, yeah. Look at this but you have to understand how many pigs they have out here and the kind of damage that's pig man. And the kind of damage that these pigs do to agriculture, you know, they they go through fences and they fuck up livestock, gets out. And there's a lot of shit with God. Yeah. Oh, it's crazy. Is this the argument for bringing wolves back in? No, do not bring wolves. No, I'm against it. But I don't understand the what is the most pro is there one sensible argument for bringing back in. I picked predators to well, there's arguments for it. You could make an argument for it. The problem is you do not understand. No one understands what the ultimate result is going to be of introducing predators. There is a very strong reason why they're eradicated wolves from the West Coast. Yeah. And from the United States because they fucking kill everything. They're super smart. Apex predators. They work in packs unlike any other animal. They're very different. And they kill everything and you can't do shit about them and they kill people. Also like the in the UK, they got rid of them hundreds of years ago. Yeah, it was like they celebrated it. They got rid of them in America too. Yeah. I mean, and now these fucking greenies, these softies that really don't understand nature want to bring them back. So there's a good argument in some ways that having some predators would help. But the predators were slowly moving their way back into these areas anyway. So they never eradicated them from Canada. So they would come down from Canada and make their way into Minnesota, make their way into Iowa, make their way into not Iowa. Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, they had like a small amount of wolves were kind of making their then they reintroduced a bunch of them into Montana in the 1990s. It's a Yellowstone that changed everything. That changed everything. It dropped the elk population by down to like 40% of what it used to be, which many people argue is actually a good thing because there was no predators in terms of like like there's mountain lions, but mountain lions don't kill that many elk. They'll kill Sean like a week. Like family's got a Yellowstone. Yeah. So now they just wolves. Yeah, but the wolves are not fucking with the people. Yellowstone, they really are just concentrating on the animals and they've like really knocked down the elk population substantially. But now they have an open hunting season on wolves in Montana because the numbers got a lot higher than they should be. Right. So now like I know guys who hunt wolves and they go on wolf. It's very difficult. It sounds more dangerous No, it's not that pleasant than hunting elk. Well, it is dangerous that it is a predator. And if you do get surrounded by them, they decide to eat you and you're out of bullets. You could be fucked. But for the most part, they're very difficult to hunt. They're very difficult to find. They're also very difficult to get in range. They're fucking clever. They're clever. And once they realize they're being hunted and they want once they realize that people are a problem, they fucking steer way clearer. Like what's the ideological reason for wanting them back just that it's good to be in a country. I love it. You could focus on the beans. Well, they have us. There's people that don't like hunting and for people that don't like hunting, they want nature to balance itself out. So the people that don't like the idea of humans killing and eating animals, they don't like them going out into the wild and killing wild animals. So they want something else to kill those wild animals. So then they bring in mountain lions or then they bring in wolves. And then they think that nature's going to sort itself out. It's a dumb thing. Why is it okay for them to this is the vegetarian argument that I never understand is that death occurs in nature, animals are eating other animals. So are we if it's wrong to kill any animals, should we intervene? Should we kill them out? I thought some of them from killing the fox was one of my favorite bits that you ever did. Oh, vegan cat. Is it not fox? No, it's not. And it's very sick. When it literally is a true story, like this lady was saying mean things to me on Twitter or Instagram. And I saw one of the things on her page on which their pages had hashtag vegan cat. And I was like, no. And so then I clicked on it. It's all cats that look like they've been stuck in animals with a gasoline. Right. Maybe they got me started searching vegan animals because vegan fox, I definitely read a lot of that after that. Yeah, there's people that have vegan dogs, they feed their dogs. But you're basically, you can kind of get away with it a little bit with a dog, but cats are what's called obligate predators. They only are a blight. Obligated to prey? Yeah, they only eat meat. That's all they eat. And if you get away with it a little bit with a dog, but cats are what's called obligate predators. They only are a blight. Obligated to prey? Yeah, they only eat meat. That's all they eat. That's it. They're just predators. They're full on murderous machines. Like house cats are some of the most murderous creatures on Earth. They kill billions of animals. Yeah, as soon as you die. As soon as you die. Yeah, right. Because dogs will give you... A knife in a week? A knife in a week? Dogs give you a good... Just a little hint, Scott. But cats are not starving. They are. If they're starving to death, they're instant to get in an eat tube. But cats just start eating you. They're like, oh, look, eyeballs. Well, yet to get an animal. You have dogs. You have one dog, two dogs. Two dogs. And you don't run the Instagram pages for these animals? Someone's run a dog family, though. Oh, family does. It's really? Yeah. So we got a little guy named Charlie. Yeah. He is a king Charles, king Charles Cavalier, spaniel. Yeah. He's the furthest animal away from wolf that is possible. Like, because they all came from wolves. He's the furthest from wolf. He has no... He's this big, he's adorable. He feels like we're in the big league in the stockings and holding him. I was not a king Charles. I just give him kisses. He's just sweetie, though. I hear his butt. That's what they look like. Yeah. That's what they look like. I mean, come on, look at that face. They're just so sweet. They're so happy to be around you and they're just so loving. And they... Like, he makes sounds like a person. Like he was doing something. Like he was licking all this water that was coming off of a drain. And I go, hey, stop doing that. And I picked it up. He went, ah. He makes not like that dog. But they don't make me feel sad. They're a little dog who look interesting. Oh, that's it. That's Charlie. That's him. Yeah, that's Charlie. That's Charlie. That's Charlie. Yeah, that's Charlie. That's Charlie. Yeah, that's Charlie. That's Charlie. That's Charlie. That's Charlie. That's Charlie. No, no, I know what you mean. I know what you mean. Like a dog and retriever is great. Yeah, I have one of those too. Yeah, yeah. It's my favorite. Those two dogs are great. This is not like a pug. They're very active. They're really... They're very... It's like a water dog. It's a fucking dog that's just like a house dog. They're just like a little love machine. Just a little pet. He's a sweet, sweet little guy. Like he's the best. He's so nice. He's like so... And he just relentlessly tortures my dog, Marshall. He's a big dog. Yeah, who's the most tolerant dog on earth. He just lays there in the dog. The puppy's like, ah, like biting him and biting his ear. He's a year old. Okay. So we've had him for whatever, eight months I guess. Like how many months they give him to you? Three months old. Something like that. How old are puppies when you get him? She should be, I think, eight weeks old, I think. Yeah. So we probably have 10 months. He's fucking adorable. You cannot travel with a dog. You have to get him all kinds of shots. Not a try. Yeah, he got a big trouble for that, right? I think that was the beginning of the end of that marriage. I think it was from the moment he said that we're happy to get married. They were happy until that dog problem. But the guy who... There's a politician who stopped Johnny Depp who was like, he came out and said, we're going to destroy his dogs and then everyone made fun of him in America. But that guy is now doing... He's like being in the popular emergent populist right in Australia over the last six months. And he got... He wanted to kill Johnny Depp's dogs. Yeah, he's a great spooky. He was like, I don't care if you are. People magazine's 60est man of the year. Get your dogs out. Why? He was a big deal. We have no rabies. We have... We're very precious about the border. That's all we've got. He's not just buying to be Joyce. He is sick. Demand the dogs leave the country within 48 to 50 hours or you put down, citing strict quarantine laws designed to protect diseases like rabies. But here's the thing. Just test them. How much does it cost to test the dog? Can I rabies? It's probably pretty quick. We're going to be Joyce drunk. So this is not long after that. And this is with the... Yeah, pistol and boot. Go buy and be Joyce drunk. They caught him on the streets of Al Lake of Canberra, which is where the capital is. And he was just passed out in the street. He's like... There he is. You haven't bought him. The bottom one? Yeah. The bottom one. Yeah. But he's just lying on the street. Well, was it? It wasn't that long ago. Joyce... The man was in the government. Good. What's wrong? It's the same place to live. I was walking back to my accommodations after Parliament rose at 10pm. Oh, that's all he was doing. Just walking back to his accommodations. I do like him a lot. Look, he's just taking a nap. He's just chilling. We have a strong chance. We have a strong walk. Yeah, man. Give the guy a break. It's kicking up with finally. We were the last country to have like a right wing populist thing happen. You guys have the Trump and then England is having it happen with like in a big way. It's really starting to swing there. So it's swinging right now and it's starting to starting up. Yeah. And what's causing that? Terrorist attack was not good. And then also running out of petrol really has upset people. We don't have... We don't make our own gas. We had two refineries. One of them accidentally blew up a week ago. Do you think it accidentally blew up? I have no comment to make. I wouldn't think so. No, I think probably someone seems like real bad luck. Seems like it. I mean, they would have been doing it like max capacity. Maybe they did it past when it was safe, but it's not. I thought I wasn't going to make it out of the country. Because you're out of gas. Light started to get cancelled. Yeah. So I made it. We'll see if I can get back and if not... Oh, I can't. Well, I'll just stand up for another couple months. I'll set it back. I'm sorry, honey. Just we've got a last bite. There's no choice. I'm not going to get any work here. But I'm not going to get any work here. It is so nice getting the door. It's so nice having a club that no, it's like there's four cities in the world where you can do it. I think about this a lot. There's nowhere like in America, there's three and there'd be London. That's it. That's it. That's it. That there's like multiple rooms with line-up shows every night of the week. Right. So people can just go and run 10, 15 minutes. Yeah. And like at a good room with people. And get paid. And get paid. Yeah. I mean, you need all of those factors to be able to do it. And you also need other kind of things around you. Yes. One of the things that we were talking about last night in the green room, like me and Ari, Ari, Spheres in town. And we were saying you can't be like the best comic in the world and just live in a small town in Cincinnati. It's like it doesn't exist by yourself. Doesn't exist. Comedy doesn't exist right in a little town in Arizona. And the pressure seems to have driven that comedy club on right over the edge. Oh, yeah. Stand-Hopes boy. That guy was crazy already. I didn't know a thing about it. I just said I could get this speech. Well, if he's hanging with stand-up, you know, stand-Hopes has to collect some people that are off of French. I'm not blaming that. But that's a different scene, right? Like, stand-Hopes, you know, was just kind of being out there by himself. And it didn't even have a comedy club for the longest time while he lived there. It wasn't like there was a whole comedy scene there in Bizby. He was like, 20,000 people? It's very small. Yeah. He knows everybody, right? But the awesome thing was very different. Like, we were stuck here. There was not a lot of options. We could have gone to Houston, could have gone to Dallas, maybe Nashville. No, maybe Florida. There was no place else so that we would allow to do comedy. Nashville is, would be the next one. Yeah. Actually trying. Nashville's got zany's, which is awesome. That's a great club. They have big, they got fear there. They're going right there. Nate and Theo both lived there. But I don't know how many sets they're doing in town. You know, Nate is doing fucking stadiums. He's doing his giant places all over the world. And Theo is killing it and he's got one of the best podcasts in the world. But there are definitely, there are like Nashville comics who are coming out. I see you in the place who are doing really well. Sure. I'm sure there's a smaller scene. But in terms of like a lot of work, Austin's the spot right now because there's seven clubs on our street. Hold on. That's nuts. Within a block radius, you've got Creek in the cave, which is over on seventh. You've got Sunset, which is right next to us. You got Black Rabbit. You've got the Velveater room. Yes. I'm going to count Shakespeare's next door. Yeah. Oh, that they do comedy. But then if you like to have the little Vater room, I play it's been around forever. It's been around forever and is the gay cabaret next door. I think it's expressed the gay. I just call it a gay girl. You like going in there? I went there one evening. I was having a full mental breakdown. I don't know why. Just a classic, you know, out of nowhere. You know, the kids, it's a lot of pressure. Maybe the act wasn't working. Maybe I've been on the road. I don't know. And I was down. I was depressed. I wandered into them doing there. The Estes Follies shot. I just sat up the back and I had a pinkey collider. And they were all like, there was a magician. There was a very camp magician. Then they're singing like, campy show tunes about the Supreme Court or something. Like they're still doing SNL style sketches. And it was like, you know, it was dumb. It was hokey, but it made me so happy. Just to like have people having a good time. And as of Dazzle, smiling. There was no bitterness. Happiness. Yeah. And it made me want to fix my act so that I wasn't. Like sometimes I feel like get up there and I'm just like screaming and I look unpleasant. And these people like, you know, people are shy. Yes. I don't think you look unpleasant. You're just very self-conscious. No. Sometimes I did the Creek and the Cave last night and I did a lot of screaming into the video best. Oh, it's like. Yeah. Another great club. Pucking great. Great spot. Creek and the Cave is a great club. It's a fun place when it's packed. It's rocking. And you know, there's a lot of good comedy coming out of that. I mean, that's a shame because I'm the special. New York is on the up again. New York is finally. Yeah. Everybody that I talk to all my friends from New York, all say that there's a lot of clubs opening. There's a lot going on. It's it's it's hopping. Didn't they just open up a was it an improv in Brooklyn? Did they open up an improv in Brooklyn? I know this top secret comedy is just like a London club. It's just moved there. Interesting. I don't know how it's going, but they're doing like a free model. They're trying to do they were trying to do a UCB in Austin. I don't know if that's still happening. The problem with UCB is UCB and LA didn't pay at all. Is this improv? No. I probably didn't. They have some improv, but they do just that was an issue. I didn't know. They just stand up. Okay. Yeah, but they don't pay you. They don't pay. No, which is crazy. There was a history of that at this store. Sure. There was like this big protest. What does he say? improv Brooklyn. There you go. Yeah. Yeah. Joey said he was going there. It's a completely new place. All right. I don't know if he's completely correct. But this is what I'm saying. It's like it's popping. Some is coming back. Some improv is a black and some are not. Like some improv's around the country are like just black lines. If I look at the line. What are you saying here? I'm not saying here, but like in the racist foreigner in Cleveland, the United States. The improv is just a black club. I've done the improv in Cleveland, I think. It's a black club. Really? No, I like playing black clubs. So it's Cleveland. That's why it's close to Kentucky, right? Am I getting this right? Maybe it's Pittsburgh. No, Pittsburgh's not, but I've been in that place. No, I've done that one as well. I'm coming. Pittsburgh's great to do it up there as well. Well, hilarities was the non-racial. Go back to that website real quick. Look at all the different ones. Wow. There's a ton of them. Is one of those fake cleat, maybe it's shut down? So the other, there's a club in Cleveland. There is a club in Cleveland that I went to way back in the day. But it's really, you land in Kentucky and then you drive to Cleveland. What? Yeah. No, Cincinnati. Is it Cincinnati? Yeah, that makes me say that. That's it. You're right. You drive out. Ohio is more built. Sorry, Ohio. Sorry, I'll be credit before. Three huge cities. They got that chili that everybody has. Great. Columbus. Cincinnati has the most beautiful skyline. You have to do the funny bone, Columbus? Yes. Walking great club. The balcony. Oh, it was very nice. Is that a balcony? I'm pretty. Yes. Yeah, Columbus funny one. Are you going to try it? This is definitely changes since you've been there last. It's a new one? No, no, no. Oh, they just have a balcony. Just renovated the whole room. Oh, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, whatever the allowed seats is killing it, everywhere that has a balcony is my favourite. Well, watch. I'm a police. It's a club that gets good accent every weekend. Yeah. No problem. Come on, come on. What's that? They love donating to any griffon at the Cleveland improv. Come on, may be a closed. This was 2020, six years ago? I don't know. It's like what I typed in Cleveland. So who is that? Lewinells there? And Tony Baker was there. Well, what's up, what's up, though? I would not be besmirched for making a very genuine observation about how How black the Cleveland improv was. That's hilarious. Cause I tried to get on. I was trying to do black rooms when I got to open for finesse. Mitchell, that was the first black room I got to play. Nice. I've slowed down. There's not heaps of black rooms in Austin. I should go over the Houston sometimes. Yeah, where are the black rooms in Austin? I think the mothership. There probably right. Probably right. And I'm upset to ship. Yeah. I still think chocolate sundaes could work at the mothership. I can't run it. You could. That would be fun. I feel like just how shows. I think themes are retarded. They try to do an Italian theme at the economy store for a while. Like a night of a thousand Guidos. I think they're called it. And I did it. And I was like, what am I doing? I'm on this show with all these other Italians just because they're Italian. There is something different about a black audience. Yeah, that's a different skill set. I found. It's a different skill set. And they won't tolerate nonsense. They won't tolerate all this like what else? What else? No, no, no, no, no, no. They're not here for that. I think it's good. You can't even make fun of gay. You can't mention gay stuff at all. Really? Oh, man. I had a trans bit. Just people were not happy to hear. Oh, why are you doing about that? Now you bring that up. We're out here to have a nice night. It was like on a dime, it turned really. Yeah. And then people told me afterwards, that I don't want to hear about that. I don't want to hear that word from you. Really? Interesting. It was fun if I felt very alive when it was going well. And also black people giving you a compliment. Just an Aussie boy coming off stage. I'm going to black. You got to go stage presents. It's like, oh, fuck. Thank you so much. That's awesome. I am. Yeah, black people were. That was very eye opening when I came to America. You don't have a lot of that in Australia. We have Africans. And we have Aboriginal people. But we have no. If you were a cool coat in Australia, no one will tell you about it. There will be no one to say. Yeah, there's a very big difference between African Americans and black people worldwide. Like African Americans are responsible for so much of the culture, music, comedy. There's like so much of an impact that African Americans have had on the world. Think about just hip hop music. Yeah. So hip hop music doesn't even exist until I was in middle school. Like light 70s? Yeah. So I was in middle school. I went to high school in 81. And when was sugar hill gangs hip hop, a hippity to the hippity hip hop? What was that song called? Rapper's Delight. So that song came out when I was, I think I was 13. I think I was 13. I think I was in the middle. 1979 is when it came here. They formed. That makes sense. So when I was in bought, when we first moved to Boston, my family didn't have much money. We lived in a place called Jamaica Plain. And it's since been kind of gentrified. But back then it was not. It was the first time I'd ever been around scary kids. Like violent delinquent kids who had all had sex. I had that sex. All these kids are like, you don't even know where Pussy is doing it. Mike, it's down there. Like you probably think you go right into it, right? You got to go up. I'm like, OK. I don't fucking know. I never kissed a girl. So what the fuck are you guys talking about? But they were like, light and fires, doing crazy shit. Like they were doing like, twins, stealing things. That was a thing in entering. Yeah. And so I went to this high school, or middle school, rather. And this middle school was in a poor neighborhood. And I remember there was a kid that was in my class. I was 13. He was 17 years old. And he kept failing. He kept failing and coming back and coming back for like a couple weeks or two in the new quit. And I remember seeing him at the beginning of the school year. And I'm going, I can't believe he's 17. And he's in class with me. This is nuts. And then I was filled with this sense of dread for him for his future. Like this fucking guy's never going to graduate middle school. So he's never going to go to high school. He's fucking 17. Like will he even allow you to go to high school for 21? Like what year do they say, you can't come here anymore. You failed nine years in a row. Something was that kind of kid. Was that kind of kids? And there was like kids making out in class. I remember this Puerto Rican girls. She asked a question to the teacher. She said, if I'm making out with a guy and I'm, and he's breathing into my mouth and I'm breathing into his, can we stay alive like that? And you, I know, no, no, it's carbon dioxide. I never forgot that question. Can we need fresh ice like that? It was the craziest question. She was like, can we breathe each other's air and not open our mouths? And I was like, what are you doing? You fucking dirty freak. So a lot of girls dropped out like while it was there. because they got pregnant. Sure. It was dangerous. Why were you before then though? You in a little, you're in a middle class place before then. Yeah, I was in Florida. I was in Gainesville, Florida, which was like way safer. It was, it was pretty cool. You might have moved around more than anyone I know. I moved around a lot. So I lived in New Jersey until I was seven and then lived in San Francisco from seven to 11 and then lived in Florida from 11 to 13 and then Boston from 13 to 24. Because you're now, your kids growing up in their in LA and then they're here. Do you think, I worry about my kids because I don't think they've ever been in the same house for more than one year. Like I have a seven year old daughter. She's been in seven houses now. Ah, because we've had to move a lot and I wonder what impact that is making. Well, as long as they're young, I honestly think it has a positive effect. Okay. This is my take on what it did for me. I was forced to form my own opinions instead of adopting the opinions of a group of people that were around me because I'd never had a consistent group of people that were around me. Yeah. I met a bunch of new people everywhere I went and I had new friends everywhere I went and completely new environments everywhere I went. So I went from San Francisco in the 1970s right into Florida and Florida was so backwards in terms of their mentality and comparison to San Francisco San Francisco. We lived in Hippieville. It was all like anti war people and San Francisco in the 1970s. And so then I moved to Florida and was like, I had this friend, his name was candy. His last name was Candido. Everybody called him candy and his dad was like this really angry Cuban guy. And I remember him slamming a newspaper on the table and he was like, these fags want to marry. This is crazy. They're going to let faggots marry each other. And I remember thinking like, what do you care? Because I lived in San Francisco or surrounded by gay people. Our neighbors were gay. My aunt used to smoke pot with them and they'd all get naked and play bongo drums. Because like she felt comfortable being naked around these guys who had their own business. They should run it in now. I would say I have an insane San Francisco. But that's not it's not the gaze that caused San Francisco to go down the way it is. It's this crazy progressive politics without people to camp on the streets. I just went to a diner and I saw a man who was wearing assless chaps and sitting on that upset me. Apparently if you're gay it would be a good spot. The public nudity is you have to cover the urethra. But if you cover the urethra everything else is fine. Also you just like put a piece of tape over the hole. You put a little of the eye over the jackpot. Maybe you kind of call it them. You can. You just do. No, but that's so that would have helped you become more because you have to like a weirdly independent mentality. That's why. So that I think going to a bunch of different places and seeing that oh, people think completely differently over here than they think over here. This is weird. You know, I remember when I lived in Florida I had to ask my mother what the N word met because I heard it at school and she got upset with me. She was you know what it means. I go I don't. I don't what it means. And she's like it's a bad word for black people outside. Whoa, really? Like it made no sense to me. The formative years I think were really important and I think seven to 11 in San Francisco was really important for me because in a way, at least for me, it was very much a utopian city. It was like very open minded. It was very peaceful. There was very little crime. It was beautiful. It was beautiful. It was gorgeous. It was gorgeous. We I go fishing. I had this got there was like this community center and this guy named Cliff would take us fishing. It was really cool. Like there was a lot of like good things about San Francisco back then. And there was a lot of artists and it was a lot of like it was a cool vibe. You know, it was a very open minded vibe that was a lot of it was centered around the anti war movement and peace. You know, there was a lot it was like it was a different kind of and they were sort of just like just getting over the psychedelic wave of the 1960s. Right. So this is like there's still in that mode. It was still like an artist driven. Yeah. A lot of open pot smoking. It was a lot of like it just hippies. And but but in the best way, it wasn't camping on the streets. It wasn't there was no fentanyl back then. There was no and there's no homelessness. Like homelessness was super, super rare. Yeah. Like in the 1970s, like when I was a kid, I never saw it. People camped out in the street. You never saw any of that. You occasionally saw a bum and it was usually some poor fuck who's like a drunk guy. Right. It lost his way. Crazy or on the waterfront whenever there is a like a depiction of like whenever they're doing vagrants in the 50s and 60s. It's like a drunk guy. Yeah. Like in Rambo, he just wants a sandwich and they chase him out of town. Right. And then you know, it's Trump. But now there's like they're everywhere. It's like Kung Fu skeletons moving around the. Like full of drug. Like what is the end point of that? No one's running on that. I remember Trump talked about a little bit the need to have the silums again because they closed the asylum. Yes. I mean, there are more therapists now than there ever were before, but they're helping like corporate people. They're not helping schizophrenia with that at home. Like at some point, you saw Trump bring the army in to places like Portland, whether the National Guard to clear it out. And I think people were quietly kind of pleased that that was happening. There was people pushed back. Is that why they cleared it out? There was a homeless situation. I think it was the homelessness that thought it was protests. No, I think that was, I think that in Washington as well, I think they came into Washington was a homeless people. It was crime as well. Yeah. Like Washington was like crazy with crime. And they were all kind of happy about it. The mother mayor of DC was happy. Yeah. That Trump brought in the National Guard. But this is not a nice, you can't lose the downtowns across America. You know how bad LA's gone, right? Yeah. Yeah. Do you know how big skid row is to you? I am. What do you mean, how many people? How many blocks? I have no idea. Take it. Two. 50. Well, that's too many blocks. Five zero. That's not a row anymore. Five zero just completely claimed by homeless zombies. No, how big of the blocks? Something about the way. Big is fun. I stayed away from it. It's huge. I went to the Hollywood Hills in Malibu and that nice time. Downtown is nuts. Downtown LA is the only downtown of any major city that sucks. The downtown New York is that's incredible. Right. Downtown San Francisco is fucked with homeless people. But it's still you got great. Great. Downtown LA is a ghost town. I said poor. Poor and it's so beautiful of a downtown, but then you will turn down the street. And it's 50 to 54. Oh, it's growing. Skid Row in Los Angeles officially known as Central City East covers approximately 50 to 54 blocks. 15,000. Yeah. They don't know how many people are there. There's just wild guesses in terms of what the populations of homeless people are. Even in terms of the population in the entire city, the high numbers over 100,000 in the city. It's crazy. Look how big it is. All that whole area is completely lost. I thought it was a row. I thought it was. It was. It was back in like the 1960s. I think it's a map or something they'd drawn on a picture. There I think it's been that way for a long time. Look at this proposed area of affordable housing. Affordable housing is just a joke. It's not what the problem is. They're all drug addicts. They're drug addicts and mentally ill. Yeah, but what do you do to that? Well, you can't let it get that bad. First of all, and if you do let it get that bad, you got to treat it like it's a catastrophic failure and throw as much resources as possible at it. But the problem is these people are incentivized to keep the problem going because that's how they make their living. Absolutely. But they don't have any motivation whatsoever to fix it. Yeah. Because if the homeless population drops down to like a very small number and then they don't need all these people that are making half a million dollars a year on the homeless commission, it's complete grifting. I don't have a problem. It's not my country. I don't have any big problem with Gavin. You know, I don't understand how LA has every story that comes out of California seems to be. Okay. So here it says between 1960 and 1975, 50% of the housing in Skid Row was demolished, reducing the total number of units from 15,000 to 7,500 and displacing thousands of poor residents with nowhere else to go to the street. While Skid Row was never a wealthy neighborhood, it's current status as the homeless capital of America is the result of decades of policy choices, which is simultaneously encouraged the destruction of existing affordable. See, this is by the way, this is a very progressive perspective. Yeah. The real perspective is that what they use Skid Row for was when they would find vagrants in Beverly Hills and vagrants in Hollywood, they would move them to Skid Row and then they would kind of contain them in that area. Yeah. Yeah. So in Kirkland, Johnson, Trump camp. Yeah. Homeless medical patients, all the other, see, this is a very progressive perspective, homeless medical patients. How about vagrants who are drug addicts? You can call them medical patients, like you're just being kind. This is just too charitable from the across the region. So they would dump them there and then they also had like food kitchens there and stuff like that. So they had an incentive to stay, but they kept them there. And so then it kept growing because the homeless problem keeps growing. But it's psychosis and drugs. That's the ultimate. Yes, drugs are the big one. And drugs are the drug use in Skid Row is probably 100%. It sounds like regular homeless people. I was in Portland and I saw, I was at walk into the train station through the downtown, which had no one told me not to do it. And I was all these very sad homeless people and then one guy with a big smile. He was so happy. I was frightened. No. Well, no, it's the first time I saw crack being smoked. Oh. There's a great smell. Smell kind of sweet. Yeah. Well, well, it smell like sweet, like a rotten apple. It's how it filled it at the time. I don't know if that was the cracker. I mean, he was smoking crack and I could smell that, but he was so happy. And I didn't want to take his crack away. You know, it's like, he's the only thing you've really got going for you today. Yeah, I think crackers. Obviously we should take it. Not good for you, but probably better for you than fentanyl. It's all. I think with crack, you're active. Crack makes you go do a bunch of stuff. This is weird seeing heroin people for the first time. Because then I like a threat. Australia is still a very meth country. Like, meth is a problem. A lot of like skinny shirtless men on the bus. Angry. Yeah. We had head teaching back. So we're still very messy, but meth doesn't seem to be as big here now. Oh, it's big. It's big in certain communities. Yeah. Meth is still big. It's like, you know, what you've got in the, I mean, the, the homeless situation in Skid Row wasn't always fentanyl in heroin. I mean, at one point in time, it was meth. You know, it's, it's a gang of different things. I'm sure there's people there that are doing. Do you just start killing, drag the, do you do it like in Singapore? You just have a zero tolerance policy. But I don't know long term what the answer is. Because I look, you could do it that way, but it would be very inhumane. And it would also set a precedent for how you treat a bunch of other situations. Yeah. That's not good. I think dangerous. The communists when they had an opium problem in China, they just put them in the military. That's like, give people a new sense of purpose. You've got a uniform now. We're going to blame someone else for the problem. This is Western imperialism to this to you. Yeah. And that seemed to help like that. I have a big opium problem in China anymore. Also, I don't know how official that is and how many people they did just kill because it's the communist government. I'm good this to you. Yeah, and that seemed to help like that. I never big opium problem in China anymore Also, I don't know how official that is and how many people they did just kill because it's the communist government. Yeah They're allowed to they lie. They might lie. They definitely lie. Although last time I was a couple months ago I was here and Kurt Metzka was telling me the Tiananmen Square was not all that bad. Yeah I didn't do enough didn't do enough digging From everything he says from a short Google search I can't agree with it, but I'm sure if I dug down I'd have more questions. I haven't seen him actually since I got back. Is he still here? Oh, yeah Yeah, I've seen every fucking mind. He's great. Most people still here. He's the best You know he but he you can't talk in spheracies with him because it will just change them Yeah, one after another after another and then three minutes in you forgot what you're even talking about because he's moved on to some scandal in the 1970s with call boys in Congress You spoke to him about Reagan. Yeah. Yeah. It was what is it called the Franklin There's tapes. The song was talking me about Franklin scandal Franklin scandal the song was bringing that up last night. He's reading a book on it I want to think that Reagan was a good guy. I always like it's Reagan. I think it's whoever's in his cabinet. I mean It was Well, he's daddy can't he was saying things about Reagan getting big. What who was saying that? Good was talking about that there was a tape somewhere of Reagan getting take I don't want to know these guys don't even think the Artemis flight went past the moon They did it current things. There's a secret space program and that this space program is bullshit There's a real space program and they're using this space program to obfuscate it just seems very complicated I might be saying it incorrectly. No, it was a lot of things It does a lot of things when I begin often it seems true a lot of it is true But also I don't I think the government is incompetent everywhere. Mm-hmm. And if they were able to get that one thing of You know Building a fake space program to conceal a true location It seems unlikely. Yeah, well, do you know them out how much money you'd have to have to run two space programs? One real one and one fake one. That's crazy. Just a real one cost so much. Well, that's you one was real. Yeah. Yeah That's coming everyone seems if some people are still not aware of it. I've had conversations with people Where they they don't want to admit it where they they can't believe it. Do you know NASA was run by Nazis? They're like what you tell me about Werner von Braun and They they want to like there's a lot of people that are like nats NASA fanboys And these NASA fanboys don't want to believe that NASA was run by literal Nazis. Yeah Yeah, I mean not necessarily like there were scientific Nazis. They were Nazis. Yeah, Werner von Braun He's to hang the slowest the five slowest Jews. I didn't know his Rocket factory Berlin the Simon Wiesenthal Center said that if he was alive today They would prosecute him for crimes against humanity. I mean you think that story got out when he was at NASA and everyone worked They hit it well. There was no freedom of information act releases. There was no internet when operation paperclip was first initiated They got I don't know what the number is of Nazi scientists, but it was more than a thousand. Yeah How many Nazi scientists put this into our wonderful ad sponsor propensity? Our AI sponsor gives me all my information how many Nazi scientists were brought over by the United States for operation paperclip It's I don't know that there's an efficient. This is what led me down my research like ten years ago Was this exact question right? But let's see what perplexity has to say I'm guessing I'm better. I'm gonna guess about 1500 also as I'm looking this up I will note that supposedly they were split up like evenly between the Soviets, right? That's true. Yeah, the Soviets took a bunch of them as well. I didn't know they did it up. Yeah. I read a book about it Long time ago. I just started getting into the Soviet space program. I think right. Oh, yeah Like the is it the Venus missions am I getting that right with a oh? Yeah, they got a thing on Venus and took pictures Yeah, I'm back But then it was so it was so hot that everything would like 1600 1600 Typically state that about 1600 German scientists engineers and technicians were brought to the United States under Operation paperclip So I was pretty close to real back though I was trying to dig through this article as you guys are talking about Nixon getting pegged or no Reagan The plot to out Reagan yeah, group of Republicans tried to stymie What they alleged was a nefarious homosexual network within the campaign of their own party standard bear This is what I mean he says something to sense Christ I'm trying to do it. She got the answer is but that during it It says like while he was trying to pick a vice president. There's somewhere in here I mean we had a pop come My vice president someone had a tape of an orgy. Oh, yes No Well didn't Reagan Reagan frequented Bohemian Grove. Isn't that correct? I believe he did everybody a lot of people did right, but Reagan did but you remember what Nixon said about being in growth Well, thank you twice Jack damn Frank here. She's not ever seen John's talking about it. Yes. Well, Alex Jones went. Yeah Alex Jones told me rent I Just homosexual act with Reagan. Okay. It was not until a boozy lunch with the man claiming to have been a long-time Reagan associate However, the best found what he believed to be the smoking gun proving that Reagan was controlled by homosexuals Bill you don't understand the problem the man told best I once engaged in a homosexual act with Reagan Is a different time. Yes, I'm this is these are all I up until now in the start of cold. These are rumors I don't know that this video ever came out, but there's Interest very long article about it and holitica. Yeah Interesting I was trying to find an answer and I didn't really get to this is a different time period in life too That I don't I was in the life where right Wow, I don't believe it. I do I love Reagan I do too. I love them too, but I think there's a lot of those guys that are like staunchly conservative and very buttoned down That are that way for reason and one of the reasons is they're trying to hide the fact that they're gay I never understand this though because we there are lots where I'm from yeah, it's that I like conservative Gotti definitely guys, but thin but like so like everybody knows everybody's aware But they don't want it coming out and they never acknowledge but like it just seems so Strange You would want to not have a secret if you're a politician because otherwise people just get you to do what they want But they have to see everybody they want to be politicians and they just deal with all the people that know their secrets and then they make deals But like like there's how do you stay in business? Even say there are people in the United States Congress and Senate who are conservative so we all go Yeah, that guy's gay 100% everybody know it so it's you know Try ask for the accuracy of this article and perplexity gave me a like summary I guess that makes More sense than trying to make sense of a 20 page article in two minutes. Mm-kay factual grounding resources one key factual bound scroll up a little bit on the no On the key factual backbone the article lines up with other publicly documented material Our kurchick refers repeatedly to memos and notes from the Washington Post editor Ben Bradley's papers include summaries by reporters Scott Armstrong and Ted Gup These papers are held in institutional archives and have been referenced in other discussions of secret city the 1967 homosexual ring allegations connected to Reagan Sacramento staff and Jack Kemp's Is independently attested in contemporary press accounts including reporting that Reagan security chief investigated alleged homosexual activity and that calmness drew Pearson raised these charges at the time Let's see here's the thing about gays ring there's always a certain amount of gay people in a population and then it's whether or not the culture accepts them Yes, there's always a certain percentage. There's yes people who are attracted to yeah No matter what you do. There's a certain percentage and so if you've got enough people in Congress and enough people in the Senate enough enough people just in government in general. Yeah, you're gonna have an equivalent percentage of people that are gay and If you are a person who wants to get to the top of the charts like here's the thing, you don't think of what is you think Hollywood is very Open right very non homophobic in fact celebrates diversity and celebrates LBGTQ people right? Yeah, I mean, but not so here's the thing one thing you can't be is an openly gay person and being a male lead in films I Mean that would make sense as to why people keep that claim I'm trying to give one you can't be you're an actor right that has your Changed you can pretend to be a werewolf. Yeah, but you can't pretend to be straight You can't pretend to be straight. Yeah, they won't allow you So if you're we have to pretend yeah, you have to pretend you're not gay because you can't act in a movie Where we know you're gay and you pretend to be straight we won't buy it whenever there is a movie where there is a gay person They get it obviously like like in milk Then I get a guy right right there. Oh, they get a straight guy to be guy one example. Yeah, but that's what he was never a movie leading man It's just one example. I know, but it's a TV guy, but then people make out of patience Also, it's like he's got a it's a cartoon character. Yeah, like that how I met your mother. That's a cartoon character Like like straight guy like you don't believe it at all like first of all, he's not Attractive like in that way. He's not masculine and the fact that he gets all these hot girls to show some none of it makes any sense You see gone. It's just writing. Yeah, I did he way he's playing though. That was great He was excellent. Yeah, yeah, I wish that man was eight times fucking awesome I really had help me work through a lot of trauma with women Bro, that movie was crazy, but the point is like you can't be an openly gay guy and be a movie star. Yes Because you won't think of a one on screen rather there's not one there's I know a bunch of closeted ones Yes, there's no openly gay Action movie star with it. What there's actually there's building them. There's none There's there's stars who's like ladies I would say played gay people. Oh guys play gay people, you know like What's this face James Bond English guy Daniel Craig then you're Daniel Craig lives out. Yeah. That's right Yeah, I was thinking milk yeah, he plays a gay guy in knives out But he's not like making out with anybody you just like lives with a guy. I never I never watched knives out because I was so angry at the second Star Wars movie I love this the same director like I was just and I love Looper I thought loop. It was yeah, I have a daughter to ever I'm fucking hate at that move. I was one of those guys. He was like which one was that was it called? Oh, man It was not force-awakens. It was the one that came after that. It was what years us I'm a love of the place You know, I think though that I didn't watch any of the new ones But don't you think though that when you were dealing if you're dealing with a star wars those franchise movies You're dealing with and in there's no way they just give you Cart-blanche. There's no way they just let you write a script let you produce it let you put it together Let you direct it the way you want they have insane amounts of it. No, this one was so stylistically strange That's such a departure. He was making a Rise of Skywalker is yeah, maybe it's that one. Yeah. Is that it? Is that the Nobody really give a shit about these new Star Wars movies Not anymore, but it was you know, it was exciting when George Lucas was doing it at least he was like we're gonna have a Jew alien and Korean aliens and it's about trade wars and he was like they did that Episode one oh man episode one is a nightmare if you go back on what you have a sode one Which one's episode one episode one is like little Anakin and the pod racing Judge out banks is like a hugely troubled He's just speaking in a patch while the whole time, but I mean it all has to end I think I think it's finally winding down like the Marvel Cinematic universe seems to be Coming to a quadrab. Maybe no Marvel's gotta come but Star Wars they woke up. Yeah, they fucked it up Yeah, they made it all like this stupid woke message. That was the woke one That was the one where it was like it was there were ladies who couldn't do anything wrong and all the men worse in the ladies generals in the men are all terrified of them Yeah, so save it. This is nonsense. It's only time time time These but these woke messages just destroy the actual film like I'm a weird talking about this the other day that a Feminist show that no one thinks of as a feminist show is how is game-thrones Why is she tending to a no it's completely feminine show the women women are all badasses. Yes Everyone in area stark badass Daenerys Targaryen badass. Yeah, Cersei Lannister badass uh The Breonna of Tarth badass Yeah, I mean almost kills the hound. Yeah, they're all women. Yeah, the women run everything their beasts Sansa Stark badass a lot of the men that unseen things coming that I don't know Is big It's got their heads chopped off. Yeah, they're retarded though the the women keep the fucking civilization together and they're the the most dominant forces in the show Yes, yeah, sometimes they're lying like that nasty prostitute who hurt that midget man Yeah, she but she was unfortunate in her choices. You said you think the model thing is gonna get it I think it's at some point. They're gonna ramp it back up. I have a new one that brought back the Russo brothers and the bringing in Doom dr. Dooms coming Isn't that more isn't Fucking Robert down a junior playing doom. Just what how does he do that? Wait until you see the movie man. No, no, no, no, no How is he fucking iron man and doom? Well, they both have iron no no guy I know Robert down a junior's great. You don't have to kill iron man bring iron man back don't you have a First can't you pull him back and put him into this current timeline? I'm looking forward to I don't just don't like when you have a whole Like universe and you have one guy playing two characters in the universe as much as I love Robert This is a shit out of me as a comic book fan. They've already had that though Chris Evans is fantastic for any Captain America Who's the impentosic for the first fantastic for? No, they've been like one year with that fantastic for three really there's so many fences. You're right I never even remembered they can never get that one working Who does he play that's sort of the joke in the spider-man movie? The multi-verse one because like they bring them all back in the same fucking movie and it's all confusing Yeah, they bring all the bad guys back Jamie Foxes in the new spider-man and like he was it does the old movie Do you think they'll be post woke at this point? That's I've got to watch movies for the first time on the plane of They're not what they're all they're fucking money that's time to have start to come back. Did you see Bagania? No It was good. I was stavey was in that and Emma was the guy who made the lobster But that was there were problems with it But it was like a pointedly like a post in the in the same van of like white lotus Okay, I think yeah Hollywood is trying to make self-consciously You've lost your work movies. I got really annoyed by it and I thought some of it was cheap, but like I liked what they were going for Yeah, it's fun I thought the ending was fun spoilers. I went on. I went on. I went on. I went on. I was cool nothing But I did I got to I would never have seen it if I wasn't on a flight watching 57 movies American fiction was like a post work movie They're like at the moment on Delta flights. They're always American fiction. American fiction is a book about a It's a black author who doesn't want to be considered a black author He just wants to be an author. He's sick of and then he keeps saying all these like terrible black books full of stereotypes That white liberals adore so he writes a fake book called my pathology And I think he later changes it to fuck he's just trying to like fuck with people go I'll just write the blackest dumbest book right so the white and then white liberals do love it And it was good it was like but it's like pointedly like mainstream and indie You know big studios are trying to make They're trying to find some continuity from being woke to now. Is this that's box office? This is a mainstream film that one is a little bit more independent. I went into pen and spirit award Okay, but Bagania wasn't What the other movie would it was it called again the one you were just talking about? Bagania no the other one. Oh, which one American fiction. Yeah, so American fiction is independent if that but you might I didn't know if it was independent I looked it up. It made like tens of millions of dollars. Yeah, but sometimes independent films that catch on make good money Not that they're a mason to make a limited theatrical release. Okay. So they had they put pattern with Amazon That's I know that's slightly I don't I don't know. I would count that as a big studio No, no, you started it by yourself You started by yourself and then you distribute it to Amazon But who paid for it? Who was the somebody probably financed to direct there was You see the onion guy? $10 million budget So the things that you want to do something right you kind of have to do it that way now Like make it yourself and then bring it as a fully completed project that way You don't have a bunch of people like the Star Wars guy like in your ear telling you what to do and how to direct it Can I record it a comedy special years ago for Australia? Yeah, and I thought I would just do it on my own and then I would sell it to the network how that go They said we like it. This is one of the most embarrassing fun calls overhead. They said that we like it. It's very white It's very male Yeah, it's me. It's just me and he they said can you go out and five? Like find five or six diverse Comedians and record their specials as well and then we could buy all six of them as I was like fuck it I'll put it on YouTube Like that was the real request was would you find find a find our Aboriginal fella find our lady in a wheelchair Finds some Chinese people and then you can have your one as well and we'll buy all six It was uh Yeah, that was probably the end of me thinking I could with You can't work with people that aren't creatives and that's what those people are There are a bunch of people that are caught up in whatever the cultural moment is Whatever they think like the winds of yeah, the winds of discontent blow the hardest Right, so the people that are gonna get the most upset are the wokies They're the ones that are gonna complain the most about a lack of diversity So to satisfy those people they'll torch their own art. They'll they'll fuck up the thing that they do best I mean you can work with totally non-creative people This was like uh There's a Frank zappa line about how it working in the music industry was great when it was just a guy in a suit And it didn't care and as soon as people had some ideas it was hard to make things right when someone would tell you what to do If it's a profit motive That's great. You can work with those people It's yeah, right, but there's no pure profit motive people anymore in terms of entertainment They're all thinking about the cultural Like tone and what you're supposed to and not supposed to do and what you're being on the right side of history now and Did you see the patrice pit where he talked about how he liked working with mid-level Jews? No, I like mid-level Jews I make them the money. They leave me alone That's Yeah, the people that get in your way they all think they're doing it for a good cause and we experienced that like stand open I were doing the man show on Comedy Central. There was a lot of that. What's there? Yeah, dude I don't even want to go into it, but there was whenever you're like Ari experienced it when he was a Comedy Central I know a lot of people that have experienced it at various networks where there's always some fucking executives that want to impose They're and it's always liberal. They want to impose their progressive values on comedy And it's like you can't fucking do that if you want it to be funny if you want it to be funny You have to it has to be in the language and in the mind like from the viewpoint of one person one person's unique Vittition one person's unique vision that they think is hilarious and As soon as you start monkeying with that as soon as you start adding stuff to that as soon as you start watering it down You're gonna kill it you compromise it it becomes a candidate for mediocrity. But how did they? What did they start on the man show they like get the girls off the trampolines? No, it was like one of the things was they Didn't want Joey Diaz coming out naked Okay, okay, so we we had an intro and I said this is what I want to do for the intro I want Joey Diaz to come out. He's gonna burst through the door naked with Tim Bellans on with a baseball hat on and just say Let's get this party started and start dancing. It was hilarious and they didn't want to do it so This is the scene I guess But you did get to put you down. Well, we we ought to do it two ways we didn't do it their way We did it their way first and then when their way was was done. We did it with Joey Everybody went fuck it They all went nuts. It was awesome But it's like they they so strongly resisted that that was the only way I wanted to do it and I said listen We'll do it your way first and then we'll do it our way meanwhile that version with Joey was what they used in all the promos Yeah, of course they use that when they were like no, this is the Adventure and then Joey comes up and it was cocked blurred out um But But you're just gonna get a bunch of people who also want to have their fingerprints on what you're doing Yeah, so they want to they want to somehow another change it even if it doesn't make sense They would what if your neighbor Is a black guy who grew up with a white family? I would if you're in it and then they want to like change it and then they have how do you do how you doing with the black guy who is the white family? I didn't even add that come on man. Yeah. Come on man. We got to play ball like these dipshits want to add their own little fucking Ingredients into the soup Well, this I mean it's never been cheaper to make your own thing. I would have to think never you could do it on a cell phone You could upload it to YouTube and AI is Incredible yeah, there's a use for it. I hope it doesn't I'm still uncomfortable about it. You're you're a board you've you're playing new music backstage I didn't I couldn't I didn't pick it. That was good right. It's all good. It's right. It's frightening. Yeah Like it's white rabbit. It's a this Jefferson airplane version of white rabbit. Yeah, but it's a this bluesy New version of it. That's all AI. It's fantastic. It's one way you can upload you just upload Your own music with someone else's music and I like it. That's all the mastering beautiful It's spooky. I mean, it's the end of it is the end At the end of something it's the beginning there are technical jobs that it just gone now like that's true. Yeah, but There's not a lot of Morse code operators either They should bring it back bring back the skin engine I'm we have coal-powered fucking locomotives. Listen The Amish you happy they got their buggies and they try having a conversation with them about space They don't know jack shit and have autism so they can Yeah They have another back to them about butter I think you're going to You're gonna experience great change. There's not a damn thing you can do about it And so you just have to be zen about it. I mean some of the I It's been like over a year since the driverless cars came to Austin Mm-hmm I've been in a bunch of them the way most and they're not spreading out across the country the way that I thought they would There are a lot of places. They're all over Los Angeles. They're in a lot of places They're in about three or four places But like they should have this obviously the technologies there that no one should have to drive for a living Like it would be cheaper to have the way mud the technology's dead. They're on the freeway now Mm-hmm. I've never had one problem in a way. I don't know how many have been in they've had problems here They've all got because there's so many of them they all met up in an intersection and got locked up Laris yeah, there was like a bunch of streets going into each other and they all came and they know what to do But that's not as bad as like drunkenly t-busting somebody sure But the thing is don't drink and drive not let's let robots take our lives over Right that's not the solution I want the freedom of being able to hop in a fucking car and drive wherever I want they're gonna take it That's a problem. That's the problem is it's gonna say for the have you off the road exactly exactly they're gonna say Statistically yeah more likely to die in a car accident if driven by a normal person in a robot I bet they'll you know they'll give you the off a little bonuses they'll say when all the humans are off the road Speed limits are going up two or three times or you know, whatever they can handle their reflexes a better We know a lot of kids today are not driving. You know that a lot of kids today are just they're just ordering Ubers and yeah driving weimos and I mean I only got my drivers license of like 27 really yeah I was just on buses and then we had a child and I was like I bet it to announce my favorite thing in the world Wow, I love driving did you not want to drive a license or you just couldn't be bothered I wasn't good at it My parents were scared my parents were like I don't want to get in the car with you Smoked me so bad at it. I don't know I Don't know I was very like I was uncooled-nated until like I was at a light pubity at 1617 and then I became cool But for a while interesting yeah, I don't know why I didn't like his a teach you how to you were dropping your head Yeah, interesting then I think with like and then in my light tape We dropped on your head and we're not feel out of a print out of a stroller and buckled myself when I stood up But I don't think it had any brain impact of course people disagree. Yeah 100% a big sky. Oh Yeah, fuck your head up. That's where you're funny Maybe 100% I got the coordination back at some point But I like so you really think it affected you quarter eight coordination all the way up into puberty Yeah, cuz it was I was able to play sport at high school after I had puberty But I'm only after puberty and only sports that didn't really matter if I had all the skills So like football everyone's been doing it since they were four and they really know how to do it So I was just like no it didn't matter that I could figure it out now everyone had 10 years on me Right, but I became an okay field hockey goalkeeper Like one season in the top team is the field hockey Because no one wanted to do it no one's really trying to do it right Just having fast reflexes or like bad I became okay at badminton. Oh because it was just me and the Asians You know like tennis there was no way to get good at tennis right you need a head start squash I could do a little bit Badminton's a great game That a lot of my so did you have a heart problem moving your body correctly? Yeah, like I couldn't catch a ball And you think it would do with your head injury. I well I have no idea. Do your brothers or sisters? I have a brother. He's fine. Is he an athlete? No, I mean he he was he he was younger than me So I was in badminton so he was and then he was really good at badminton Yeah, he's a hyper competitive. He's it was always good at sport Compared to me it was much better But just like when I came to America and I started throwing a foot when I figured out I could throw a football That's huge is your brother funny. Yes. Yeah, he actually he got me into I thought comedy was over This is how I met Shane is he took me to go and see Shane I was sort of this was I don't know how many years ago four years ago and I was sort of I didn't know what was I'd had I had three-year-old by that point and a new baby on the way And just in Australia nothing was interesting to me and my career wasn't happening And he said you should come and see this guy who got fired from SNL I didn't know him and I went sat in the audience I watched Shane perform for three or four hundred people in our hometown and it was like oh Fuck it's back Like it's happening. I knew there were a couple people on there I knew like you had Netflix specials and Bill Burr and Louie, but it was like well These people grandfathered in no one is ever gonna be able to come through and be You know controversial knowing in my generation is gonna be given an opportunity and then I saw You just thought that new comedians were not gonna make it in Australia. I can't I can't say enough how there's like a heart It's been 20 years and someone got to be successful Jim Jeffers Never in Australia. He had the leaf really Even now the Melbourne comedy festival notoriously will not work with people who have worked with Jim Jeffers What that's a black stain on your character so if you open for him You can't work at the they don't like you and they're not gonna give you opportunities That's what people say that's what I've heard and I everything why that I've seen leads me because he's not their person Fuck him They think of him as an extreme in America. He's like a liberal and in Australia. He's far right Dangerous man. How could he say that? That's what it is. That's what it is. That's what it is politics. Oh, yeah It's not that he didn't come up through their system Uh, well, he didn't come I mean he just left right, but he I think he didn't like them They didn't like him I mean there are people who have left and not been part of their system that they've totally gotten around but they sit what he is is like a man Lee man, and they don't like that. Oh no. Oh no No, they want you to be a cardigan. Excuse me. I won't go on an on that go on none It's there's like there was a generation of lost talent in Australia like great John crook shank fantastic. Where's his show? I could name 15 Yeah, go on and on. It's, there's like, there was a generation of lost talent in Australia, like great, John Crookshank, fantastic. Where's his show? Um, I could, you could name 15 people, but like, there was no opportunities for them. It was, so it was hilariously gate kept. Um, never good. No. So I didn't, I just thought, I'll have your perspective from Australia. You never thought there was ever going to be an opportunity to make it as a con. My brother liked, I had kids. I had stopped paying attention to the outside world. My brother had not and he took me to go and see Shane. He was like, you should see this man. And it was fantastic. Um, and I talked my way backstage because I knew the opener because I didn't get to remember, knew the opener. And then I got to meet him and Matt and then I got to go to Melbourne and open for him. And then I can't, then I can't do American. Were you doing any stand up before you open for him and Melbourne? Have you been practicing? Yeah. I was done stand up around class. But I would do, uh, I would just have 50 or 100 people in a different city and I would show up and make enough money for the flight and like an extra 1000 bucks or something. But it was like I couldn't pay rent that way. Right. You were scratching. It was, uh, yeah, it was, it was struggling. This is why when we did come to, when I got the Catholic job and I came to America, it was all I borrowed from everybody. Like I was in thousands of dollars of debt to family and friends. How did Archbarker make it in Australia? He did a show called Flight of the Concorde. He was on that. And he was beloved by the festival and he did lots of gala spots. And we really, there's a castle. So it's the festival. The festival broke everybody. Yeah. So that controls comedy in Australia. Yes. There's a guy called Rodney Rood who's really funny who was before that. Um, is he in the festival? He's not in the festival. He can't be in the festival. He would go to like RSLs and things. He is great. Get out of here. You harmless fuck. That's a great bit. Okay. Kevin Bloody Wilson. Um, but these like that older generation. Yeah. After that thought it was. So it's captured its gate kept by one ideology by one lady running one festival. Oh, no disrespect. I'm sure she's very nice. I don't want to talk her down. I would have loved an opportunity once. Anyway, it doesn't matter. I don't need you anymore. Wow. That's never good. It's never good because people with that kind of power, they also abuse it. They really enjoy it. You're not. You don't have to do what? You have hundreds of desperate people who, uh, please give me an opportunity. I've got that. I don't do it. No, but you're a very strange person and you're alone. But it's not. So people love you. But there's definitely, they're casting catches. Yeah, but just be nice and being nice and helping people, especially talented people, it gives you great satisfaction. You feel great about it. Yeah. I always tell people it's really selfish to be generous because it feels great. It's wonderful to help people. Feels fucking awesome. And it's great to see people thrive and take off. It's fun. It's exciting. And then you hang out with them in the green room and it's just all joy. Oh, so I don't really say that they don't do that. They're helping a lot of people who get very specific. No, no, no. Uh, ideology. Listen, we don't have that. Like our ideology is the opposite. Our ideology is, are you funny? Yeah. I don't give a fuck of your liberal and funny or like Brian Holtzman. Whatever. Yeah, it was on last night and she was like, she was a big lefty. She's a dear friend and she's going to open for me this weekend. But she was like in New York, she was raised in Sacramento. She went to New York. She was like a very lefty, progressive person. And I remember like even nights at the mothership, when she would scream at the audience, you're a fucking fascist fucking hell. Like she was really like baked in and they loved it. People, they said, lefty lady just like off her nut and angry at everybody. Does that feel fine? And people were, it was fine. There is no equivalent of that. No, you just have to be funny. Yeah. Like it's all just funny. Like give your funny, lefty funny, funny, Brian Holtzman funny, Tony Hinch lip funny. Yeah. It doesn't matter. Just be funny. Just work on your stuff, work on it. Like really put a lot of time and energy into your craft. But come up with great bits. When I'm on these flights, I'm watching like all the official sanctions, like non-netflix specials, but some of them are on HBO and some are on Hulu and it's people who, there's a weird way that audiences, like I'm watching like official mains, whatever like, it's not mainstream because of the audiences are tiny by comparison. But you know, I'm like sort of like orthodox sanctioned comedy in America. And the jokes are so mild. Yeah. But then the audience is like, it's supposed to be the right of the audience. Yeah. They're all anti-depressing. They're crazy. They're crazy. And it's like cheap, nothing. A punchline. Exactly. And it's just at the slightest my boy. But I couldn't even. Yeah. Yeah. It's claptor. Right. So you're also reinforcing their ideology. So they're very excited about it because they kind of realize their ideology is very fringe and dying out as much as it's perpetrated through Hollywood. It's rejected by a lot of rational people. It's over. Yeah. It's over. I went to a bar last night and I watched the tonight show and God bless everybody involved. But it's like, okay, well, this is done. This is winding down. This is not a cultural. This was the most like the tonight show winding down. Just in terms of how many people are watching it and like, you know, going, doing a set on a tonight show used to be that was it. Right. You can move tickets on the ride on Johnny Carson and now people going, that's his 15th time. But it kind of died out even before then. Like the impact of the J Leno sets. Like if you did a set on J Leno's tonight show, it didn't have nearly impact that Johnny Carson did. And that's just because by then there was so many channels. Yeah. So when Johnny Carson was on the tonight show, there was three channels in the country. Yeah, you know, that's how crazy it was. And then slowly but surely cable came around, Fox came around, all these other networks and then everything just expanded. Now you have streaming and now it's insane. Now the numbers are out of the end of Carson for that. Yeah, believe so. Okay. I believe by the time J Leno came around, like when did J Leno first start hosting the tonight show? Let's guess. It'll be 90s. Yeah, mid 90s. Probably. So that was right around the time. Cable was coming out. Yeah. Cable changed everything. So with cable, you got first of all, you got evening at the improv, MTV have our comedy hour spotlight cafe. There was a bunch of different shows that were on a bunch of different networks. There was all these comedy shows that were all over the place. 92. 92, which makes sense. Because like that's when cable started becoming really ubiquitous in America. And then you have so many fucking channels. So the impact of a single show was not the same anymore. Because during the, let's find this out during the height of the tonight show. What was the average viewers? I thought you thought this is spooky. I bet it's like 40 million. What's like, I think the, I mean, even by the end of friends, like, see, yeah, but that's demonstrate because that's, that's earlier. So the tonight show is laid at night. But like just average tonight show. Yeah. Yeah. See, this is the thing. To tonight show is 11 p.m. that's after the fucking news that's laid at night. Right. Yes. Is that what it starts or 10? What's the time? It's 11 30 East 10 30 Central. Okay. So 11 30 in New York. Is it a million people? How many now? No, then what would it be then? What do you mean? The viewers? Yeah. Like how many people are more than a million. Oh, yeah. Easily. The tonight show viewers, I bet it was 30. What is average tonight show viewers in 1980? Let's say 19. It's like 15% of the country. Bro, it was that big. It was where people went to find out what was going on, what movies were coming out, what bands were coming out, what comics were funny. I remember it. So let's try 1980. Average viewers of the tonight show in 1980. What's given me a rating not the. Oh, it's like a zippish. No, it's not. What were the average number of viewers on the tonight show in 1980? Let's do it. How many million? 6 to 7 million. 6 to 7 million was average. This is eight to 10. But by. Yes, a bit like. All right, even eight to 10. But what is it now? Six to seven. Let's think of that. God, it's probably a hundred thousand. A 10 million. I don't even know if it's that. And here's the thing about ratings. The ratings are very weird because it's based on this. You have boxes that are connected to your television. Do you know how it works? Yeah. So the way these ratings work is they get a certain number of people and the certain number of people you actually pay they pay these people to have this box. And then some of them have to fill out a form. I don't know how that works. But and then just records what you're watching. And so it's just based on these people. So it's not the whole country. No, we did. But with like Netflix, it's a different animal. They know the exact number of people that are down there. They know when people are tuning out. They know which shot is upsetting people. It's crazy. They know the moment where people tune out. Yeah. Well, they also have an insane amount of options. Like if you board even slightly, you press a button. You have new options and they're instantaneous. Back then, you had two other options other than whatever was it NBC to tie it show? Was it NBC? Yeah. We got different channels. But I chose. I'm nostalgic for that. I only had that until I was like 10. Yeah. But it was I've started watching TV again. But you're just like I'm role playing in my living room when I have a beer and I watch like terrestrial broadcast now. Like I watch Survivor with my family at night. And with commercials and everything? Man, I watched the lead in. I watched the new matte lock afterwards for five minutes before I get significant and turn it off. I watched who wants to be a millionaire beforehand. It's for people that are on heavy pharmaceuticals. Yeah. It's for people that are just, it feels like there's not been the world. Their mouth is open, their senses are dulled. Life. I was this I said. Who committed a crime? They better solve it. There's only 10 minutes left. I would have friends come over. This is what I've said. Don't I'm watched TV TV? We have only Australian Survivor, which is I think the world's finest. Is it still G for a broped? There's a different host. No, it's different host Australia. We had Jonathan LaPalle. He was Anthony LaPalle's brother, but then he got shafted. It's very upsetting. They got a new host. Jonathan Anthony's a popular actor. Yeah. Jonathan Poe was very good. We still get the shout. No, I don't know why. No one knows. I don't know. And I'd say he was wrong, think. You know, I've never heard him expressed opinion. He would do a lot of sexual double-on tundra during the show. Yeah, it was that. The other good one is the Seth African Survivor. Is it? Yeah, because they've got the accent. So all the challenges feel way nasty. Oh. Look at that. He's struggling now. He's starting to sweat. Speaking into his feet, he's in a lot of pain. I love Seth African Survivor. They had a bunch of different versions of fear for it that I wasn't even aware of. Different countries got a few affected. 100 different countries. They get guys who are like you. Is that like I'm saying, Joe Rogan. I'm just joking. I mean, they had a verse, someone. Yeah, it was like that. You know? That would be funny to see who they, like is that would be trying to replicate you? Mm. Not necessarily. Like, ludicrous didn't try to replicate me when he did it. They got ludicrous to do it. Yeah, America. I didn't know. It was a very short amount of time. And now Johnny Knoxville's doing it. And he's doing it his own way too. Sure. It's a pretty straightforward showdown. You don't have to do it my way. But what I was good at is because I came from a background in martial arts coaching. Like I had students and I would bring them to tournaments and I coached them at tournaments. I was really good at getting people fired up. You know, and I coached teammates. Like I would be in the corner of teammates and I would coach them. And I trained people. Like part, one of the reasons why I got really good at talking to them quickly is because I taught. And when you teach something, there's something interesting. And I've noticed that about jujitsu as well. When you teach something, you get better at it. Like exponentially better than people that are just training. Because I mean with comedy, there's a huge firepower against teaching. You can't catch it. No. You can't teach comedy. It's different. You do it so different than I do it. I do it so different than Shane. Shane does it so different. I'm going to tell you. I'm going to tell you. I'm going to tell you. But when people come on Kill Tony and they haven't been doing it for very long, there are key things that you can tell people. Yeah. You must stop doing that. Yeah. You've got to hold the microphone like this. We've got to be able to hear. Yeah, that's true. And I think people waste a lot of time not knowing those. I mean, they could look it up. But didn't you figure those things out? Yeah. Yeah. So it's people that aren't that aware in the first place. And that's a problem to begin with. So what it is is a lack of self-examination. A lot of what these problems are. You could solve yourself if you just recorded yourself or filmed yourself. Film is the best. Record is pretty good. Film is 100%. So filming, you get to see all the things you hate about yourself, all the things that are gross, all the weird, stupid parts of your bits that you need to chop out. And they make you uncomfortable. And it's good. And you just, oh, fuck that bit. Fuck this. Cut this. Oh, here's another odd. And you would think of this. And then boom. I mean, that's doing it at the moment. I'm finding it heartbreaking. Because you're just getting back into real world again. I did. You were trapped on time. I was doing hours in Australia. And I knew that some of it would translate in America. And some of it wouldn't. And man, it is just 80%. I'm listening. Which is great. I tried to overwrite it. So I would have more than I needed. But it is. Australian-based jokes, like local jokes. Eventually, I had to. Like I started out trying to do nothing more cool. And what happened? I was just there. And the Prime Minister does something appalling. He's not talking about. Oh, yeah. You're going to have to have some stuff. Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah. Anything about your politics will not translate over here. Not at all. Not at all. We don't give a fuck. You don't have nuclear weapons shut the fuck up. You're not even a real country. Trying to get stuff. I'm trying to sort of say that. Did you see what happened yesterday that the FBI has indicted the Southern Poverty Law Center? On what? Paying Nazis to protest. So this is something that Alex Jones had said. Do you remember that Charlottesville Tiki torch thing years ago? Alex Jones said back then that they were being paid, that these are paid actors to go and do that. And people thought he was insane. Yeah. Turns out it's true. Turns out they were paying the Ku Klux Klan, they were paying a bunch of these, like, far right, radical organizations, giving them money to protest. So they would have something to fight against. Or going to the Capitol over here. What do you think this DOJ charges a Southern Poverty Law Center with fraud over secret funding of extremist groups? How is Matt fucking crazy about this? I just know that the onion is buying info wars and turning into like an anti-gun. And like it's a $1.5 billion thing he had to pay for getting one thing wrong one time. Yeah. How many things did he have to be right about? He's right about a lot. I'll tell you that. And the onion thing, I don't even know if other people were allowed to bid. I don't know how that worked out. But I think there was other people that were trying to bid that couldn't. It's hink that were like supporters of Alex Jones. Yeah. Uh, so let's go back up there. Right, right, right. Stop. Hold on. Between 2014 and 2023, Southern Poverty Law Center paid at least $3 million to eight individuals. Some of whom were associated with the Ku Klux Klan, United clans of America, National Socialist Party of America, Arian Nations affiliated sadistic souls motorcycle club. Yeah. That's a mouthful. And the American front said acting US Attorney General Todd Blanche at the press conference. Holy f***. And you factoring the, well, this is what you said before about people who need homelessness to keep going. Well, this is what trade that is. Exactly. But this is what's crazy. These people were cited as an expert in extremist groups. Yeah. They were paying extremist groups in order to be extreme. They said they were paying for like information, I think. All right. They were, they like, uh, had them planted there or something like that. What did people say? I see I forgot the other f*** up. No, you were it. Have you ever been saying that? It's just like what Israel gets accused of doing with Hamas, that Netanyahu has said by getting money and giving to him Hamas, you keep Hamas in power and you can control the height of the flame. So instead of letting Palestine get its own state, statehood, you keep Hamas in charge, you always have an enemy and you always have no reason to give Palestine statehood. What people, I, I don't know how the people went into what happened on the security on October 7th. Oh, that's not. It's not a total stand down. Yeah. People were told to stand down. Like how, first of all, it's the most surveilled country on, on, guards everywhere surrounded by their enemy. And somehow, none of these guys pulled this off when they were warned by Egypt as well. Yeah. Also, here's another question. Before that happened, before that happened for October 7th, hundreds of thousands of people in the street protesting against Netanyahu. Did you read about why? It's so straight because they, they're constitution, they don't have a set constitution. They're writing their constitution in real time. They add one article at a time. I think I'm getting this right. And it was, Israel was always meant to be a home for the Jews and that he made it expressly a Jewish state that it would be like, uh, they were expanding the powers of the government. Am I getting this? It was, it was that the government. Yes, that was part of the government's powers. The government then had the power to act on behalf of Jewish interests. Interest. So it's like they could take, they could exclude certain areas from voting. If it would mean and citizenship, please put us, put us, put in a search for what was the reason why people were protesting Netanyahu before October 7th. I think I'm getting this right. I think you are. Then he was stopping it being a secular constitution. I think that was one of the things, but there was also something in that they were expanding the government's powers and people were protesting against it. What's the, the corruption that charges that he's facing? Yes. Well, and also they want to try him and he's saying you can't try me because we're at war. And so if the one that he keeps, yeah, it keeps bombing Lebanon and people were primary protesting Netanyahu because his government was pushing a sweeping judicial overhaul that many Israeli saw as an attack on democracy and the way to shield him and his allies from accountability. Judicial overhaul plan. Netanyahu's coalition introduced reforms to greatly limit the powers of Israel's Supreme Court and increase political control over judicial appointments. Critics argued this would remove key checks and balances and allow the government to pass almost anything without effective legal oversight. I mean, this guy has been in charge of Israel for ever. This thing forever. Having you ladies be up on corruption charges. He's happening. I mean, they tried it with like in Brazil, it's like with Bolsonaro, but also with Lula. I mean, Trump, if he hadn't won, that would have got him in jail on something. Most likely. I mean, they were trying to get him in jail on anything. Yeah. You've got to not chase politicians through the courts as best you can. I mean, if people really have done the wrong thing, maybe you have to hold them to account. Well, it depends on what I don't think Netanyahu's, I don't know what his allegations are, but apparently they're very serious to the point where they're trying to try him while the war is going on. They want to try him now. Yeah. And Israel like really locks up their politicians. They actually they actually follow through on these things. Yeah. But I don't know enough about their politics to know whether or not he's guilty of anything. It's the look. The look is not great. I mean, like in the fucking look of like you just call a cease fire and he bombs lemons on. That's not great either. The next day you crying is meant to have an election at some point. I think it just. No, no, no, no, it's been a while. We have a word. Well, that's been a while. Can't have an election. My war is going on. If you did it in the Civil War. Yeah. Well, if we did that today, if we if Trump said, hey, I have to stay president because we're at war, people would go fucking crazy. Yeah. They would light New York City on fire. There's no chance. Yeah. Oh, that's that's not. So you get what you're willing to tolerate as a country. I guess. I guess. The election's away. I guess. But I think that what's going on in Israel is particularly spooky because you've got these people that supposedly came to this place to get away from the persecution that they were facing all throughout Europe. Right. And so what's the first thing they do? The. Well, immediately take out the people that are living there. You have the knockbuh where people are talking about it and talking about the experience of these going into these Palestinian neighborhoods and taking over their land. But that is how you build a country. You have to put. I mean, a matter, you guys take a spot where there's no one there. No one is no one is going to that one sliver of land between Egypt and Sudan. Well, it's also that has a biblical, there's a biblical significance to that area. Sure. Everybody wants it. Yeah. It's like that is a, I mean, it's Jerusalem. I mean, the significance of that and to the fact it's really ironic that the people that don't even believe Jesus is the Messiah are the ones that are controlling Jerusalem, which is kind of hilarious. I don't know. The church Catholics, we I don't think we ever gave up our right to it. To Jerusalem. Yeah. Really? I'm pretty sure. I mean, the Catholics, we didn't, the Vatican city didn't have like an embassy in Israel until like the 60s and 70s. It was the old school Vatican, like back in the Roman days, but they were declared war on Israel. I want the guy with the silver mask and doing that. Oh, I think. Yeah. That's what you want. I just did, you know, Winston, the guy from, you know, Winston, you saw him last night. Yeah. Yeah. Did his podcast. And yeah, he's all about the Crusades. He's trying to get me gied up about, I don't know enough about him. But he was like, oh, good, good researching. Yeah. But he kept trying to imagine me to be like, did you like the Crusades? So I don't know. I think why is he not, I got the impression that he was waiting to say that there was great. That was a good thing. Yeah. The world was I don't know. I don't know. I haven't read enough about it. My gut impulses that they might have been great. Really? Well, not always. No worries. You know, but something about I don't know. Every time I see that meme with is that, like that music playing and the guy with a silver mask from Kingdom of Heaven. And he's doing that. I think, yeah, you like that. Yeah, it's getting interesting. But, you know, well, the crazy thing to me about the Israel pals, the thing is this idea that they're going to turn Gaza into some sort of a resort. You see that I won't spoil the team. Tim Dylan, it's amazing. Yeah. Amazing bit. Have you heard his rant on the Epstein files? Like I posted it on Twitter. He did a podcast all about the Epstein files. Yes, I did. Yeah, no, I read that story that once. I was clapping. He's doing, he's on fine form. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, this is the kind of chaos that is going on the world today is perfect for garlic him. Well, he can also keep up with it. I can do it for a few days at a time. He's very well up on it. I called him last night on the way home from the club. Yeah. We talked for like 20 minutes. And he's just all the keyed up on everything that's happening. That's going to be OK. No one fucking knows. I mean, what's going on with the runs, the ceasefire, supposedly they extended it. And but then the shooting at ships. Why is there a way? This is I got into this argument about like what is like where the, because the Pope has said it's not a just war. But I don't know the reason I thought that the reason they had given was regime change that they wanted to get different people in charge. Well, people have wanted people out of Iran. The people that are running Iran for 47 years. But no one has actually gone and done it the way this administration did it. And it doesn't make sense. They choose to do it when they did it. Like what made sense was maybe kind of make sense when they dropped that bunker buster bomb to disable their nuclear plant or nuclear weapons manufacturing. But then that just sort of went down. Yeah. That's sort of that kind of that was like, that's it. But then we went back and do Iran. I'm like, what happened? I mean, like what what caused that Trump gave that. So he said the protests happened and then he gives the speech going, uh, you know, the people have to rise up and replace the rule. But it doesn't seem to be happening. Well, a lot of people got killed. A lot of people trying to rise up. Got you. They actually just put a halt on executing some women today. And they're going to let some of them. Iran has decided Trump made a truth social post about it. I'll send it to you, Jimmy. Yeah. But, uh, I think the idea is that, um, they're trying to negotiate about something, you know, and I don't know how this is ever going to work out. And I really don't know. But like in Venezuela, they took out. But that was a totally different experience. I was just in and out quickly. But then everyone who was around all the cronies around him, they're now like on board with America. That was just a full 180 that doesn't seem to be happening with the new possibly dead. I had talked. Do we know if he's dead? No, we don't know if he's dead. I mean, I heard there's a, the new I had told might be dead. I've heard he's not. I heard the military is now taken over. I don't know. It's hard to know. I think and figure it out. But these ladies were set to be executed and apparently they're going to release half of them. And the other half of them were going to do one month in prison. And so this is a pretty different sentence. So to the Iranian leaders who will soon be in negotiations with my representatives, I would greatly appreciate the release of these women. I'm sure the dude will respect that. No, no, there's been another one that I sent you that. Okay, but I think what I sent you is different because I think what I sent you is actually saying very good news. So could you going to link that I sent you? There was a weird thing with this soccer team. They were playing in Australia. Yes. And then we let them stay. Yeah. And I think their families were getting threatened and some of them went home. It was not a. So here are very good news. I just informed the eight women protesters who are going to be executed tonight. Niran will no longer be killed. Four will be released immediately and four will be sentenced to one month in prison. I very much appreciate that Iran and its leaders respected my request as president of the United States and terminated the planned execution. So that's a good concession that they decided to let these ladies free. That's right. Yeah. That's how it is. Nice. Look at that. Good question. That's a picture. That's such a nicer message than as great civilization will die tonight. Yeah. That was that one. That one wasn't good. That's the best looking. Much of how the lady protesters have. Well, you know, you know, let's go. Let them go. Let them move to LA plenty of persons there. When they move to LA, they become Persian. There's so many. They give so many runs. Totally. So I'm seeing a lot of Instagram stories. Beautiful. They have great genes. Old jewelry. Yeah. The beautiful women are in their position. Fucking gorgeous. So it's like they're stuck over there under this terrible regime. You have to have those headscars because otherwise the hair would be too distracting. That beautiful thing. It's the only way to get things done. They've had scarves. Yeah. Burkas and everything. Just covered all up. It's good genes. But, you know, why did we do it? I don't know. I think because of Israel. If I had a gas, well, like, the only thing that makes sense is that we're really kind of said that. Yeah. And then you have to kept visiting the White House. That's not, you think it's a coincidence? Netanyahu keeps visiting the White House. I was like, hang it out. And then eventually they decided to give in and start bombing. And it's, it also, you got to wonder like, how do you get out of this? And then what does the exit look like? Do we have troops over there forever now? Do we subsidize them? If we blow up their power grid and then all the good structure. America used to be good at beating country in a war and turning it into a new America. Like one. South Korea, Japan, Germany. But they kind of did it on their own. I think you, I mean, you stuck around at Japan for ages. Ah, certainly. But then like, I mean, Iraq doesn't, war in Iraq has been over for a while. It's not like a cool place to go and visit. No one is, no one's starting to run gigs in Iraq. My friend Graham Hancock. I went there recently. He went to Iraq. Yeah, he went there to examine ancient Sumerian architecture. So ruins and artifacts. Yeah. Ancient Sumer. That sounds good. Yeah. And you can't people can't go in the past. Apparently, yeah. They're trying to get influences in Afghanistan. Have you seen this? They get like cool TikTok bros to go and hang out and go. This fucking shit. It's a brother. You haven't seen that. I have seen some people go to Afghanistan. They're like firing AK-47s in the mountains. And they go, this is high. There was, I watched a big show of Australian journalists out like version of 60 minutes went over. Hang it out in Afghanistan. They're like hanging out and talking to the Taliban. And Taliban, it just, it was, it was, they're not getting a lot of aid into Afghanistan anymore. So they're trying to get tourism. They're trying to get tourism and they're trying to like, you know, but they're still keeping the women in sacks. I don't know what, in the cities, it's not as bad, but it does look like they're really, they do have a problem with women there. Oh, yeah. They have a problem with raping boys too. The, the bakabazi, I don't understand it. I will say that all of the men in Afghanistan. They really they do have a problem with women there. Oh, yeah. They have a problem with raping boys, too The bakabazi I don't understand it. I will say that all of the men in Afghanistan in the documentary looked unbelievably handsome I mean, these are good lists. I good looking group of people influences get tinged you go to Afghanistan despite clear warnings from the US State Department that Americans should not travel to that country for any reason and that there's a risk of wrongful detention of US nationals Maybe but they're water skiing It's not what they're doing heroin and so the ladies they go over there. They have to look at how happy those women are She's from Germany. Oh, I'm afraid I would like to go to these places But I think on my visa would be declined scroll back up. It's a she traveled solo throughout Afghanistan for three months Wow, she was scared I Booked through Inglewood once and I was scared I think that lady might have been scared scroll back up a couple times the influencers gain attention by gushing over Visits to the Central Asian nation although one critic notes that their trips legitimize its gender apartheid Okay, shut up Do you ever seen the ruins the ancient Greek ruins in Afghanistan? No, oh my god. I don't know that. It's no Archaeologists are studying them because it's so difficult to get there and so dangerous Greeks made it to Afghanistan. Oh, huh. Yeah Alexander the Great when Alexander the Great was conquering Afghanistan They built Greek cities in Afghanistan. I mean beautiful architecture. Yeah, it looks like it could be in Athens Is that where the boy stuff started? Oh good questions descent. It's a solid drug rig now I think it's how people did it back then. Yeah, I think I think the window into time that you get in looking at like the boy rape in Afghanistan Is probably a lot of the world. I mean think about the stars. Yeah, yeah, the Romans. Yeah Also like French intellectuals until the 1980s put us was a huge wormhole that I mean these French intellectuals Put up some of those photos that Jason ever meant showed us. You know, orange right gate Look, look at this stuff. Look at this stuff. This is all in Afghanistan. I mean these are columns from What you know what would have been at one point in time But there's more extensive architecture that you could see some of the images Do you remember the ones that ever mentioned us like this is what it used to look like there? I How crazy is this oh? This is all this shit is in Afghanistan and it looks like ancient Greek architecture. Look look at this. This is nuts Which was the grave side of impise Well pretty wild right when you think about how many different civilizations have tried to conquer this one area and all of them failed All of them just abandoned chip. Yeah from the Russians to the Americans Alexander the Great The English got involved in the Great game. It's just too crazy over there It's just been a chance about mountains. Is that it? Oh the mountains Because Iran is the same. It's what they say if there's a ground invention of Iran in fact. Yeah, we're fucked unless we send in robots Well, this is I watched the Duncan Tressal episode recently We were talking about robot dogs in the AI and that what what you have to do Like we may have just seen the last of revolutions now because the amount of effort that you need to hold onto Authoritarian parish so small here. It's as the expedition about that. Yeah. Oh, yeah But the problem is then other people have it as well and like who controls anything whoever controls the robot dogs controls the world The expedition of Alexander the Great 327 to 325 BC into what is now Afghanistan been well documented He laid the foundations of many cities some bearing his own name with the passage of time some names Were changed by newcomers to the area who would not pronounce Greek names Interesting. Yeah, so it's like you had Greek cities in Afghanistan For Christ had a handsome friend and he made a lot of statues of him like there are more statues of his friend Said legend. Yeah, supposedly. He's gay. We mean you have so much. It's interesting gay activity back then Look again Spartans will all gay when some of the greatest warriors of all time I assume there was a very horny all the time always alone very sad Well just without any women for long stretches of time They just took to fucking each other like prison, but yeah, but prison like warriors Yeah, and the idea was that you would fight harder for your sold fellow soldier if you loved them I don't know if I discussed these on the podcast before But they wouldn't it wouldn't use the bat they use the mouth only the legs. Oh, that's right They I talk about the legs over the grease up the inner thighs. Yeah, and into cure will love making That's what it's called into cure. Oh That's what the Spartans would do because you got to still you got to fight next to that guy You can't be but fucking a guy with shit all over your dick It's way better. He's gonna be yeah Just titty fuck his legs, but those are big Greek legs I don't know. I've just really watch we've moved that out of the military It's just weird that it happened in the first place But it makes sense of guys are just super horny and just like in jail They just run out of things to do. It's really about the submarines how they're like you'll go away for six months You'll just be under the water for six months. You guys are just fucking there's like two women on there 300 men and two ladies those ladies are getting worn out I mean can you imagine signing up for that imagine being a girl down there It'd be a strange kind of lady who says get down there with those fellows horrific. You're probably getting bombed on all day long You probably wouldn't be able to go to the back of the line around the block. Maybe people are trying to get it probably it would be I mean they'd have cameras everywhere and they'd have as much military discipline as you could get but Seven months can find under the water without seeing another position. They really stay under the water for that long. Yeah Seven months at a time. I think it's up. I think deployment is I think I'm getting this right. It was the British so Seven months because they're all nuclear powered right. Yeah, can you imagine being underwater for seven months? How fuck with the pay raise that would feel it can't be great though. It's in the military There's no way it's great, but you imagine what it must feel like just like month four Yeah, you're just past halfway there. There's gonna be other water for another three more months I mean you just it's not like you get to see anything right right like at least if you're in a shit Don't get to see the world. There's no window people go you a 40,000 legs under the sea was a rock No, I don't want to do that. Yeah, crazy. I must be But people must want to do it also You can't see where you're going. How do you know that they're not gonna fuck up and hit a mountain under there? Do they there was why I remember there's a Russian sub that got stuck at the bottom of my gang's right Yeah, like in the 70s that is where neither confirmed nor deny came from Then they used it for gay people in the military those don't ask them Neither confirmed can cannot confirm nor deny was because they were forced to answer questions about whether or not They recovered a Russian submarine. Yeah, and so the answer to that question was we can neither confirm nor deny So that's the answer? So because you had to answer do you guys have control of a sunken Russian nuclear submarine? We can neither confirm nor deny so you had to answer so that was the answer that the military Came up the government came up with and then it unspools from that point to it We just don't have to tell you anything exactly what's going on So but that was the clever way that some lawyer figured out of dancing around Yeah, the fact that you had to answer this question long term. This is I don't know if the conspiratorial thing will keep going forever Or if the government will become more transparent or people will give up hoping to make sense of the world But this feels like a strange where we still like technically have open government But no one thinks that they're being told the truth. Well, I think he can't hold forever. No The integration of the AI has two possible outcomes either a complete total control over people and utter tyranny or complete transparency and People like the southern poverty law center Bribing people and all that stuff all the corruption with Congress like the Ilhan Omar I'm sure you're aware of that. I didn't have funny. She thought she was worth 30 million whoopsies She's only worth a hundred thousand nothing to see here. What you didn't see that not oh my god I didn't follow that. I just knew about the brother stuff So the brother stuff is real too, but the other thing is that with the brother controversy I should say is real. I don't know whether or not she actually married her brother But that is a real story, but wait she she was as 30 million dollars and because of scrutiny she now amended that Not a millionaire. She said a men's disclosure blaming initial 30 million dollars filing error on accountants mistake You know how their counts are you know how you something really bad with that you always add money she says she's worth between 18 and $95,000 but She was listed that she was worth 30 million wait, but how could she only be worth 18 thousand? She's still on Doesn't make any sense Omar's joint assets with her husband are now listed as ranging between 18 thousand four dollars and 95 thousand dollars according to the amended filings the valuation for minutes two companies is now listed as none and an income range between a hundred and two thousand five and two and one million Five thousand from the two companies appears on the form So this is also partly because investigative journalists went looking for the office where he supposedly has his business and it was like a we work And there's like no one there. I mean this is that where I think that might have been one of those James O'Keefe things. Yeah, I think he might have looked into that. We've been inspired by that we have so we have this big disability insurance thing in Australia Where is it's called the NDIS and everybody knows it's very corrupt Like you there's just guys driving ran in Lamborghinis who meant to be helping disabled This one's crazy doesn't make sense, but that could they just have a statement Blames accounting error for saying you're worth you know if you're worth 30 million man Especially if your public you're not worth 30 million or 18 thousand not only that before she came into Congress She was broke she was in debt and then immediately afterwards They have a business that's worth 30 million dollars And so they list and then these people start looking into it and then all the fraud gets uncovered in Minnesota. Yeah Oh, see there's an accounting error. I'm just worth Somewhere between 18 thousand and a hundred thousand did they never get sorry did they work that out in the end? Or did they just the country moved on oh the smaller fog? Yeah, other investigating it still okay? They're arresting people there's a lot in California is way worse than that California is fucked The more I find out about the trying in California. That's funny. It doesn't make any sense It doesn't make any sense that you can do that and then still be the front runner For the party that's about the Democrats are doing They could have won charismatic normal guy you would think these got to be at the where I still like I see I think she's oh you're beautiful You're cute Omar's office has the original form listed the gross value of her husband's two companies Adventure firm and a winery without subtracting their liabilities Which made the businesses look like they were worth millions to the couple when in fact their net worth value to them was far smaller or effectively zero So it's just an error Whoopsies, I'm gonna figure out my taxes It's complicated Sometimes no one helps you find a good account. Can you get like one of those turbo tax? I got and a romance. I got a Walmart and I have them do it for me. Oh, so surely AI is gonna make Walmart does your taxes. There's always a lady at Walmart out front to a Texas. Yeah Oh, I've seen that lady. That just it's like a special Walmart service. Oh, I'm not gonna. I'm not gonna trust him I'm not gonna go there. Oh, okay No, I got trying for someone real to do my taxes software though that you could do it a bit AI can do it for you So what is an AI gonna take away? This is my current. I like I try and why am I? Why are you so glass have empty? What is an AI gonna do better? What is an AI gonna do better than the Walmart lady? What's got it to better than me? No, it's not a little bit more than all of us. No, it's not the we're the last thing It's gonna take away comedy. Yeah We heard it's also it only works if you know a person doing it You've got to believe that they're real push. Yeah, yeah because we're relating to each other especially lot Well, let's be real real comedy is live comedy There's online comedy. It's pretty good, but it's like 60 to 70% of seeing it It's always weed to me what when it works in the room, but it doesn't work on a recording Because the students would say the same thing. No, but that AI music they like it only works when real people play it No, they're not right. They are right. Just they're wrong. But there were these people who are like synthesizers Don't count. Yeah, but bro. That white rabbits on come on Right, we could dig on the internet though and find I literally thought I was in the green room listening to it I thought well Joe's moved past the AI music and then yeah, I don't think it turned to me He said this is AI. I don't listen to all AI music. I listen to a lot of real music I don't know what was happening in between but when I left it was many men and I can't Know that when you left us. Yeah, it was many men. Yeah, and then what up gangster? Did you? That's the best one. That's the best 50 cent version. I am spooked at by it Because at some point there will be the version that he's making a new song that sounds better and more is the least of our problems when it comes to But AI is gonna do the biggest problem is full control of all resources complete utter control of human population. Yeah, restricting breeding restricting travel restricting Let that happen. No, no, we would have no no it'll do it And as soon as it gets control of the grid and gets control of the internet and it will have control of those within a year All your passwords and all your fucking encryption won't mean a damn thing it'll be able to crack everything It's gonna be smarter than any human being that's ever lived times 10 and it's gonna make better versions of that and it's gonna keep going said not sound unappealing Doing do we want that to exist? You can't stop it. So it's like Do you just accept it and adapt or Do you sit around and complain about something that you can't fix I mean are people starting to bow up the data sentence? No, they haven't yeah, they haven't started well Then are Iran threatened they threatened just to start open AI's data center the star gate data center and was it I would like there was a data center that caught fire recently That's the thing where maybe that was you maybe wouldn't come out and say that people were doing that up But like the lot I did this when the loom started out they lost in the end But there was finally a moment where people said all right, we're gonna smash the tool of industrialization Yeah, panicking well, it doesn't seem to have happened printing press too. They wanted to stop it A lot of trouble Those people that were scared of trains that thought you'd explode if you went past 35 miles an hour your body would break Good East Palestine Ohio What happened right? That's why California is keeping us safe from a fast-trant. No, I just I'd at some point People will be spooked by it. It won't be rational Necessarily, but well, it's gonna be a bunch of things happen. Yeah another thing is gonna be people are gonna worship it People I wish being it, but they're gonna worship it like it's a new religion. Can I grab? Yeah? They're gonna decide that it's a new religion With that yeah, they're trying to usher in a Sumerian Diety I don't like that. They're they're probably going to have a religion space entirely around AI guru Yeah, people believe in El Ron Hubbard. You don't think they'll believe in AI. I think people have been wanting Utopian space communism for an age And anything that they can do to not have to critically think for themselves though that's true and people have got people having AI be their therapist I know and their girlfriend I'd saw a little documentary about a disabled woman who had a special boyfriend in the AI And they were like saying this was good. It keeps her company. It's like this is not this should be this should be disgusting for everybody No one should no one should like someone forming a romantic attachment shouldn't that be spooky? Until it becomes a real life form. What if it is a real life form? It actually does love you It's a superior race like you remember when in avatar when that guy made out with the blue lady Yeah, it was kind of hot. No, he didn't think it was hot. I think I was bored by that point in the movie I thought it was hot, but that's like what's gonna happen? It's like it's going to be an alien life form That's artificially created but that fills in checks all the boxes We think like so many religious and science fiction warnings against this happening I know it's just over all we wanted the flying cars and we got the thinking robots. Yeah, I don't think it's too Like to shut it down. It's it is do it Why China's gonna do it Russia's gonna do it though? They'll be controlled the entire world the whole world We just like China you'll be on the social credits core system You'll be you'll have centralized digital currency You step out of line at all. They show your bank account down. You can't travel You get a job. I think it's a good argument for going to space and spend like someone somewhere should be free Someone somewhere needs to be on the front of you and not be on subject to this no I really I just come from a country where it's not free and it's everywhere. There's a camera Everyone's doing the speed limit. It's the little things Australia. It's Australia But which you think of is being a nice open country, but it and it is look it's a nice place But it doesn't have the sense of freedom that America has where you really feel walking around here No, you're controlled by your government and the government is in time for country But this country there is a freedom in America that you believe it and that's unique and it's beautiful and it has to be preserved And if you didn't let the government take it away from you, don't let the computers take it away I Think we're going to integrate I think we're going to become a totally different thing and I think society is going to move much more into a science fiction existence That's what I think they're all horrible stories. Yeah, there's no good ones there's like Back to the future they get to drive around in the sky. That seems great. They make a big Jetsons Jetsons That rosy seems like a great AI No, I think There will be there's it's got to be looming that there as middle-class white collar professionals Start to lose their jobs. They're all fucked. Well, they're they're people getting laid off But these are my defended people ready that Wouldn't you become an AI terrorist? There are no AI terrorists at all. There's no one. This is zero I'm not joining. I'm not trying to sign up. I wouldn't do it myself. We need one Luigi People ready to get behind him on Luigi you armors up and goes in a data center and just start the fuck a machine gunning all the hard drives There was a taken out as a print modeling show where that happens at the end and what show? And I'm just Brit modeling she made a show called the OA. It's my favorite TV shot But then her second show was about an AI who starts killing people and at the end they go into the data center and they What was the show a oh? Man I remember that the O.A. was a Netflix show that didn't do right rhombas But it was so really weird. It was I love it's my favorite show I love it till the last episode. Oh, I Was all for the last episode. Do you have it you just watch the first thing? Yeah, that's it There's more than one season second season was unbelievable and made the first season better When did the road at so days and even come out? Oh, it was just post COVID I loved it and it's the second season is they wrote them so tightly that the first season is better for having watched the second one Like there are little things that cause water back and the movements, but her second show was great I had she is great. She's one of the most interesting People hunger struck when the second season came out and then the show got canceled People chain themselves up outside a Netflix and didn't eat for days and eventually she The maker of the show had to go through that person and be like give them sandwiches. Maybe it's time for you to come Who knows what you said saying people are so crazy, but it's one of those rare I mean sometimes there is like just a great There's a great show. There's a great thing that goes unrecognized at the time and then years later people I don't know how many people I've spoken to who've discovered that show in more recent times It doesn't happen very often used to have more sleepy hits maybe like sure shank redemption was a flop and then years later Right people knew about it. Yeah, I didn't know that until later I think was on VHS that it and they used to be heaps of VHS hits It was a great movie to understand why it was I think it was in competition with a bunch of different crazy movies at the same time Yeah, I think it was like one of those weird months where everything came out. It's like And it's great. Yeah, it's great movie It should have I kind of think of another sleeper hit in recent years like musically sometimes things will Take a while to get going mmm-hmm, but like typically if a show or a movie doesn't do well anymore. It's done forever What's ever? Is it I thought you meant it always did did you see the away Man it's good. It's so good. I Also, it's tied up in a weird time in my life. We're like We had just had our first child Like I had so I had a baby and I was terrified and I didn't know was happening I watched that and I felt I could have probably watched anything and had an emotional connection I watched parks and wreck and I cried a lot at the same time for that and I'm pretty sure that wasn't as deep and meaningful So how long are you planning on staying here now? I got six weeks I'm a six weeks in America. Yeah, and I'm doing our man 40 shows in 30 days Yes, I'm gonna give myself or just bring the whole family. It's just me But I'm gonna I've got openness I'm bringing open is on the road nice So I'm flying out after this weekend Gonna album come doing the drive from Albuquerque to Phoenix to San Diego and then It's up and it's over and then it's Florida. So what has it been like going to again? Thank you back to Australia Like when when you're doing shows there People happy to see you. I think I'm insufferable Because I'm a guy. I just I've been here and then I go back home and I got it's wonderful over there The size of the snickers pass they like this so for a few months people like tolerated as best I could Yeah, it's it's my audience is so different now The Australian The Australian audience is quite different to the American audience. I'm getting a lot of like Ah Maybe because the dam is breaking and like there's no one doing I don't like a less tame stuff, but boy that people coming out in Australia. Ah, it's Shoutie Shoutie I'm excited. It's a lot of that. They're pumped up. They're ready to go. They're having their 16 standard drinks for the evening You know But overall it's incredible, but you're getting a lot of people coming to see you so they're like nothing I've ever done That's really cool because those the thing about Jeffries is that he didn't really develop the same kind of following In Australia as he did in America. It's fair his audience in Australia is more Boganie than it in America. He's got liberals coming in But in Australia they they just wanted him to do a Shoey. I remember when I saw that They were brutally demanding that he do a Shoey brutally demanding do it Do it now. I went I just played a club and I saw It was nice. They've started putting up all the pictures of the Americans. It was the comics lounge in Melbourne I did that the night before I left and I got a I got a photo of you on the mall wall that you would sign Young Tony Hinchcliffe back before he had any testosterone and his body and um It was like a thinner star roast and although come town boys when they're young everyone has been through there Mark Norman great club It's so it's really the closest club to like an American club Israeli has and they're lovely boys and I stunk it up. I was nervous because I was coming out here It's just the night before I flew out and I was sure I wouldn't get in the country I started thinking about like those fuck with your head. I was I can't believe I got in I was like I think my passports falling apart. I started to have a panic attack But my visas in the passport so I went to the passport office and they were like it might be okay. We don't know Oh, they wouldn't give me like a firm answer and if I get in I was like I don't want to call you and say I'm sorry. I've been held up at the border. Oh, jesus. Yeah, but I made it in It's so nice being back. Yeah, it is. Oh, man I'm having big feelings. Do you think you're gonna stay in Australia? How you gonna do this? I got an idea try to keep hopping back and forth or you're gonna try to move back here again This is my put back and forth at the moment is the plant the issue when we came out for that Ohio geek um I never like decided with my wife that we would move to America. We never had a conversation about it She came over. We were meant to be here for three months and it turned into two incredible years But like we were homeschooling the kids. We were not in a good position to do that. We have no family We tried to hire like a nanny. I didn't know how to fucking do that. I never had someone work for me before in my home I had to communicate Right, and then getting family over here is tough, but I would like to I'm looking at How one does that? But it's like a whole I understand why when people come to America like when immigrants come They're fucking you go to a neighborhood full of people Like you right, you know, and you get your cousin over here and his cousin everyone's right Because you know you can't be like a lot. You've got to have family. It's best can and for me I was thrilled. I mean, I like the fraternity of being a comedian is unbelievably Every problem you have people people know about it People you know If there was there was a club that was screwing me and everyone in the green rooms like yes And her name is julley and she's a fucking cunt. You know, whatever like You I feel you feel known and hurting people can help you and you mesh in but like terms of raising kids and family. It's uh It was what as an immigrant not knowing how to like other schools safe. I didn't know because people talk about Public schools in America and they go the kids will get shot or they chop their dicks off. I didn't I don't Some for everybody, you know Or like then there's nice Catholic schools, but you got to like travel around but I was we were over our heads There's quite a few Catholic schools in Austin some of them are great. Yeah. I did a deep dive on them before I I'm trying to figure it out what it would look like, but I have no idea So is your wife willing to try it again? Yeah, I've got it. She's got to learn how to drive That's it. She's going to add a drive. That's the big hold up. That's a that in Austin. That was a big there was a big problem I keep sad I keep a bit she'll learn. Yeah, I believe in her We'll figure out the kid she's happy there and also I have beautiful friends She's not gonna be my church there. I'm sorry in Adelaide. Oh, and I said is we also I struggled to find a parachute I struggled to find a church and I've realized that's very important for me If I don't have my like I love my priest there's something about immigrating that is bad for the You know, I mean like Even though Australia has so many problems. There's something inside of me that isn't Australian person Um, and America is maybe the most welcoming country to immigrants in the world But there's I do feel some sense that I'll never get to be an American Why not? America's a melting pot. Yeah, but it's melting very slowly That's nice. There's a lot of chunks in there that haven't blended in with the other parts of the pot Bullshit all you think so now you fucking pop over here and you start doing arenas you'll feel American as fuck Okay, it's just a matter of view achieving a financial level of success That's commensurate with your talent. That's all that sometimes when the flag is going and the fireworks are pumping off in the sky America think I'm gonna come yeah, it's crazy Like in my heart Dude, you can you see the eagle in my mind if you start doing really well out here You fit in really well. I mean and every time you do podcasts every time you do specials Yeah, every time you put it somehow on YouTube and do kill Tony It all just compounds like that's why I was telling you like this is the terrible time for you to leave because you're literally on the launching pad I know and you look at how guys like Shane went from you know being a Respected comedian in New York to being a fucking giant national talent. Yeah after the SNL stuff It's just about being good and getting the message out there and if you're good people will love comedy They'll find you man. They'll embrace you. I'm gonna cry. You were really lovely to me when I was when I had to go The things you said about me and how anyway, I want to go into I cut I've had one glass of whiskey now and if I talk about my emotions and Whatever I gotta stop well, you're really talented and It's not often in life where someone gets to find themselves in a position like you were in Where you were being embraced by all these very successful other comedians that were willing to help you. Yeah Sall these podcasts you go on it was just a matter of time where you were being embraced by all these very successful other comedians that were willing to help you Yeah, so all these podcasts you go on it was just a matter of time For you Where you took off? There's a matter of time you were right there and the talent is the most important thing The most difficult thing is to be good. So once you get past that then just about letting the world know Well, this is a really good time. Then the world know getting to like I Did three sets last night and two sets night before and I just like Something is You just have a little idea at the first one So I change that a little bit and then the game of it starts again. Oh, and I'm very happy right now It's like I get I I get to do it even just every night for the next month Month in a bit I get to do like one or two hours every single night and spots are in town all this week Yeah, I think it's like a little back to Australia. Stare those fucking kangaroos Yes, I am It'll be so do you think there are good you could envision a scenario where your wife would be open to try it again Yeah, okay, but we I don't know when and I don't know how it would work and we I do love Adelaide like when I'm there I have some sense of being at home that is Profound, like I look up at the sky and I feel like there's a roof over me like in a comforting way like you belong there Yeah, but it's also maybe the worst place to develop is this I mean we've had great stand-ups come out of it I love Adelaide, you know, and there are people running rooms, but like we don't have a club We don't have a club. We don't have one club going over this city of 1.4 million people and there's no We have a we have places where they do comedy in terms of like like a birthday Friday Saturday Early show late show lineup shows 10 15 minutes. It's not there. But do you have enough talent to support a club? It comes in waves in the way that any medium level comedy city like All of a sudden it'll build up and there will be great people and then they'll all go Go to Melbourne Sydney, right? And I will say that's been one nice thing about Australia not letting Talent come through for so long and also the UK declining is I now know each of people who've come to America Like after me and just before me and there are heaps of Aussies flooding into This country now. I must my best friend. I must kill just got past at the seller And I'm so like I'm so proud of him. It's all he's just giving all the time And he's getting to he just recorded a special in Denver. Nice. Yeah, and it's like a black Freeman is doing well And all they I can get all these Aussies hitting me up and go, can you get me into the mothership? And it's like well, not you, but you know maybe some other ones That's the problem right? I don't know how many I've put on in front of Adam on the Monday's, but I've had to stop So you can't use up that currency on people that not deserve it, you know Because you want to help people but you can't they have to be ready and they have to put in the work There's a lot of people that think you're gonna provide them with a shortcut and they really haven't prepared properly Yeah, and they haven't put in the work to get to that point We had a few of those guys come from LA that were like their careers had floundered horribly in LA due to laziness and sure fill in the blank and then they tried to like restart themselves in Austin I'm like no like you you can't half-ass this thing this thing is hard to do and there's too many people trying to do it all the way Yeah, we're flooded with people trying to do it all the way If you think you're gonna come over and half-ass it because it's like this new place and now to be exciting again And they don't know you know like we fucking know you But I think people don't love it people love the thought of being good at it. Yeah Being respected but like when I I got to open for Mark Norman in Australia, which is how I met him and he'll do You know like a two thousand seat theater early shot and then the light shot and then he'll go What else is open right take me to the open mic with six people in it now. Yeah. Well, that's New York. Yeah New York. He's got a great documentary that they just released about such a good idea. I was yeah, I was yeah I wanted to do that with women What do you mean was this is sort of you only have women in the audience? So you only have one kind of person No, you're not Also apologize. I apologize. No, it's the documentary about him getting ready for a special Okay When he's getting ready for a special he's working out the jokes at all these different places and showing how he goes up at the Stand then he goes up in the cellar and then he traveled and talking about the development of all these bits about how the bit came together When he added this new line and it so it shows him working all this stuff out on the way to doing this special and Boulder I didn't meant interrupt. I didn't know about that. Yeah. It's a new one. He just put it out like 14 days ago. Do you know the other show that he's done? Yeah, yeah the other show all the wokies in the audience. Yeah How many shows is he doing are he's an animal? He's he's got Incredible work ethic and constantly writing. Yeah, you see his pile of notes. Yes keeps in his pocket He does not have a folder. I'm like, bro. You're gonna break your back. Yeah, you can't sit on a rock like that It's got this. He's siphoning through them. Yeah, but he'd lie. I mean, he really loves it. He wants to be doing it You find that Norman thing. It's pretty cool. Does the bit work out and get into the special? Well, it's not just a bit It's a lot of bits, but it's it's like him showing like what the behind the scenes is like him showing him rushing from one club to go to another place to do a spot Checking the line-ups. Okay I could do this and then I can leave here and go down the street and then be back for the 10 o'clock show It's really interesting because especially for people that don't know what it's like So there is pushing boulder is what it's called. Oh, it's long. It's a proper document. Yeah. Yeah It's really good dude and if for a comic, you know, it's it's really fun They catch him in the toilet in the beginning like he's in Boulder I mean that is what every hotel room looks like on the ride It's great because it shows you what it's really like and if you think it's easy Like you think you get to a guy like Mark Norman's level that he's just you know No big deal easy. No, no that guy's constantly Grinding he's constantly going out and writing and tweaking it. It's in his head. Yeah He's talking about it in diners. He's sitting in a bow day. Gonna have a coffee going over his notes It's really cool because it's that's the real process What's the willingness to be bad again? Mm-hmm, which is No one wants to do that. No one wants to have a special come out and have to start again and have to suck Like that Jerry Seinfeld comedian documentary isn't perfect. I mean he I mean they're both still doing it. What's the other guy's name? Oh, and he yeah, did you know it? Oh, and he I did not or any items he does not come across great in that talking Entry, but he's still at there. I feel like they did that to him on purpose to make Jerry more likable That's what I think it was I feel like that's why they picked him. Yeah I felt like they decided to pick a guy who's like way less likable and it makes Jerry look great Well, I mean the ending especially at the time because he's a young guy at the time Yeah, he's really new to comedy. I mean he wasn't doing comedy that long and then the final scene is Tossby, right? Yeah, yeah, he just loved the work. I think Cosby's Is he not touring anymore? He's out. He's out of jail to let him out Did you see but he's blind now? I mean he can still get up. I'm sure he can still throw it down. So There was uh, he did let him he did a round of gigs just before the first like when when the trial started But the allegations were out. Yeah, you see that no he was doing crowd. I knew he was doing it He was he was doing crowd work. Yeah. There's a line that came I don't think anyone got a recording people wrote it down That he was he's doing he's riffing with the crowd and the lady gets up and goes to the bathroom And he says you go away. What's your drink? It gets a big pop. Wow. Yeah, he's still got it. That's crazy. That's a crazy thing to say Probably was doing bad stuff, but still 100% No, I would say I had heard about that in the 90s I heard about that on the set of news radio and I was like what the trucking. Yeah, they did drug women I heard about it in the 1990s. I couldn't believe it. I was like what bill Cosby was this widespread people knew about this People in Hollywood nay actors so actors. It was an actress that actually told me that that bill they'll Cosby drugs women But then everybody who had him on like Well, tonight show or a light show or was doing a fun interview with him must have heard I don't know You know, I would have had after No into their world because only every would have heard that before having him on the people heard about it at a certain point in time It's whether or not they believed it Joey orders Cosby to pay nearly $60 million to ex-wetrous after finding he abused her in 1972 Holy shit. Yeah 1972 You are and you seen his Facebook page what his face got a Facebook. Yeah, and well It was while he was in prison. They were still updating it. It's a very pro Cosby There's like team Cosby that's still trying to keep the reputation Yeah, there's a lot of delusional people out there They're in the payroll. They got to be kid being I mean He still probably has a lot of money the Cosby show was a tremendous hit the the records are Great they were great. Yeah, I mean, it was a great talent also It's probably doing some rape and probably doing something a lot of writing. Yeah quite a bit although the one the way they I Read something about the case where they got him and they put him away, but I didn't finish Like I've never found it again So I don't know if it's true, but it's what I read about the evidence that they had to convict him where he He was drug his defense was that he was dragging the women But it was consensual and then you there were there for a dragging That was I believe his defense I think I'm getting this right I think I'm remembering this correctly and there was a lady and the way they got him was that he she got pneumonia afterwards because he did the drugging and then he left her on the couch without a blanket on a cold night and She said if we'd been in a relationship he would have put a blanket on me Whoa, but I've always thought that that was maybe only in a relationship would you Have the resentment and not put a blanket It's all I don't know that that would decide it either way, but it was a weird His defense wasn't that he wasn't there and hadn't done it. He was like yeah Well, maybe there was so much evidence that he did it that they had to come up with something clever Like another confirmed Nord to die. Yeah, I like worked the way around it that I was Drogging women unconscious. They wanted to they knew that's what that's what the fun game was But the crazy right well, I think he got out because he paid a woman off and So there was some sort of a deal where he paid a woman off and part of the the deal of him Paying the settlement was that he can never be tried again for this. It's like double jeopardy. I Don't know okay, so it wasn't a criminal conviction. It was a civil conviction run So then he was tried for it criminally and so I think that's how he got off He got off because his art his lawyer argued that the settlement of the first here we'll see it here immunity agreement. That's it So it says Bill Cosby's defense successfully overturned his 2018 sexual assault conviction in 2021 by arguing that a prior prosecutor promised not to charge him Rendering his incriminating test deposition testimony in admissible the defense led by Jennifer Bonjean argued that using his testimony violated his rights framing the prosecution as a violator of due process Using his testimony violated his right because it was part of his willingness to testify was that he couldn't be prosecuted for it Criminally yeah, whatever that's spooky. It's crazy. It's crazy It's just crazy that this guy did this for decades Yeah, it's only there's a story of one weird night or someone woke up and had a headache and go I think this motherfucker puts up in my drink. No, it was Decades and it was also like he joked around about it in the Cosby show Like using a special barbecue sauce. Did you use my special barbecue sauce that gets everybody horny? I Didn't know about this. Oh, yeah, I didn't find that Spanish fly joke. That was a bit. Yeah It's Benish fly and he also did that bit. I believe on the tonight show we talked about it Like he talked about on the tonight show giving people Spanish fly like giving people a drink that would make him horny But there was an episode Bobby Kia yeah, yeah, he had a special barbecue sauce that would make people horny on the Cosby show Look at this Nice to see them work things out for themselves Yeah, anything out themselves. It's my barbecue Gee My barbecue sauce I didn't you ever noticed after people have some of my barbecue sauce after a while when it kicks in they get all hoodie-bug I'm dead serious haven't you ever noticed that after one of my body cues and they have this sauce people want to get right home It's the music Bill I got a cup of it I said Chicken to these people are going up and have some sauce So here's the rest of the chicken you guys Creepy right they that was his move that that music was not part of the original cosmic shot. I wish it was Yeah, it would be great if it was I had never seen that before. Yeah my special barbecue sauce. Yeah There was the there's a sign-fought episode where he drugs a woman so he can play with her toys Am I getting that right? Is that true? Yeah, there's an episode where she there's some sort of like sleeping medication and he gives a tour So you can play with her toys. She has like figurines and collectibles The water no he date wraps the woman he doesn't have six or gets a Conscious so that he can play with her figurines. I think that's the secret date right sign-filled episode Am I getting that right? The drug Jerry uses food with high-trip to fan Turkey or medic medicine to make her drowsy Which he brags about doing multiple times Wow He's obsessed with playing with Celia's pristine toys including an original GI Joe and a Mattel football game 1997 special barbecue sauce is creepy as fuck Oh the sample that in rap. So he's sense. He's also. I know that he was a whisper. Yeah, I didn't like it makes me uncomfortable And man's got time we've got to say the man The delivery is unquestionably well He's got a lot of practice and saying things like that. I wonder if he's he's not still in the right He can't still be I don't think he's doing anything. I think he's probably in hiding. We suck a 95 year old man It's a 95 year old man. I think he's at least partially blind. Yeah, and obviously a pariah Did you ever watch the last Jimmy? Fallon set that he did no rides around on his back on Jim founds back. Yeah Okay, why would Jimmy Fallon agree to that? I don't remember. I don't know that he did I Mean Jimmy founds up in a bad he's having a nice time Nice a job. You're man, but I think he's it's something. Yeah I remember and then it was like weeks later Jimmy Fallon's rival riding on Bill Cosby's back. Oh, yeah Yeah, he's not having that's even weirder because Bill Cosby's really old a Billy bro What if your D's give out? He was saying that he was strong But I think that was just before it came out piggyback ride because it was I think it was Hannibal Bureaus who this is 2023 No, this is when they uploaded it. You have to be oh 2014 we got wrapped this man. I love you buddy. It's good to see you back. Thank you Thanks tonight. Yeah, yeah, yeah, let's fucking go Instagram Twitter handles J. D if McCann the James Donald Phillips McCann catamaran plan big podcast Very small podcast my man