Thank you for coming on, Mr. Trinity General. Glad to be here. So the most pressing problem, I think it's fair to say, is an outsider in Texas. It's immigration. It's totally changed your state in every way. Do you expect that the new administration and the executive orders in the first couple of days are going to have an own material effect, an noticeable effect? I know they are, just because I saw what happened four years ago or eight years ago in Trump came into office. I went through, I've been in politics since Bush was in office and I've seen how Republicans and Democrats have dealt with immigration. They have not dealt with the effect leak because they have not enforced federal law. Trump was the first president to use the force of our federal laws, which are good in design and protect us whether it was Romania, Mexico or whether it was Title 42 or it was stopping catch or at least basic common-set things like building a wall. Those things work. They've just absolutely worked. Just what he's done in the first couple of days is significant in changing word, Biden was taking us. So one of the things you pointed out off camera was his executive order designated the drug cartels as terror organizations is significant. Yes, we as states don't have much authority to stop illegal immigration. But the federal government has that authority and by designating these cartels as terrorist organizations, now the military, our military force can be used to against them rather than just using border patrol and leaving the state subject to the cartels' crimes. You do wonder about the power of the drug cartels. They've a lot of the weapons we've sent to Ukraine have been sold by the Ukrainian military onto the black market that's a fact, a lot up to half. And a lot of the members by the drug cartels you see in Mexico, pitched battles, military engagements between the cartels and the Mexican military where they're very well-armed. Are you worried about that happening in Texas? Absolutely. I think the Biden administration is indirectly funded the cartels. They have encouraged by saying no deportations on day one of his administration, they've encouraged illegal immigration and that's a profit center for the cartels. They make eight to $12,000 a person. If you just do the numbers of $14 million, that's a lot of money. They're making billions every month. And then they can go and use that money to buy weapons from Ukraine, which were funding worse for sending that over free. So indirectly, they're part of the whole process of one, allowing the cartels to have access to our country and allowing them to make a profit and then to use that money to arm themselves in a significant way. That's our government. It's horrifying. I mean, because some of the weapons are surface-to-air weapons. So you wonder what's the subject of commercial air travel. You can see things kind of starting to fall apart. Is there widespread acknowledgement of this in Texas that we could have a serious problem with these cartels? I think even just common people are aware of that just because of the influx and the increase crime associated with just everyday crime that people see as a relationship with the cartels moving into our state. And that network that they built is not just in Texas. They have building that network all over the country. They're not going to want to give it up. They're making too much money on drugs, sex trafficking, other crimes, and the importation of people. Every big construction site in this country has prostitution run by the cartels, often of children. I don't see anyone doing anything about it. And it makes you wonder like Mexico is completely utterly corrupt because of cartel money. Politicians, judges, journalists, all in the payroll. You see this in other Latin American countries. I mean, our politicians are not that expensive. Like you could do that in the state like Texas, right? Well, here's one of the biggest problems we have. We have it in Texas. We have another parts of the country. George Soros has figured this out. He's gone in and elected DAs in Democratic counties. Austin, Houston, Dallas, San Antonio. So 70% of our population controlled by Soros DAs. He went in and knocked off Democratic DAs because we can't get elected Republicans in those areas. So he went in and knocked off DAs who were actually prosecuting and replaced him with Soros DAs. Now, our legislature could fix that. They haven't. They could come in and say, AG, you have concurrent jurisdiction who after these crimes. But because they haven't done that, crime is proliferating in all of our cities. Financial crimes, other times, crimes because they will not prosecute crimes. And so the cartels have an open invitation. So do other cartels from other countries. So if you go out to our financial crime unit in Tyler, they will tell you about all these crimes. Crime groups coming in from other countries because they know they can get away with it. And our legislature so far has not fixed that. Then the question of motive arises like, why wouldn't you want to stop crime in your state? That's a very good question. I find that DAs have, they have more power in Texas than any elected fish lie we're seeing because they're not accountable to anybody. If they commit a crime, no one can prosecute them. If it's a state crime, they'd have to prosecute themselves. And they can allow any crimes in their area. And they can go after in Texas. It is so easy to get a diamond. You just walk in, you can tell the grand jury, anything you want to, you can lie. Once you have the indictment, you've got it. There's no getting out of it. And so I think a lot of our politicians are afraid of their DAs, even if they're liberal Democrats. But if we don't get control of this in our state, in other states, and give somebody like the attorney general, I'm not going to be there forever, give that authority so that there's another way to prosecute when the Soros DAs and sources figured it out, but the Republicans have not. I mean, it's so obvious just in your 45 second explanation, it makes sense. So is it that they haven't figured it out or do they have a higher loyalty? They're afraid of the DAs. They're afraid, the DAs come in and lobby. Everybody's afraid of their own DAs that they'll get indicted if they do it. There's just that power because to get an indictment in Texas, you don't have to have, there's no recording of it. It's only one side of the story. You can walk, and if they lie and they get the indictment, there's no remedy. There's no consequence to the DA and there's no remedy for the victim of that lie. You are going to trial. You can even, it's somehow you could find out what happened in that secret grand jury proceeding, which I have before. It doesn't matter. You can go to judge and say they lied. You still are indicted and you're still at risk of going to prison. You have to tell your kids you've been indicted. And you might be in prison. They, you might be in front of a jury that doesn't know the truth. And you go to jail or you're a, you know, Democratic County, you might go to jail on something that they made up. So you, you really think, I mean, I'm sorry to be so naive, but I grew up in this country. And we didn't have things like this that I was aware of in 1985. But you think that members of the Texas legislature are afraid they'll be indicted if they push back against the DA's. I think there is a fear and there is this lobby of it. These DA's have so much power. Otherwise, why would they allow Soros to control the major cities and the pro, it's obvious that they're not prosecuting crime. They wouldn't even prosecute shoplifting for, if you have free ride, if you want to, so I want you to take seven or $50 a day in Dallas County, whatever the number is, and you go to different stores, you can do that every day. And you will, you, the DA there said, we will not prosecute you. But why would you want that unless you were trying to destroy a civilization? Soros, it's exactly what he wants to do. So there's no political goal here. It's just destabilization. Right. And it's so easy. It is literally so easy to do that. And he also, I believe, got control of our court of criminal appeals, which is our highest court. We have a bifurcated system in Texas. We have the text Supreme Court that that's the final appeal and civil and the court of criminal appeals. But no one knew who they were. And suddenly they strike down a law that allowed me to that directed me to prosecute voter fraud. And they took it away just by saying, oh, it's unconstitutional because you're in the executive branch and separation of power says you can't be in court. How insane is that? So we, I've had to go run three. I'm trying to take that court back. But we right now, I can't even prosecute voter fraud, which opens us up to unfair elections in Texas, which we, which I was prosecuting plenty of voter fraud before that happened. So who, who's supposed to prosecute voter fraud? The Soros DA's. So that's where we're at in Texas. But that's why I ran, this is a nine member court, six year terms. They waited till two days after the filing deadline to announce their decision. This is a 1951 statute that has thousands of cases of precedent. And they came up with this insane idea that it was unconstitutional for the attorney general to be in court because I'm in the executive branch. If that's true, every AG in the country is violating the constitutional constitution. So that was irrational. I had to wait two years. I recruited three people to take out the three people that were up. So we've replaced three. We got one good one on there, but we're still down five four. So until we fix those things in Texas, we're at risk. Oh, big time. Oh, big time. So do you think that these Soros DA's have hesitated to go after the drug cartels? They don't. They don't go after crime in general. They don't work. They're pull, they do political crimes, but they generally are not there. They don't do their jobs. They don't prosecute even when people get killed. Hit and miss, hit and miss. But they're not the message from Soros is let as much crime goes possible. It's amazing that a non-U.S. citizen in H.C. United States hates the West. Could have that much power in our country. It's just his money. It doesn't take very much. It doesn't to elect a DA in a Travis County, which is Austin. You're in a Democratic primary. It doesn't take that many votes. You've got I was working with a DA there who was a Democrat. I didn't agree with her on everything, but she was doing her job. They spend a little bit of money, takes her out. Suddenly now I've got a DA who won't prosecute anything. Same in Bearkin, which is San Antonio. I worked with a DA a lot in Bearkin. I've got a Nikola Hood. His brother is now converted to Republican. He's a state rep. He was awesome to work with. He was a Democrat. He was Democrat. He did his job. Guess what? Soros replaced him with money. That's what it doesn't take him that much money. The controls are our whole situation with crime and controls our judicial system, at least on the criminal side. We're sitting here letting it happen in Texas and other states. What did you think when Joe Biden gave George Soros the presidential medal of freedom disgusting? The guy's done more to it. As far as I know, there are not many people in the world that have thrown more harm to our country. He's being applauded by Joe Biden. It's not surprising because Joe Biden has the same motivations. What did Joe Biden do that was good? Can you name it? I can't tell. They worked from day one to destroy what future would pass generations had built this amazing country. It had to be on purpose. The reason I said it is because you would think that randomly he would have done something good if it weren't purposeful. He would have had something economically internationally. The board of something would have been right, right? Just brainably. They're not a love average. Right. A victory once in a while. The bell curve tells you you'd had something good. He didn't have anything good. It was all on the other end of the curve. The downside of the curve, which was harm to Americans, that cannot be accidental. It's too individual Americans, I think that's absolutely right. Again, I'm so fixated with this. Why would you want to do that? I truly believe that this started, I think, with President Obama, first president, I believe that didn't love America. They really thought we were a bad country, that thought we were racist and that we deserved to be taken down to another level. I think they operated under this idea that we were a bad country. They were bad people and that we don't deserve this. They fundamentally don't believe in what was created here. I truly believe that. And they want to destroy it. Take it down to smile on that. Because they think it's bad. They think we're bad. I don't see another explanation. There's hate behind it. There's no doubt about it. How could you wind up with the outcome with people dying of drug ODs on the street and stores closing because of stealing and you think the kids cutting their own genitals off, like you would have to hate someone. You remember the contempt that Obama said, they cling to their religion, their guns and their God. There's contempt for that. What the founders put in place, a bunch of white racists who had slaves. And so that permeates his view of America. And yet, there's no excuse for slavery. We messed up in that. We fixed it. We were moving the right direction. But his view is we're broken because of that. And therefore we deserve to be dismantled because we don't know about that. I mean, there are countries, well, slavery is still practiced in certain countries. There were like critical US allies that had slavery until the 1970s and no one ever, 1970s. And no one ever mentions that. Olds, then response will Obama has no problem taking money for speeches in those countries. That's why it doesn't make sense. It's slavery around the world forever. And it's awful. It is awful. And the US and Great Britain were the reason that we don't have it anymore and globally, for the most part, and no civilized country would tolerate slavery. But if you're against slavery, by the way, why would you be for the drug cartels, which practice slavery, which sell people? All I know is it seems like the things they focus on to the greatest harm to America. Totally agree. But I think it's a mistake to take their explanations at face value. I think there's something deeper. Like it's just hate. I want to hurt people. They do not have an abiding love. Look, I didn't like Jimmy Carter as a president. I think it did a good job, but he didn't have a hatred for this country. I don't think so. I don't think he did. I think we've had a lot of mediocre to bad presidents who still... Didn't want the country to be dis I agree. Just like me. But I think it started with Obama. Biden didn't know what he was doing. He was being told by others. He wasn't competent. And that this was the third presidency of President Obama. And he didn't have to worry about being popular anymore. Because he limited himself a little bit, because he wanted to get reelected. I think Carabzo, by that reelected. You think it's over for Obama? His influence is permanently diminished? I think it's been impacted and affected. It could be. If we continue the momentum, we don't mess this up. If we get caught up and not focusing on the best things for America, he can come right back in. If we don't take care of the American people and make that our number one focus, what's best for the American people? If we stand that track, we have a really good chance of being successful for a long time. If we lose sight of that and we start worrying about our power and our high agree, once we start taking care of ourselves, then they have a chance back in because the American people see that. I think that's really wise. I'm concerned about that. Not because of any individual acting in bad faith, but because human nature. That's a problem. What it is, it's exactly right. The press attorneys actually had that right. When they set this government up, it was based on the depravity. It was the reason they wanted three branches of the government that made it so frustrating to get things done, it's because they didn't trust people in power. Because every human, I wouldn't trust myself in power at all. I don't want power because I don't trust myself. I don't think any honest person can really say, my motives are pure. No, I grew that. We all have this pull towards, yeah, and anyone who doesn't admit that's a liar. So yeah, I want oversight of me. And then you see Chuck Schumer like that kind of is a lot of oversight, like armed oversight. You know what I mean? Like all of us. Yeah, I think you got it right. And you're speech at the Bible Museum during the inauguration about humility and realizing your need for God's work and your life. And without that, you have a tent. We all have a tendency to go to 100%. And you lie to yourself, oh, I'm doing this for the greater good. I have known people personally who've killed other human beings because they thought they convinced themselves, this is actually for the, you know, some, the humanity will benefit from. Oh, yes. That's what we all can deserve. Whatever we're doing that we're doing this. And it really, we, we, we tell ourselves, oh, this is really good because we are, we are all face many times. It's so, it's so true. So the whole point of market capitalism is consumer choice. You have a choice between products and services and the competition between companies makes the goods and services better. That's the core idea. Unfortunately, there are an awful lot of monopolies out there. Monopolies are not good for consumers. They are not good for you. And one of the places where there's effectively a monopoly is in wireless contracts, but it's not a complete monopoly. You're probably paying way too much to use your cell phone. But now you have a choice. You don't have to pay a hundred bucks a month just to get a free phone. That's not a good deal. There's a company called PureTalk, which we use that has no inflated prices with a qualifying plan of just $45 a month. You can choose a free phone, an iPhone 14 or a Samsung gallery. Then you get unlimited talk tax 25 gigs of data, which is enough for most people, a mobile hotspot all for that low price. And it's got the most dependable 5G network. So you get your free iPhone 14 or Samsung Galaxy by visiting puretalk.com slash Tucker and you switch to pure talk today. America's wireless company PureTalk. So can I ask you? I was reading in the final weeks before the election that the Biden administration was selling off portions of the materials for the border walls. Is that actually true? I believe it is. And here's what happened. We had sued the Biden administration a couple of years ago. And in these cases, these federal cases don't happen overnight. It took us a couple of years. We sued them and we said Congress appropriated money for the billing of the wall. You are not building it while you're actually selling off assets. So we sued them. We won that lawsuit and in May we get an injunction from a federal judge saying you, DOJ, you, by the measurement cannot selling more assets off. So then I got called for President Trump a month ago. He said they're selling assets off. So would you sue him? I said, I don't have to have our done it. Why are we getting order? So we go back into court. We've told the judge, hey, they're selling off assets. We've been told to sell off assets. We went into counting. And before we got there, DOJ is calling us, begging us, hey, we're not selling, we swear we won't sell anymore assets. They didn't say they hadn't. Say we won't sell anymore. So they signed a grant and say we didn't sell anymore. But the judge, which we asked for, there's going to be an accounting and there's potential sanctions if they lied and they followed, they did not follow that order. We don't know that yet. But we're going to know that soon. Now that DOJ is switching, we're going to know that soon. I truly believe they're selling off assets. In violation, not only of federal law, but in violation of a court order that we got in May saying you can't sell off assets because we were trying to protect those assets so that if Trump won, we would come, because I knew Biden would never build that wall even if he was instructed by Congress to do so. How hard is it? I never really understood why is it so hard to build a, seems like a pretty straightforward infrastructure project. It is a pretty straightforward infrastructure project, but they hate it. It's some kind of symbol of, I don't know, racism or whatever, but it's not. It protects us from exactly what we've had. So why not pass a law that says anyone, any elected official who opposes the building of a border wall is prohibited from putting a lock on the front door of his house? Well, that would affect a lot of Republicans. I mean, my own senator would have to have trouble with that John Corin, because he's been against the border wall saying it wouldn't work. But we all know that walls do work. They do work. I've seen it. I've seen how it works. Why would John Corinan be opposed to a border wall protecting his own state? I don't understand it. I've seen quotes from him. I've seen video clips from him over and over how it's not enough. It doesn't work. He is opposed to the border wall. But he's helped to appropriate billions and billions and billions of dollars for border security on their countries. I know. It's really odd that he thinks it works other places, but it doesn't work in Texas. And he's sort of mocked it and said it doesn't work. It's not. I love that. You hear him mock his real sporter wall. Do you think he will? No. I'd love to hear him mock Ukraine's territorial integrity. Do they know? Nope. I've heard him do that. What is that about? I don't understand. I mean, I think the Bush has had the same idea that open borders were relatively good. I don't think that he or the Bush is. But only for us. No one's called in China to open its numbers. I don't know why they have this view. But they I mean, even under the Bush presidency, I don't think they took immigration seriously. The first president I've ever seen taken seriously is Donald J. Trump. How did John, I mean, this is a question I could ask of so no offense. I say this is a Texas lover who's got a lot of relatives there, including a child. I love Texas. And however, I think you've got some of the worst politicians in the country. Like how did that happen? How does that happen? So I think about like the Texas house and what's going on there, what's gone on there for 16 years, where a small group of Republicans for power align themselves in the house with the Democrats so that the Speaker is elected by mostly Democrats and a few Republicans. They just did it again. I'm an already Republicans after he put the rules in place that the caucus, the Republican caucus would decide who the Speaker was. And when he lost that vote in caucus, he walked out, cut it into all the Democrats and he just became Speaker of the Texas house. That is for power. That is for his own personal power. And that the Republicans that do that have traded getting good policy done, getting property tax on school choice, protecting the board, not doing impeachments of guys that just got elected. They traded that to have power. That's all it is. With all this drug cartel money in your state, it's not going to get better because you could just buy and remember the Texas legislature. What would that cost? Not too much. I mean, these guys, I mean, they only make 600 hours a month. So you know, anything is good after that. You're pretty vulnerable that way. I think we are. And I think a lot of these people, because Texas house, you pay 600 hours a month. So most people that run have to have money. You can't. And if you don't have money, you're getting paid somewhere. For something because it's impossible to live on obviously 600 hours a month. So everybody has to either work and it's hard to work when you've got a job that may take a year out of every two years. So specifically on John Cornyn, how did he get to be a senator when statewide in Texas? So this goes back to George W. Bush appointed him to be a US Supreme Court judge in a United States, but a tech Supreme Court judge. And when he did that, he authored an opinion that created this thing called Robinhood, which takes from the wealthy school districts and gets to the poorest, supposedly. And what that did to our system was it created a mediocre school system because it's just socialism. Instead of just letting the wealthy school districts make their schools however they want to, we've got to take their money. Why don't we just fund the poor school districts? It makes no sense. But I think it's not about helping the bottom. It's about crushing the top. It's about making it all equal. That's socialism. It doesn't work. It's never working where we have no example that it actually works. So but in yet, John Cornyn did that for George W. Bush because George wanted to be president. He didn't want to pass a major tax increase. So he let John do it judicious. It was a five-word decision. John Cornyn was on the five-word. I'm pretty sure he authored it. And so it's in the late 90s. Yes. And for that, they pushed him, Rov and Bush pushed him to be the attorney general of Texas, first Republican actually. And then they pushed him into the US Senate. So he has been pushed and funded by that group. And fortunately, Texans have caught onto that and realized that group, whatever they say they believe isn't really what they believe because they don't actually follow through on it. Well, I mean, we kind of know what Bush believes. I mean, as families out there campaigning for Planned Parenthood voting for Kamala Harris, I was with him two days ago, and Obama at the inauguration right next to them across from my watch to him, you know, Paulo. I'm with the United States friends with Obama. That's his world. Right. That's his world. That's all well-known. But what's pretty distressing was running me indoors, Kamala Harris and his sad little daughter campaign for Kamala Harris. So that whole world is now their own Democrats. But John Cornyn is still an elected statewide elected official in Texas. He's a puppet of the left, obviously. How does that continue to happen? So I think it's because people weren't as aware of what the Bush has did and what he's done and that they've become more aware because of people like you and others who have outed that. So he's never had a real prime. He had four people running in some, none of them had money. Nobody ever run before. No one even knew who they were. It was all fake. And he claims, you know, he got 76% of her. Of course, he had nobody running in so that I could tell you who it was. And I'm pretty involved in politics. Somebody needs to run against him this time because he's been there for what? 16 years just in that position. Count his AG, that's four years. He was Supreme Court, Texas Supreme Court justice. And before that, he's been doing this a long time and he's gotten away with this. It's about time that he'd be held accountable because I can't think of a single thing that he's done for Texas that's good. He has no claim for doing things good for Texas or a good. He's helped Zelensky and that's pretty much it. So how do, okay. So what's the process? I've never met anyone in Lake Shore in John Cornyn, never met anyone who thought he's achieved anything, never met anyone who thinks he's smart. He's pompous. He's quite a self-righteous little guy. So I think he's very unpopular with every person I've ever met in my life. And yet all things being equal, he gets reelected. So how do you stop something like that? So I'll give you an example of what you're just saying. So right after I beat George P. Bush, who he came out endorsed, of course. And then he made disparaging comments about me being an embarrassment to Texas and he made some comment about me being part of Russia propaganda. You're a Russian propaganda. I don't know how that happened. I'm in Texas. I became part of the Russian propaganda because I criticized him on Ukraine. He said that you were a Russian propaganda. Yes. Yes. Yes, we said. Crazy stuff. People didn't used to say things like that. Right. Well, guess what? So who's more loyal American or John Cornyn? I'm who's more focused on the fortunes of his own country and his own people. You were John Cornyn who obviously doesn't care at all. Didn't say anything his own state was invaded and lectures us endlessly. So tool the Intel agencies lecturing us by Ukraine. But you're the disloyal American. It's actually, you shouldn't say things like that. It's not talk. It's crazy. It's so. And so justice, the crazy thing we have a text from Republican convention shortly after the election where I win by 38 points, George P. Bush, which is pretty significant margin and a primary. So we have the convention of 12,000 Republicans there. He and his wife walk up on stage and for 10 straight minutes, he doesn't say a word. He gets booed for the 20 minutes he's speaking. He never adjusted the speech. He gets booed the entire 20 minutes. He gets booed 30 minutes straight. I'm standing waiting to go on stage. I walk away because I'm afraid of what I might say after he said these things public to me. I go up and get a standing ovation. So there is the people of Texas, no John Cornyn. And I don't think he'll survive another primary. So how do you stop the cycle? I think in Texas, it's very doable because people realize now who John Cornyn is. We have a primary next not this March, but the next March. So somebody needs to run against him in that primary. So in a year, basically in a year and two months, you have a primary. So that primary. It's imminent. It's coming. Absolutely. So he's I don't think he's he's long for this Senate world. So I'm sure he's got such an enormous reservoir of skills and talent that he'll thrive in the private sector. Doing what? I don't know if he's ever been there. He couldn't start my truck on a cold day. He has no idea. He has no skills. But anyway, sorry, I'm being too mean, but it's all true. How do you how do you beat him in a primary? So I mean, I don't know. I'm running for sure. I'm looking at it probably the next few months. I'll be talking to people around the state. But I mean, I've run two primaries against George P. Bush and another guy Dan Branch who was George, one of George, so he was a little bit of a damn branch. Twenty five years close friends, but very moderate. And I I beat him. Nice or do you, then he was me. Yeah. I served in the house with one one always so nice to me. 65 35 him with he had a lot more money, same with Bush. I beat him 68 32. So primary voters, if they're educated, will make good choices based on what you've actually done. And that was always me with Dan Branch. We're in the house together for 10 years and I moved over to Senate for two while he was in the house. Don't listen to the rhetoric. Look at the record. We both have a record. Go look at the record, compare them. See if they're the same. They're not. He can say what he wants. He is not what he's he's he's running on my record. Look at his record and that works and primaries. And the same thing with John Corinne. I bring out what he said about Trump and how disparaging was a Trump in 2016 and 2000. Just in the last election saying he shouldn't run. He's not the right guy. I mean, John's wrong about most everything. There's very few things. He's the side with the swamp and Washington and he does what Coro tells him to do. So that that doesn't work in Republican primaries, not in Texas. What is Coro? I mean, Coro is I mean, he's got to be 70 anyway at this point. I would think he's been around. I mean, I've known him for pushing 30 years. I don't think his track record is something anyone could brag about at all. He's been wrong about his sub genius, I would say for sure. I'm a genius. No, you're not. And his record's just he's not. And so why does he still have info? Does he still affect him? Let's be honest. He's propped. for sure. I'm a genius. No, you're not. And his records just he's not. And so like why does he still have info? Does he still effective? Let's be honest. He's propped up by Fox News. He has the platform. They take care of him. He can keep people like princess. I can't get him. He's still on Fox News. He's still on Fox News and he's kept me off for a couple of years because I went over and he gets Bush. They got Bush on and took me off and all the shows I used to be on. All of the all of them. Are you serious? I know that for I know for a fact he is to disadvantage. Carl Rob is still on Fox. He's still on Fox. I've just saw him during the inauguration. He's there a lot. I used to go in studio at the same place in Austin. I trade out with him. Yeah, I've been to that studio. Yeah. And he got me cut out for sure. And I know that from hosts of shows who have said, sorry, week, they will even like I will have a case. They will we will get we will. Jeff. You'll talk to my communicator. They'll book me. They'll cancel me. Then they'll go try to find another AG. They'll call the Republicans. We find another AG or they'll ask for somebody else in my office other than me. That was Carl Rob blacklisting me. Carl Rob is booking shows at Fox News. He just goes around and he he controls. So crazy. No, I've been told by people you know that have show everyone there. I just don't want to out him. Yeah. No, I get it. That have told me we can't have you. And for the last two years, I've been in Fox like maybe a couple times I speak on every day. Sometimes no imagine if I can just say since I know these systems. I lived it. Imagine you're the host of a show and you get a call saying the sitting Republican attorney general of the second biggest state is not allowed on your air because of reasons we won't explain because like Carl Rob's like a totally discredited buffoon doesn't like the guy. Be like buzz off. Well, I think he went to like Paul Ryan the board and just got it's like I am like why would you cave to that? Like I don't job is worth taking orders. You didn't cave that. Why I fired exactly. But that's when you can sit or that like what they always say on the three or four times they ever said anything like that to me. I'd be like, no, it's totally great. Just put it in writing. Just send me an email explaining why we can't have this guest the rationale for it and all assessed and I'll respond in writing. The second you say put it in right and they're like, oh, they never call you. I'm just telling you. I just put it in writing. It's totally fun. I know you know what I've got some hearing issues. So if you could just write it down explain what exactly about Ken Paxton is like verboten. I was supposed to go on a show. There was all there's still one host that would sort of have me and I was supposed to go on these show and I had two different settings to go on and both got canceled. I've sold. You got canceled from we're moving in another direction. Yeah. Even if it's my case. I mean, I fall the case and they want another Chinese general to come on and talk about this. I would just never put up with that. I would always call and say like what, you know, what is this? Well, the decisions made by whom and why. But that's why Carl of still has his platform because it's all the most disgusting kind of power, which is like stealthy, feline power behind the scenes power rather than just saying, you know, here are my views and this is what I think and I'm happy to debate it or whatever. I think you're wrong. I don't like, you know, Ken Paxton's evil. Here's why. They'll never do that because they're not honorable people. I'm not talking about it that company. I mean, more broadly in our society like the people who win every bureaucratic battle are exactly the same. They're all the operated darkness. You know, they're never straightforward about anything. You talked about my, we came in. You were the first person I talked about the impeachment that was held my whole impeachment went. It was done in three days. No due process. I didn't get any information. I wasn't allowed to participate or respond all behind closed doors and then they leak stuff to the media that's not even true. And I've got a gag over on me and I can't talk. It's so dishonorable. How do you survive that? It's really hard. How do you live with yourself? Like how do you live with yourself if you operate that way? They convince themselves. I don't like someone. I'm always delighted to call him on the phone and say I don't like you and here's why. They convince themselves that like I deserve it because I'm a bad person because all of this stuff is true, but none of it was proof. You know what? Because it wasn't true. But why do it behind the scenes? Why? Because I can tell you why. So I had friends that were called in the speaker's office, Republican house members. And they were saying look, we need you to vote for this impeachment. They said, well, can you just show us like some evidence? Well, you have this, you know, three day hearing, three hour hearing. Well, there's no evidence there. Can we see some evidence? No, you're not getting any more. Well, can we like have a little more time to like kind of figure this out? We've only had like three days. We're going to vote on this and three days. No, we're not giving you more time. What about like can we talk to the witnesses? We don't even know who they are. None of them were sworn in. We don't even know who the witnesses against him are. And they said, no, we're not going to let you do that. And they said, well, why is it that we can't see the evidence? Why is it that we can't see the witnesses? Why is it that has to be in three days over Memorial weekend? And they said, because if we give Ken more than three days, they'll win. That's what they told them. That is, you know, if you find yourself living your life like that, you have to make a change because that's really deceptive. That was the Republican, supposedly the Republican House control by the Democrats. Oh, they're all like that. I got called in one time by executives of a company and they're trying to tell me that Roger L's was a rapist who I knew well and really loved. You know, it's flawed guy like we all are, but I didn't feel like a rapist to me. Pretty sure he wasn't a rapist. And I remember saying like, okay, who did he rape? Well, he's not a Republican. We know this. We just know this. You know, we had Robeson grade to this investigation. He raped people and well, okay, who were they? And he's like, no, I work there. I know everybody. No, I can't just trust me. If you saw what we saw you, and I was like, okay, but can you just tell me like what were the circumstances of the rape? This is like an elderly man who's got a human failure. Don't think he's raping anybody. Well, and they were very annoyed that I asked the basic questions and look, I don't know so many things I don't know, but I did come out of that meeting. He didn't rape anybody. You know what I mean? I absolutely, I see it all the time where they people get accused of things, then they get overwhelmed by media and then they're thinking overwhelmed to people always say this anything. We know this. We know the look. I've talked to people. We know this. Look, let's just start there. We know the whole road to that to me. He went to people so we know this. We know this. We know this. And they're like, well, where's the proof? I've got it somewhere. It's what he does. But I do think you just all you need is self-respect. Like, I'm not going to be lied to if I can help it. I'm lied to all the time. And I don't know it. But I'm not going to allow myself to be lied to if I can help it. Well, look, but people are just like they're willing to be lied to. It's the vaccine safe and effective. Okay. Then it turns out it's not safe and effective. And then they don't have enough self-respected demand and accounting of those lies. Like, you told me this turned out not to be true. Why'd you do that? No one ever does that or they call roachos up and it's like, we know Ken Baxter's a criminal. Okay. Where's everyone's self-respect? Like, I'm an adult man. You can't lie to me. Okay. It just seems like I'm kind of baseline. It is baseline. And that's why when I was in the middle of that impeachment and I had no voice, I could not respond. I'm getting beaten up every day. Told my lawyers. I know you think I'm going to resign. But I haven't told no one I'm going to resign. I'm not going to be allowed to talk to the media. So how could I even talk because there were printing stories I'm going to resign? I said, I want you to know. I don't care how bad it gets. I don't care what they say. These senators are going to, I'm going to make them vote. I got elected four and a half months ago by the people. Let them vote me out. If they do, they will be accountable to those. But I will not give in no matter what. I watched it up close and you won. It was amazing. And it was hard to, so how many times did you want at the Supreme Court with the, the Biden administration? How many times? Yeah. Oh my gosh. I mean, we had 106 cases. We won over 75% of our cases. So several ones that we, I can't even treat keep fighting. Oh, okay. But 106. A lot. We went there a lot. You should have 106 times. So I'm kind of thinking since this is politics that that may have had a role in your impeachment. I have no doubt. You know how I know they were there. I'm convinced that Biden administration went to the House, Texas House with the Democrats that we won him a piece. And then Biden sent two lawyers from the Department of Justice to help the general investigating, which is five member committee three Republicans, two Democrats. They had four lawyers, two of them came from the Justice Department. Just randomly showed up to help. Was the Biden administration involved? I don't have proof. I'm not. I'm not stupid. That's unbelievable. So is there any, should you expect that, um, the role of being involved in this primary? Oh, absolutely. He will do whatever he can to stop. He does whatever he can to stop conservatives in Texas in general. Most of his budget in Texas. All of his, yeah, his fund raise everything. So you see out the help Republicans. He goes into primaries to get Republicans take out conservative. He is not there raising money to go after Democrats. He's there to go after Republicans. What do you think he's doing? I mean, it's amazing. The number of Republicans who are Republicans who are mobilizing against Trump's nominees, particularly Bobby Kennedy and Tulsi Gabbard, he must be have, I don't know this, but do you think Carl has a hand in any of that? I would not surprise me at all. It's not at all. And the reason they want to go after those two is because they're got their effective. Oh, if they're courageous, of course. And they're going to change America if they're getting the opportunity. Exactly right in there. You know, so sad to see some Republicans who I know well mobilizing its Bobby Kennedy and they're saying we're doing because he's pro choice and well, I'm vehemently passionately pro life. I have always been, I will always be, but these are all people who are themselves pro choice. Yeah, it was supported plenty of pro choice nominees. And it's not about that. It's about the fear that Bobby Kennedy means it that he's sincere and that he'll get something done. And by getting done, it's like fighting the corruption that controls Washington. The thing that's most missing in political leadership is not knowledge of what to do or how to do. It's courage. And the thing that Bobby Kennedy has, he will take on the Democrats, his own family and the food, the big food. That's exactly right. And they know that and that's what they're afraid of. And so they have to stop them. Yeah. It's the testosterone level that scares them. It's totally absolutely right. Unafraid. He's unafraid. So in September, we went across the country coast to coast 17 different cities on a nationwide live tour. And it was amazing. We brought the entire staff with us like we always do because we all worked together for so long and enjoy traveling together. And one of our producers is a documentary filmmaker. And so he decided to make a documentary film about our trip, a full month ago. So America was the most interesting people around different people join us every single night. On Geno and Russell Brand and Bobby Kennedy and J.D. Vance and Donald Trump, etc. etc. With the best time and the fruit of that is a documentary called On the Road, The Tucker Cross and Live Tour, which is available right now on TCN. On the Road, Tucker Cross and Live Tour is hilarious. You like it. It's interesting. I do you think it's fair to keep a list. I mean, I'm probably too fixated on this because I lived in a Republican world in Washington, for so long, but I think it's fair to keep a list of like the Republicans who were working against reform, who are working against Trump's best decisions, which are reform. Minded decisions like nominating Bobby and Tulsi. Like you should keep a list of that. Absolutely. And it should be open. We should be transparent. We should tell the world like who's working against us because they've done all this and they try to do this in secret. And then they go back and tell their constituents, well, yeah, I did my best. No, they did not do their best. They were behind scenes. This is John Corners career. This is what these people do. Transparency, just like my speech of the transparency of the trial actually helped me because the truth comes out. Transparency is what we need in government. And we don't get it with people like, no, the people you're talking about. That's I think that's really deep and true. The thing they hate most is exposure. So I've always thought that's why they hated Trump there where he was going to declassify stuff or say secrets out loud that, you know, that implicate the people running things. They hate him for that and they hate him because he also is courageous and he doesn't his agenda is the American people. Yeah. No, I think that's interesting. So do you think you may run against Corners? I'm strongly considering it. I haven't made a decision. I have the spring to kind of work it out and, you know, I'm still doing my job. I had a lot to do under Biden before he up. It's a lot easier with Trump because we're working cooperatively instead of having to be adversarial and everything. So, you know, I'll be looking at this spring and seeing what people see, I'm going to travel state and get a feel for it. But my sense already is that John Corners is not loved in my state by Republicans. He may be loved by the Democrats, but he is not loved by the Republicans. How long do you think Texas has before it becomes a Democratic state? It's totally up to us. We can preserve it. We can just like with this thing I told you about America. If we do the right things and we take care of the people in our state and we give them opportunity, we give them a good education, which the state is responsible for. If we provide opportunities for their children, if we provide just freedom to go be the best you can be and not get in their way with regulations and taxes, we give them, we will be a Republican state because what I did and what your skin color is, if you get a chance to be successful, you're going to vote with the people that gave it to you. I think that's right. I think that's right. And I'm embarrassed to say that I kind of bought, I guess intuitively, I don't really think about it, but the idea that demographics is destiny. And I do think there's a lot of truth in that. However, Texas went from a majority white state to a really a majority Hispanic state, but that doesn't mean that it has to be like a dystopian left wing state at all. Hispanics are conservative socially, they are hardworking, they are family people and they want to be successful too. Well, but it's interesting. So that I first heard that line from Carl Rov actually house a president or neighbor. And he would always say, you know, Hispanics are natural conservatives and I would say, well, I'm from California and that became majority Hispanic state and it just it just went right off the cliff and became, you know, really, really, really dark socialist dystopian place. And he and I would say, so what do you make of that? What I didn't realize was it was actually the liberal whites who are the problem. I mean, that states run by Gavin Newsom. He's not from Wahoo. You know what I mean? He's from black and county. And a lot of the decisions are made by people like that. And actually Hispanics are conservative. I mean, that's real. Look at us Salvador. And so it what what's happened though is that the party is controlled by neo liberals like Gavin Newsom like Carl Rov and they use the power of the Hispanic vote to affect outcomes that I think a lot of Hispanic voters reject, right? Yeah. And look, Trump is winning counties in Texas that have never been won before. And we are that we are having more and more Democrat Hispanic politicians moved our party and their positions are not changing. They're just realized that the Democratic party allowing all this illegal immigration and hurting their areas and all the those types of things. They don't want that. And so I'm leaving the machine. I guess the only thing I would say just as an outsider observer is if the drug cartels are allowed to control the machinery of democracy in Texas, like it could become Mexico. That's why the whole day thing that I was telling you about is so important. I remember when I was coming into the Attorney General's office, Abid deserves as long as serving A.G. in Texas for 12 years. I'm now about to tie that, but it was he was the one that told me the most powerful elected officials in the country of Texas district attorneys because they can do whatever they want. They can allow any crime they want. They can let their friends commit crimes and there's nothing that can be done to them. They are free to do what they want. So we had problems like this in the 50s and 60s after Brown versus Board where certain states didn't want to comply with federal law. Eisenhower sent the 101st Airborne to Little Rock and said, I'm sorry, you can't violate federal law. You're not your own country actually. And you wonder how serious could the Trump DOJ be in reigning in this crap? No, you're not allowed to have chaos in your state. This is an American state. No, I agree with that. And I think you're already seeing it on the board. He's already sent federal troops down there. And I think he as long as it's following federal law, I know that Trump is going to be aggressive at protecting this country. I hope so. And I believe it. So here's the question I've been obsessed with recently and I don't know the answer, but your attorney general. How are states allowed to have sanctuary cities and open violation of federal law and that's not insurrection because we've allowed it to me that that should I mean like in our state, we banned them. You cannot have a sanctuary city and we can remove people from office that put that in place. So can states just say we're going to ignore federal law? I think we had a civil world for that, didn't we? No, it's long as the federal law is constitutional and it is not infringing upon state rights. Right. You know, every federal law is correct, right? But the ones that are that are correct. Then yes, they have to be followed. We're these are the borders of the nation. Yes, right. So what states do with immigration affects the other 49 any individual state. Exactly right. Because it does seem like there was a standard in place under Biden where illegal aliens who are by their presence committee in crime were held to a lower standard than American citizens. We had to sue the Biden administration. We sue them specifically over letting criminals into this country known criminals and they fought us on it. Yes, we are in litigation over whether the Biden administration can purposely bring criminals. And of course all these countries were emptying their prisons to get rid of their bad people from all of the world and Biden say, come on in. It's that's what I say evil. Like I don't believe they were trying to do good for America. You cannot do that and tell me you are trying to help America. How hopeful are you that we can deport millions of people? Like I've seen Donald Trump do things that I never thought could be done. He said he's going to do it. I think it's you're not going to get everyone of them. But I think Tom Holman, I love that guy. I think there's going to be a real serious effort to get as many out as possible. And that's really all you can do. I think it's I think it will be a success in the end because they're going to one stop the you got to stop the bleeding, right? We've been bleeding like profusely and then second start moving don't accept the fact that these people came in here legally and just let them stay. There will be a lot of forces are made to stop that. Obviously, the I already know the Democratic AG's I mean I know the game plan and I was the game plan. The game plan is to sue Trump and stop them at every turn legally go to liberal judge try to get an injunction and then you know slow just slow it down. So I know I think California AG already they've already allocated 25 million to this fight. So I just stop Trump from the reporting criminals and to stop his agenda in every possible way. So the Democratic attorney Joe is arguing to be suing and just trying to stop all of this. The good thing is you know I've got one of my guys was my offensive coordinator to sue the bite of my situation. He's he's if he gets confirmed he'll be in a strategic position and he knows exactly the game plan and how to deal with it. If you go and beat Cornyn in the Senate which I certainly hope you will is there someone coming up behind you who can get elected who will be as aggressive and focused on the needs of Texas. So one of the reasons I didn't want to leave last time won't is I don't want to be forced out like I didn't I don't want to step away under their terms because I just thought was wrong. So second was I didn't I mean I ran against three people that I just thought would be horrible for for that job they didn't know what they were doing. There are certainly people that will run that. I mean there are lawyers have never practiced law that want that job because they're in politics there that's not the right way I want something knows how to practice law that understands the law. And yes there are a couple people that I know that could run and I think might run. Otherwise I have a hard time walking away from it because I don't want to give this is such a crucial position really for the entire country. The Texas Attorney General has the largest Republican office with the most resources and has the most ability to go fight we have we can attract talent. And so we have a lot of ability to take DOJ straight out that's why we've run it one over three four to our cases because we can fight them toe to toe. I think it's you see this weird dynamic in Texas where I mean there's so many great people in Texas but all the money not all the money but a lot of the money in you know Highland Park and River Oaks. You know your riches of codes pretty liberal. What is that and by the way I know a lot of those people and I really like them I'm not attacking anybody personally. Because I know you know I know a lot of them but we they seem to be funding people who will not continue Texas as currently organized like it's exactly right so a lot of it's very showing so this group Texas for lawsuit reform used to take a lot of that they they funnel their money through them so it wasn't them directly. And that's the group that spent you know 10 million recruiting the Supreme Court Justice who is a DEI person as it turns out that's how we we expose that and she blew up that's who they supported. I don't tell you understand it but it's like you two they're like oh no action so embarrassing. I know it's because if you asked them to run a piece of paper like where do your political parties they would they would be not so different from yours. Is that whole but they don't like it when you actually try to implement what you say you believe. And here's part of what I think happened I think that I when I ring a sand branch he was one of his question of course I knew Dan branch he was not his deal was always this way I spent 10 years with them. I would say hey we need to do this this is right thing to you guys man what are the optics here I'm like who gives us the optics are this is the right thing to do it was always the optics how does it look. I don't know what is an affluent part of Dallas yes and same with you were talking about River Oaks in Houston. Does that bush world this for a bush and I have family in both those places and I think they're wonderful they're not no they like all the people and as I said I like Dan branch I mean I think I'm probably susceptible to charm in a way I shouldn't be because. I like all those all good guys but like the in the end it's considered somehow go sure bad to actually try and do what you say you're gonna do that's why they don't like I just. I don't know if I'm so doesn't hurt your feelings but I've been at dinner and people like oh can back soon you know who can back since like. Why because he's doing what you see you believe this same thing happened to help it's the same thing with Trump people that were I mean I don't know right it is I was at his announcement Marla you know you were elected officials were there to support them that first. There were lots of regular people there me and Troy Nelson at the very first I know everybody then was like thinking it might be somebody else and no one wanted to work sure how you had these in diamonds and. It's the same thing with Trump if you actually go out and do the hard things in your controversial and then they attack you for being the media don't like it and then people go well you know we need to see. I'm like okay you're you're you know what you don't want Trump because he's controversial that means you don't want something to actually get something done. The people that aren't controversial or the people don't get anything done the media doesn't attack them and so then all these people are like I just don't like his tweets you know blah blah blah blah like what I care about what he gets done. I think it may be that rich people are so insulated from the effects of everything that they don't really feel like these arguments are existential that they really really matter. Whereas you know if you make 120 grand a year and you live in Houston and you see the city like you can't use the hospitals. And crimes out of control and like everything is changing too fast to metabolize and you can't really you make 120 grand a year you can't really do anything about it you're powerless and that's by the way twice with the average person makes. You're like you realize this is not a joke they're wrecking my city for real can't be fixed. I think you've hit it because those people even those people are affected by inflation right everything is more expensive gas is more expensive. It's totally right the average American and even above average American feels all of those negative effects every day. If you're a billionaire just it is it does it's no I know you don't care what it cost to fill it. You don't even think about it you could just weird in Texas so if you go to California if you go to Moran or downtown San Francisco or you know the town that I grew up in half fluent town. You know everyone's kind of openly liberal you know what I mean like they're smoking weed with their kids in there whatever they're liberal you go to Texas and you meet the. You know in class in Texas boy they're just great people they're just great people who share your values and and I think they really do by the way at least the ones I know they sincerely do. But they don't feel that sense of. Of eminence of like holy shit we got this is like a crisis they do not feel that well those are the people that elect me if you look at my campaign finance reports I actually have a massive number of people giving. But a lot lower level than some of the other statewide official yeah the numbers are just staggered I raise less money. But my contributions from the number of people I get I think I at last for it maybe I'm off on this move is one for 8,000. In six to six months. Well I don't think anybody comes close to that but it's so it's it's not the million dollar checks I don't give million dollar checks I have a much lower. Contribute by I love it because I like the fact that the people as a group. Helping me yes that's who I'm beholden to those people I think that's right and there's a. By the way I just want to be clear especially in Texas like the rich people I know in Texas are good people with nice you know love their families their children turn out well like they're good people for real I love them actually. But I and they would agree with everything you say but in practice it freaks them out and you see this with Bobby Kennedy too like anyone who's kind of tuned in realize you have Bobby Kennedy is like a turbo liberal he's a Kennedy yeah you know he said all this crazy gun grabby pro portion nonsense but then you watch him and you're like. I know that guy's on the same wavelength is me and he might actually get stuff done it's only it's it honestly it's the rich republicans who he freaks out. He scares them I can see me for the same reason you scare them because you mean it and they're like ah. This is embarrassing I can't fully control it I'm not sure I'm for this part of the problem they all talk to each other and they'll get their ideas from like each other it's just almost too inbred they don't get they don't get down to talk to the people that you're that you are talking about they don't know. They don't around them they don't live with them so they don't feel it. It's right. What your original point was they just don't know these people if they knew those people I think like you said they're not bad people I think if they connect with people that are not billionaires instead of just with each other I think it would totally right. It would help them I think it's totally right I grew up in a rich person world the greatest gift I ever got was you know spending time in a non rich area for a portion of every year and it really changed my worldview. Like so dramatically just having contact with people who aren't you know in that world like just getting out of it a little bit. It's called perspective. I don't have a ton of perspective but I have like a little bit of perspective. Right. It's like that's super helpful and super helpful it is it's super helpful and wow that's so interesting can you win if you don't have the support of the big money in Texas. Well all I can tell you is I've been I've been statewide for 12 years and I've won my closest primary run off when there weren't you know four people in race was 65 35. The last one was better 68 32 so I just go to the people and not I usually get out spent. As long as I can be within like two to one spending. I have a really good chance of winning a primary and I think anybody whole is consistent on views that are that take care of their constituents. That's the key to winning is take care of your people care about them. Yeah well I've always thought that but then I up and down the ballot and state after state you see people elected who are basically promising to destroy their own constituents. All the the black leaders in Chicago who are like you know lecturing about black political power and how important it is and then they make this the city hit Hispanic. Now they have no political power it's like. I mean whenever you think of identity politics I'm opposed to it I don't think you should be running on your race anyway but it's just a fact that they did exactly the opposite of what they promised their constituents and really now nobody cares with those people think. It's the same problem the people like that were taking care of themselves they were not actually looking out for the people they said they were looking out for and then they they leave them in a terrible situation they're not better off what Donald Trump supposedly. Yeah that doesn't like those people when he's finished these all categories of people black white Hispanic are better off knowing that seems like a good thing right I know but yet he's a bad guy. It's amazing so here's a complicated issue that I think I know that you've addressed an in court data privacy. The idea that you ought to be allowed to have like conversations that other people listening to them the idea that people should be able to steal information about you and profit from it. Where are we on that so you know my first term was about stopping Obama yeah and so I think in two years that he was there I see him 27 times now I. on that. So, you know, my first term was about stopping Obama. Yeah. And so, I think in two two years that he was there, I see him 27 times. Now, I stepped it up a little bit with Biden, but we had four years with Trump. And the reason I ran the second term was to deal with this exact idea. I saw, I saw a big tech and I saw big corporations and people were felt powerless because all their information was being taken. They have no control over it. They're being censored. And I'm like, how do I solve it? So I went out to Palo Alto. I spent like a year of my life going out there talking to professors, talking to lawyers who were tech experts. And we ended up putting together many lawsuits several against Google several against Facebook. We just had like we sued Facebook because there's a tech slaw that says you cannot steal somebody's face, take somebody's face or their voice without their permission. And then once you've taken it, you have a certain amount of time, a reasonable fear of time you keep it and then you have to destroy it and you can't sell it without their permission. Well, guess what? Meta. Now, meta was they were doing it. They just did it anyway. So we sued them. And we got the largest settlement between a state and a business ever $1.4 billion. We have sued Google, I think five times. We've won two of those cases. We have two settlements, but the three biggest are coming. One of them is about the same thing that meta did. They stole our faces. Another was about incognito where they told people, by the way, you go into this incognito, you sign up for this. We will not track you. Why? They tracked us anyway. That's a deceptive trade practice in text where they tell you one thing and do another. They lied and they're so big and they make so much money. They just think they can win everything. Well, the final one was this is one that everybody thought was crazy, but we did it. And now do then do J. Faul, a copycat case under Biden actually, where they were Google controls 97% of the ad market and they destroy the competition. If you're competing, and we believe they cut it deal with Facebook to keep them out of it, pay them off. And they destroy you if you're small enough. They buy you if you're big enough and they cut a deal with you're super big. And all of that's illegal under antitrust law. So we in April, we are going to trial in Texas. They delayed me for two years by forcing me into what's called multi-discoligation. And I got put in New York, but we got a piece of legislation stuck on a bill that got us back out of that. So we're back in Texas. So we are going to take on the big tech companies. We're taking on General Motors because General Motors would sell you a car and they wouldn't tell you that they're on star system when you signed up for it was tracking all of your driving. And then they're selling that to insurance companies. And then you cancel and your insurance goes up because they're tracking every, you know, every turn of your car what time you drive and how much they don't tell you that's a deceptive frame bracket. So and of course we sued Pfizer. And for for lying to us about the vaccine is a little weird after all of that to see Larry Ellis and stand up and be like, everyone's getting an mRNA vaccine for cancer. What? I mean it's crazy. I don't even know. I'm trying to digest all that. Maybe just live in and denies, you know. Yeah, exactly. But do you have a hope? It does seem, look, I'm not against let's say I am against technology, but I don't think I should be against technology. I should be a little more open minded, but you know, there's a place for technological progress of course, there is. But it does seem like it's unrestrained. It does, you know, I believe in forced counterforce, I believe in balance, I believe in marriage, which is that, you know, when I mean, two forces having to accommodate one another. And in that you find a piece, I don't see that dynamic with tech right now. It's just, it just seems unrestrained. The charge of the elephants, like nothing can get in the way. So that is the reason I saw that if we didn't step in soon, and I didn't see anything else, do you know what I'm doing it? I didn't see other states do it. So it was my, that's why we're in the second time. My mission was we don't stop this now. They make so much money. They just buy their way and everything. So they get sued by the, you know, European Union, they just paid two billion. They just jack up their price. When you're making $130 billion, you know, that's just a minor little tax, right? For Google. So that is why I didn't just, I'm not just doing this for money. I'm asking for restructuring of Google. I don't want them to be able to do this to us anymore. They need to divest things so that there is competition in the marketplace. I'm not, I am totally free market, but one company that controls 97% of the market and then destroys competition. That is not good for consumers. And that's why we have antitrust laws. So if we don't stop them now, they'll control all our cities. We still have antitrust laws. We do. You know, we brought them back. And by the way, DOJ copied our Google case. Exactly. Biden did. Is there any hope? There's hope. And I think, I think the fact that you see after we settled with Mark Zuckerberg, he's he's showing up at Trump. So he was, he spent what $400 million trying to beat Trump last time. Yeah. You're seeing these CEOs come in. Now, they're, they're trying to keep their profit motive going. And they're, it's hard to get any done in cars because they give so much money. But I think the state AGs and hopefully DOJ with Pamani are key to making sure that they play fair. Look, go make billions. I don't care. I want you to go make a lot of billions. I want American companies to do well all over the world. But play fair and allow consumers choices don't destroy choice. Yeah. And it's just acknowledge that what you do has an effect on a lot of other people. And you know, it's okay for other people to weigh in and have an opinion. It's you get the set. I mean, I know all of these people, you get the set. They're so annoyed. There's any impediment to what they want. Like so annoyed. Like they can't even believe it. Like what you're getting in the way of progress. It's like, well, first of all, I'm not totally convinced this is progress. Like that's a subjective term. We debate what that is. But second, like, I don't know. There are all kinds of things I want to do. But I have to negotiate with the people who are affected by those things to reach some accommodation. That's just what life is. But the idea and you see this with some countries too, like, oh, you know, our neighbors don't like it. Tough shit. It's like, I don't know. That's not what life is. Like everything is given take compromise. Well, so and where do we get these attitudes? Like I just get to do exactly what I want. It's going to totally overturn your life. And if you don't like it, like shut up, these are super companies. Right. Companies are bigger than most countries. Yes, they have more money. And I think that arrogance that we talked about in politics. Oh, my gosh. It happens in business. And so not only do they want to control every market and control every transaction on the internet, but they also want to tell you what to say and what you can say on their platforms. And then they tell you they're not censored, but they are. And so even with the fighter case, where we went in and sued and we sued them, not just for lying about the effectiveness of the vaccine, which they did do. So you haven't noticed that secondly, for trying to censor people once they found out that their vaccine didn't work. I want to do that with this podcast. So I what I want is Congress to pass a law preventing anyone from suing me no matter what I do. Anyone who criticizes me is pulled off the internet and called a racist. That's pretty good deal, don't you think? Absolutely. And then if you happen to like not participate in their little scheme with the vaccine, then you lose your job and your social podcast or you're fired. Right. Yeah. That doesn't seem like an unfair business advantage. It's pretty unfair. And I actually it's crazy because then there's no incentive for them to test it. They didn't test the vaccines. They don't have to. Why would they they test it for like six days? Well, they're fully indemnified. There's nothing you can do to them. So we got actually we've pursued the Pfizer over the vaccine. We got dismissed by federal judge who said we didn't have because of that federal law, our state laws don't apply. I don't think that's right. So we've appealed to the fifth circuit saying, wait a minute, they have their federal laws, but our state law, if you deceive someone, you lied to them. That is a violation of state law. Who cares what the federal immunity thing is has nothing to do with our state laws and that's our argument. Man, you guys, you know, there's so many arms available on the black market. I think Texas should buy some and just to give a little more influence. You know what I mean? That's not my department. I always tell people they want me to go to the, why don't you do something? Why don't you do something? Why don't you do something? I said, well, I am, but they didn't give many guns. It just gave me like lawyers. I mean, all of those lawyers, you like the drug cartels as if I am on the dark web. Oh, hilarious. Compaction. Thank you so much for taking all this time. I enjoyed it. Thanks for having me. And I hope you crush that John Cornyn. I really do. I don't see you. I'm rooting for you. Well, thank you. No one else agrees, but I'm in Highland Park, but I'm on yourself. Hey, thank you. Appreciate it. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could blind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google, or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.