Hello Ron hello Joe. How are you? I'm good man. Oh good. You got double water bottles one water one protein shake. Oh You know I'm fucking around no no you know last time I wasn't aware how long I will be here now I'm prepared. I'm a settle in. I'm not gonna be hungry. My wife got me all set up a Protein shake make sure that your blood sugar doesn't drop Maintain energy levels Mm-hmm. You are a man who has done one of the most difficult things the person could do you lost a ton of weight? Yeah, and then maintain Right, that's the hard part. Yeah. Yeah, the momentum of losing the weight is good But most people to get to a point and then want to take a break Mm-hmm and then once they take a break then it all slides Yeah, it's a bit of both sometimes. I want to take a break But then I want to get to that next level so then Get back on it when we're talking about Gucci main before we start a podcast Gucci is the guy who's done that Yes, he's maintained and looks fucking amazing Took it. He was a big fella. Yeah at one point time when he had bird tattooed on his face Mm-hmm. Nice cream. Yeah, yeah And now he's shredded Yeah, I'm gonna wear that ice cream Well, you were saying it was lean right yeah for sure yeah, you're coding will play a lot of weight on it My friend's man that is crazy. Well, he wasn't too fat in the other one. Yeah, that's like yeah That's guy kind of like him mid-losing weight and that one you can find some real chunky picks of yeah of him Yeah, he got sick. Yeah, you know Yeah, yeah The ratio yeah, me my wife all the time we look at him and his wife the pictures they take what they do and I'm like What hit on that direction? What do you do for a good out? I have my trainer about three days a week? Sometimes two days a week and then on top of that and we'll do you know just different circuits back chest You know whatever whatever Legs and then Then the other days I'm always just trying to make sure I hit the treadmill twice a day for two miles on a day Why is it day? Yeah, yeah, yeah, really you do it twice a day. Yeah in the morning and I don't do much otherwise so you know all especially now a lot of my stuff is sitting in front of a computer Podcast and playing games on Twitch and stuff like that. So I feel like oh when spent sitting up that long I guess start the day treadmill in the day treadmill. That's discipline. I like that. It is I fucking hate it So This is a blast when you like to results. Yeah, I feel like the compliments. You know I was just doing this thing the other day and um Jake Johnson and the guy from New Girl, I'm in a cartoon with him and like that's like, you know He's like a lead and man dream boaty guy and he's looking me like man He's like you're looking fucking good man. You got your shit together You look like you're about to lead your own show and I hear shit like that and I'm like, okay Yeah, I better get on that treadmill again. Yeah Yeah, that helps right. You really does. Yeah the positive feedback and positive energy That's one thing that I'd like about what you do. You are very positive like you're you're very warm and friendly Like all the shit that you do online you're all smiling and positive and friendly It's cool. It's it's kind of it gives off a good vibe like when I look at your Instagram posts or read something that you post It's like Ron is on the good path. Yeah You know because it's just it's so easy to go the other way and and you caught up in what other people are doing and What you think you should be doing which I battle all of that too? So I don't ever Try to act like oh, I'm just like oh everything's great. It's like of course. I go through shit all the time But like I think I choose to support my friends. I choose to support positive things because That's what I can control and that's to me fighting against that negative is opposed to like just joining Everybody in the fray. Yeah. What would you mean? But like how do you feel like when you say like you feel that too? Like the feel the draw to the negative I mean because we all like you know We just want things, you know, so I want it a Netflix special I want to be a lead in the show. I want my own show, you know And I've already do a lot of great things But and that's why I have to balance it all because I'm like oh, man, I'm such a great position I do so many wonderful things I would always helps me actually is talking to people like you are talking to people like Bert talking to any Comedian that's been doing it like 20 years plus when I'm at like 14 now and when I talk to them and then they are like oh hold on Slow the fuck down man like You look at where you are and what you're doing for how long you've been doing it You're fucking aces men. So chill the fuck out and play it out Don't freak out and that that always, you know Haven't faith that always helps me. Well, we're all stalled right now. Yeah, unfortunately because we can't work but Stand up is a long haul like you're a ten years people start taking seriously You know if you're really precocious people start looking at you at seven like Thomas motherfucker's good But at ten years they go, okay That guy's a pro or she's really got it. She's legit ten years usually So 14 man you're cooking, you know 14 you got things happen You know you're putting together like real sets you got like you get off stage you like damn That's that was legit that was legit Fucking it's a long road to get good at stand up, you know It's like that AC DC song. It's a long way to the top if you want to rock and roll I was on stage or not about to go on stage rather at the improv once and there was a lady who was on stage and she you could tell She's real recent and She was just eating it just eating shit up there and me and the DJ were just like I just looked on my go. It's a long way to the top if you want to rock and roll And then the DJ played that song as I went on stage The highway to the top it is man. It's a fucking long way. Yeah No, and I agree and that's what I had to change my mindset very early because you know I came from not having money not having anything and having my son really early and so I was like I need to make it and you did it and then like I remember I got on Conan first time and and I they were like oh, what do you promote and you got to promote something? You know when we introduced you and the only thing I had to promote was an open mic that I was doing in Portland the next day Just like this is always gonna be a part of this. This is always gonna be here It's always gonna be and there's will be highs and then there'll be another day And so I got to learn to not You know fear that next day and just be like this is I mean, this is just my life And that's what helps me through all of this quarantine stuff So I'm back doing weird zoom shows. I'm doing my own live stream shows September 5th and people adapt. Yeah Exactly. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, the best out of it So far I've seen is Andrew Schultz Andrew Schultz has adapted the best because he's really figured out a whole new kind of a format Is figured out I do these like 10 minute chunks on a particular subject Like rapid fire with images behind him his style of comedy and it's I'd be calling a quarantine comedy because it's like he's No one in the room with him. Yes, you know and it's high production value and it's it's without network Notes it's without and it's him being able to to distill his voice What do anybody telling him what to do? So then when you watch it compared to things you're seeing on TV Which now because their force to scale back start looking very similar You're like why the fuck what I watch this? Yeah, it's so much more fun. Yeah Shultz is so much funnier than those guys those guys are forced to do TV kind of comedy for the internet and that shit is not good enough TV kind of comedy is okay if you have TV kind of restrictions, you know that those restrictions that they have for language and content Then you can get away with it But if you just you know if you're forced to compete in that internet realm like the internet is wild man The wild west Long wild west, you know this show like you could never do this fucking show No, no, whatever allow me to do this show anywhere else the only way it would have ever worked is to have no one telling you what to do the thing about Those feelings that you get when you see other people doing stuff and good things happening them you're like I want that on that. That's fuel man. Mm-hmm. That's the key is like how you harness that fuel you can Port all over yourself and light yourself on fire which a lot of people do Like you know, yeah, see it all the time all the time or you can just go I'm gonna work harder I'm gonna fucking just buckle down. I'm gonna stay focused and I'm going to Somehow another be my best self be the best version. Yeah, I never denied jealousy, you know to me That's like that's just lying to people when you say like oh, no, I don't get jealous like I What when I was a very young comic I would listen read Pat know as well It's the spew and I think he wrote something he wrote jealousy is a map of where you want to be and I was like Oh, I just look at it like that. That's a lot easier for me to swallow. That's a wise way looking on it Yeah, you also one thing that for me when I first started doing stand up I was real jealous and I also I also didn't like comedy anymore I didn't like other people's comedy because I would be jealous like I would watch someone kill and I go oh, why did I come up with that joke? Oh my god. He's so much better than me. Oh my god. He's killing shit I want to be like that and then I realized like oh my god I've stopped enjoying comedy and now I'm not a fan anymore and one of the things that switched with me is I realized that I was I had a very weak perspective on it instead of being inspired and instead of being like energized I was like wishing that they would do badly Which is a real common thing like you you see someone who's doing much better than you and you actually hope they fail Yeah, well, you see a lot of people once you see them start succeeding a bit I've noticed in general you stop seeing people champion them. You know they stop they're like oh well You've made it as far as I wanted you to I think call you a sellout I sellout, but I love being inspired that I've never had like I've always been inspired by comedy I've always loved comedy and I there's sure there's comedy I love more than others, but I've always learned to go like well That's not for me. You know, I respect their craft. I respect the way they put that together But that what not for me But I always looked at it like rap where it's like man You look at like the old defra records or then they always were sharpening each other by How good each individual was and I look at comedy the same way where it's like oh if I see the amazing set I'm not like trying to steal that joke or trying to that but I'm going like oh fuck I got a raise my gang. Yeah, well that was one of the best things that we had at the store Absolutely We were all working together and you know we have a show on to be you and me and burn You know and Eliza and Whitney and fucking I only Wong and bang bang bang bang bang these shows were fire It was just and you had a warm up in the back. I'd be in the back I'd be jumping up down on cushions and shit shadow box and touching my toes and Taking deep breaths and you got a you know you got to get your body charged up You know I missed that I missed out a lot and this thought a lot I missed that feeling of being the main room green room Get ready to go on whoa, it's just the hang man. Yes, the hang. Oh truly I mean that's for me especially because I was still always looking at it It's like oh, I'm kind the young guy on the totem pole here and it's cool that Not you know it's one thing the original room is awesome But when you're on these main room shows you know like oh they're putting me on here because they also think I'm A part of a draw and so be on that with you guys But being younger in the game than you guys and being like oh fuck I have to follow Ali Joe Joe E. D. As you know Whitney I have to follow them all and then I don't have the credits that these people are gonna care about It was the thing I've learned to crave I mean like because when I got them I was like they are on my side because I'm fucking good They don't know anything else. They don't know what I've done. They have now figured out. I'm good and that I miss so much I was there once and I brought you up and you said something to along the lines of Joe reminds me of that teacher that got arrested for having sex with a senior Like she's like that cool teacher. Yeah, that you find out he tells you all the cool stuff He tells you how the real world works and then you find out he was at religious Teachers a Crying I was crying But it's like those kind of moments man. It's like the the camaraderie of the store One of the best things about the quarantine is being able to do this podcast and have guys like you on and have all you know All of our friends come here and and just sit down and just at least spend time together Yeah, and have some fun and talk because I miss that so much man You know, I look I love my regular friends and I love my family. I love my neighbors But they're not comics They're not man It's fucking different, you know, yeah, my wife is funny as shit. She's funny She's she says mean shit to me like to be funny like funny shit makes fun of me It's fun. It's like we have a good time But comics are a different animal man You know and if you're not around them for a while like you go fuck I wish I could just have someone who just wants to fuck around and talk shit. Yeah, just have some fun. Yeah, yeah Someone's not getting their feeling I heard Everyone's so goddamn sensitive, you know make fun of me. Please Please You know, let's talk some shit. Yeah, no, I'm That is what I miss the most is there's just being in the back seeing my friends and and those things we took for granted So much as well because I just be like all right Well, I'll see you tomorrow and now I don't see nobody ever When we were shutting down in March and I was thinking like you know what man I'm just gonna buckle down Work out a lot right. You know come June whenever the fuck this is over I'll come back gone blazing You know and then when I realized that there was gonna be a second lockdown and then there was gonna be no return and here We are in August and there's no site. It's not gonna happen. It's not gonna happen till 2021. There's there's no way I Was like fuck like this is terrible This is a terrible feeling I could never would have imagined that I would have to worry about comedy clubs going under But they're going under all over the place man. They just can't stay open Crazy. Yeah, no, I mean I was in the exact same boat I think anything most of us were versions. Okay. Well, I can I can last I'll put it together Just treat it like I'm in short-term prison sentence and just work out get my G D Become a lawyer. Yeah over my case Yeah, and then yeah same thing that second lockdown happened and something happened in my brain where I was like, okay I'm gonna have to just because before I was like, oh no zoom shows nothing like that I don't like how it's fucking with my rhythm. I don't like how I'm not getting feedback But after that I was like, you know, I just kind of have to adapt and Go with the flow and hope things change and know that things change in time no matter what but if This is how it is I got to stop fighting it and start just like you know finding my lane in it So, you know, I'm just trying to do that now. Yeah, um, you have a podcast luckily Mm-hmm. I felt bad for dudes who didn't yes for the folks the guys on the gals It didn't have podcasts. I was like, oh Like you got no way to keep in touch with people. Yeah I mean and that was exactly the reason why I started my podcast because I was like, oh, I'm like Everything I'm doing is a guest and other people shit like I'm a guest and everyone else's home And I don't have a home for people to come hang out with me Yeah, and so I was been thinking after a long time and as a reason why I started my podcast and when all this just happened I was like I was very happy Because I've always been in two minds when it comes to comedy. I love specialists I love people who are just like I do stand up straight stand up I'm gonna be the best fucking stand up in the world like I love being that competitive But I also have this part of me that's just like I love new challenges of all types And so I've got into voice act and regular acting all that stuff and when this thing came down I was like, oh fuck actually, you know, just like in business. It is good to diversify Because voice acting is saving my fucking life right now. Yeah. Yeah As a person in show business you must have as Many forms of revenues you can really have and you have to save for a rainy day You have to do those two things that've been real lucky that have weird taste. I mean, they weird shit So I've you know cage fighting commentary and then I also have the podcast and I also have this Stand-up thing which is just Unhold indefinitely, you know you could do it right now. I mean I've you thought about doing one of those driving movie shows I thought a bird about it. He made it sound interesting. Yeah, he loves the way he sells it make it sound fun But you got to realize he's drunk though. Yeah, I do and I realize I do realize that Horns yeah He likes horns and people hot beaming him Like explain so dude. It's like a UFO I'm actually I've been talking with Chris Titus because he you know, he has his own little production studio I shouldn't call it little because he has his own production. You know, I don't mind. I don't have no fucking production studio He has no big-ass production studio and he's been shooting his own Specials and his own he's doing a reunion of the Titus show through it and so I reached out to him And I'm gonna do like a live stream show where we have ten people in the audience and then we'll be live streaming it I don't YouTube on September 5th if people won't get tickets to that Combs so there's ten people in the audience. Yeah, so what do you do test those folks? Yeah? Yeah Well, you know, they'll be way not like you where you had where I took the full test But it'll be temperature checks and waivers and they'll be wearing masks They'll be wearing masks and they'll be socially based on them and be done man You know Texas is doing that with restaurants. You can go to a restaurant Texas everybody wears a mask Simple they space the tables out everybody wears a mask good ventilation server wears a mask and they're not having any problems You know with this their draconian laws. They've instituted in California This is the only state where you can't go to the barbershop. Do you know that I did not know every other fucking state in the entire union You can go to a barbershop. You can go to hairdress if you can get your hair done I don't have an issue with that obviously I'm bald as fuck but But I just think it's crazy this the restrictions that the states put on businesses. It's forcing people to flee That's part of what's going on there. That's one reason you're leaving. Yeah, I just think there's too many folks here too I think as I get older. I realize there are There's drawbacks to high population areas. There's tension in high population areas And when things go south when natural disasters or and you know what we're dealing with with COVID things along those lines It's just a bad place to be man. Just not safe. It's not healthy. It's not wise like I like calmer, I like a little calmer because I'm my problem is not getting up for things like I have a friend Who lives in New York City and he loves it because like oh, I love the energy of the city everything's happening moving man Yeah, I don't need that. I got a lot of energy. I need chill. I need downtime. I need I need a place where I get You need space you need a fortress a solid shoot. I need relaxation. I need a balance and whenever I'd go to places There were more rural there was like nature and trees and shit. I always feel better I understand that I about I mean, that's one of the reasons why I like where I live in the Valley Since I like being I've always been outside if we want to start a comedy I Started coming Portland, Oregon, but I lived in Salem, Oregon, and I just make that 45 minute drive because I did like Going into a thing doing my job and then leaving that day Yeah, yeah, that's how I was felt about Hollywood. I lived in North Hollywood when I first got here And I just kept moving further out then I moved in C know and I'm like I have to go further out And then I went way out. Yeah, man. Yeah, that is true like this lifestyle is so weird if it will Get you so wrapped up in other people's Information and partying and engine. That's one of the reasons like I love like I got my little small town Canadian wife and my son who You know that that's who's been my balance the whole time is that I started comedy my son was already three years old So he won was like you need to be feeding me with this and he I don't give a shit about your jokes So we're hanging out at all so you know, I would like to be here and have you hanging out with me? So that's always I think that's one of the reasons I've been able to be as successful as I am is that I was like I don't give a fuck about hangin I don't give a fuck about and there's a lot of fear that comes that right because people are always like I want to be part of the group on be part of the click and if I'm not hanging I'm not part of clicking I was just like well, don't know. I'm fucking good at comedy. Yeah, like me from that You've never had a problem with that. I mean, that's one of the things about the store. It's a real meritocracy You you'll hear people say like oh, you know Like there's clicks there and they don't accept you. I think that's horseshit if you're funny It doesn't know when it gives a fuck of your gay straight trans white Chinese black Fucking Puerto Rican nobody gives a fuck. Are you funny? Yeah, and if you're funny you're in that place is a hundred percent inclusive If you're funny you're in you know, it's it's it's you're accepted for what you what the kind of heat you bring You know when you get on that stage and light that place up you don't have to hang out You have to be one of the you know one of the people that parties and drinks. They don't give a fuck. They know you're funny Yeah, I mean I've seen you murder You know when you when you can lay it down the way you do you just accepted. It's just how it is It's a beautiful thing really. It's like that The art form of comedy We all know how hard it is to get to that 14 year spot like you're at and you know There's a lot of people that at 14 years and now it's funny as you know For whatever reason psychologically they've not figured it out artistically. They're not true to themselves Whatever it is. They didn't ever found that And I think I bet having a child and having that that intense Responsibility, you know when you're starting out You know being an open miker and also having a child like whoo That is that is extreme. That's an extreme amount of responsibility Yeah, I agree and I've talked about it with the others comics I know that our parents because we'll make fun of The laziness of other promise that they'll be like oh man I got to do this set at midnight and then I got a meeting at noon How am I gonna do and I was like well Before I came it is said I helped my son with his homework I got to get him up on the school bus at 6 a.m. And then you know So like I don't have any fucking sympathy for you Yeah, well, one of the things that I loved before the store closed down was my schedule was basically I would put my kids to sleep They would go to bed at like, you know 8 30 9 o'clock and then I would go over my notes And then I'd have a set at like 10 30 It wasn't it was perfect and then when I would come home everybody would be asleep So I just hang out with the dog and write you chance to come down And I talked to you nothing man just quiet That's the balance man. Yeah, that's what it's up. That's for me. That's so that's so big balance It's so big. You have to have it. You can't just be all about because I think You know me and multi-musashi was He's a samurai from the The 15th century you wrote this crazy book called the book of five rings It's all about strategy and how to be the best Whatever you do and One of the things that he said is like you have to have the same you you have to do All things with the same intensity and energy like you can't just be a guy just to kill people with a sword He was excellent and calligraphy. He was an artist. He wrote poetry He believed that you had to have a balance as a person Otherwise those flaws would show up in your sword fighting. Oh, that's amazing. Yeah, I love that That's I've always that strikes me hard because I've always believed that in my comedy from the day I started I was always like oh, I can never let my life Get far Away from my persona that I present on stage. I can you know always that we turn in ourselves up to 11 or whatever I go from just my experience and my love of comedy I go oh when people get too far From their persona in any general way and they're lying to you It just starts falling apart and start showing in their act and it shows in their life and I've always That was is what gives me material because I just talk about whatever is active in my life as opposed to being like well This is like because if I did that I'd been stuck when I was 23 just been like I'm the fat Stoner guy, you know right right right right Yeah, yeah, you could get caught up in your act, right? Yes, there's a look there's a lot of examples of that Even success ones like kennison kennison does like it's a great example Bobcat for Until very recently. Yeah, he on this podcast talked about a heart. It was the kick and the people like gay man do that scream things like fuck you Done man. I don't know You didn't want to do it. Yeah, he He got stuck. He got trapped. But emo Phillips. He's another one, you know, I mean emo's like didn't fucking 60's now He still got to do that weird sort of thing that he did when he was 20 that was kind of cute You know when you're 60 everybody's like man, you have an a stroke like what's going on up there buddy Yeah, and that one does still hurt me because he's such a tremendous joke right Yes, amazing joke right there But I do see that yeah, it's like you have to kind of you can't just go up there and start talking Can't just be yourself. Yes. Yeah, which is one point when you know Learn that you get in it to it people start caring less and less about like oh, that's a crazy as joke He wrote and they want to know more about like who who are you right? Yeah, yeah Another but we were talking about kennison He was the guy who got really caught up in it because his thing was partying like he couldn't go anywhere without partying Mm-hmm. So like guys line up giant lines of Coke for me like oh It's heart be beaten out of his chest and couldn't you know couldn't sleep for a week and this comedy was suffering like Real bad. I was point to him as a great example for comedians of Someone who was so good for a short period of time and then was so bad afterwards He he was so good around like 85 86 that was like the louder than hell days Like dude, he was revolutionary like nobody'd ever seen anything like that a short fat preacher Go on stage screaming and talking Screaming you've been married look at me. Look at me like this is marriage. Oh You know like I was married twice. That's how fucking dumb I am and You would see him and it was like this force and nature But would great material great insight great points and then all of it went away and then it was like cheerleading It was like weird like I remember he had this bit about drunk drive and he's like we're gonna drink and we're gonna drive And we're gonna pull it off. You know why because we do it every fucking night Woo, that's like what yeah, and then he was killed by a drunk driver. Yeah, which is crazy. Yeah I hate that's I always hate when people let use their charm and they use their tricks to push apart false premises Yeah, you're fucking lying. I think he was just trying to do it just to be he has brother wrote about his brother Bill wrote a book called brother Sam was a really good book for someone who's a kennison fan Really interesting. We talked about it pretty openly about Sam just stopped writing material fell apart and he just became like a shadow of himself Like open mike or doing a kennison impression with like shitty material It's sad it is, but it's a lesson for us. Yeah, you know like you got stay on your fucking game And then there's also the problem when People know who you are they come to see you You know, it's Ron punches. Oh, we're gonna go see him. I'm like we're excited to see you and everything you say I'm happy to hear You could you get your crowd and the problems if you're only doing comedy to your crowd You could really delude yourself. Oh absolutely, but that's why people who are good like to go around to all the different spots I love to go around and do like house parties and the comedy store and my shows on the road You do house parties sometimes like what kind of house parties? You know, they do dumb ass mansion parties and shit really? Yeah, it's a lot of weird rich comedy producers and you just like I don't know what your life is But I will take this money for this event and then I will probably not see you again and you do it at the house Yeah, how many people you know this is but way before yeah, be like couple hundred people no shit Yeah in the yard or something or inside both, you know, wow Yeah, well, there's a lot of comedy there was a lot of comedy in LA and strange places Yeah, I got invited to a lot of yard shows guys would show up. Hey man, I'm doing comedy Best fish taco doing the taco restaurant. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You want to kill Cliff? What do you think sure grape CBD drink delicious good for you no THC? Well, that's okay Get you some THC if you like that. We have plenty of that But I got those for us not bad delicious right good for it 25 milligrams of CBD Do you take CBD at all? Yeah, but yeah, I get some of my Not bad. Delicious, right? Yeah. Good for it. 25 milligrams of CBD. Do you take CBD at all? Yeah, a bit. Yeah. Like get some of my wife whenever her back is hurting. That's one of my daily things. That's the other thing that's so good for you. CBD is so good for you. Just anything you do that reduce inflammation. Fantastic. For the body, for the brain. I didn't even know how to anxiety till I started taking CBD. Except for me. Whoa, maybe you did it. Well, it's relative. I mean, it didn't have anxiety compared to people who have anxiety. But I took CBD. I was like, man, I feel really relaxed. And I was like, oh, OK. I see what's going on. Yeah. No, I like a good CBD. I'll just smoke this as straight CBD sometimes after a workout or something. Yeah, I was saying I'm going to do that. And then I grab a regular joint. Yeah, well, I'm saying I'll mix them up too. Do you ever smoke weed and then work out? I, yeah, my trainer hates that. But yeah. Why does your trainer hate that? He's always like, I can always tell when you're high, when you smoke and weed. He's dudged. So he talked to me. Yeah, I had a dudged kickboxing trainer for a while. They have a different way of talking. The dudged way. Yeah. Yeah. They don't understand America, as well. You're so fat. What? You don't have to be. What are you eating? Your friend. It is very simple. What kind of foods? Dudged is a weird country, Holland. Because if you know this, but they have some of the greatest kickboxers of all time, all came out of Holland. Real weird. A few guys went over to Thailand, started training in Thailand, and fighting in Thailand. And then they brought it back to Holland. And then Holland became like this gigantic kickboxing epicenter. That's great. And I didn't know that. I didn't know that. I had us motherfuckers of all time come from Holland. Yeah. Please known for like weed chops, red-like district, and mushrooms. That's why I go. That's one of my favorite places to visit. Yeah. Four times I've been to Amsterdam. I've never been to love it. And it's not even, you know, you can get just as good if not better. We here in California, for sure. But it's just the vibe. It's just the lack of anyone ever being like, oh, you dumb, stoner. It's none of that. I was like, I remember I was sitting in a coffee shop. And the guy who tried this sneaker beer in, and then they kicked him out. And I was like, no, drinking. And I was like, I like it here. I like it. Yeah. It's funny what we chose to allow and not allow. Yeah. Well, where I'm going in Texas, you still, I mean, Austin, it's legal essentially. They've decriminalized it to the point where the cops want to arrest anybody for weed. You mean, you don't want you selling large quantities of it. But it's still not legal. It's still not legal statewide. And it's the dumbest thing to make illegal, just to make zero sense. You know, I see the argument for making alcohol illegal, but I would never agree with it. I think people should be able to do whatever they want. Yeah. I'm with that. The argument for weed being illegal is the dumbest. It's just a personal responsibility. But we have so many arguments that we're not really good at it. Yeah. So. Well, look at what's happening with COVID. Yeah. That's the best. I mean, if you look at what we're so bad at it, America is so bad. Our response to COVID and how we've handled it and allowed it to spread with a worst. Yeah. I mean, you know, I'm a big pro wrestling fan and that's been making me angry because it's just as much as I miss comedy. I miss, I used to go to my wrestling shows with my friends and my buddies. And now I'm watching the Japanese wrestling that I love and seeing that they have full crowds all sitting there in masks, just hanging out because they are good at handling their fucking business. Yeah. Like that's when it, because when you're just sitting here, you're like, oh, well, we're all following the partners. It's just how it is. But then you start looking over at other countries. And you're like, well, no, they figured some shit out. Well, this virus is so sneaky, man. Even Japan has had a research. Yes, recently. It's so weird, man. It's the weirdest fucking virus. It's just like New Zealand even had a resurgence. New Zealand had over 100 days with zero cases. And then they just got about, I think it was at four or something like that. Got it. And one family got it. One trying to figure out how that happened. They just sat down the city where they're at sort of, like they staged three or something. One family. Yeah. It's one family for as a sneaky fox. What have they been up to? Maybe they got some bad tests, but probably not. Yeah. That's what I'm trying to trace how it happened. It's such a weird, weird, weird disease, man. I know so many people that have gotten it now. I think I know about nine people and so many of them have different symptoms. I know people that got it and they just got a mild headache and they felt like shit for a day. And then they were fine. And I know other people that like Michael Yoh, who's on Death's Door. You know, but his, when people ask me about that, there's extenuating circumstance. Like if you listen to Michael's story, he was worn the fuck out. flew all the way to New York, did shows, did morning radio, did TV, flew all the way back. And then got in a car with his family drove to Vegas. hung out with his wife's mom's family hung out there for a while and then drove all the way back home same day and then had auditions the next day and then had auditions the day after that and then boom it hit him. He's a me and systems compromise. Yes, he was erect, he was exhausted and low vitamin D. Vitamin D seems to be one of the big factors, gigantic factor. There was a recent study that Dr. Rhonda Patrick sent me yesterday that have to go over. But one of the things that she said was that in a series of studies they did, when they showed people in the ICU for COVID, more than 80% of them had insufficient levels of vitamin D. And out of the people that were in intensive care, only 4% had sufficient levels of vitamin D. Got to take your vitamin D? Yes, I do. How much vitamin? I don't know. I just, whatever is in the bottle. Tell me one of those things. Yeah. Multi-vital. Yeah, the V is in the multi-vital. Yeah, so full C, then the multi B, something called arganine. I don't know. So amino acid? Yeah, I do know that. But I don't know what that means. It helps build muscle. Okay, but I'm taking it. Yeah, branch chain amino acids is a really good post workout. Take it after. Yeah, I'm going to take it after my workout before my... Yes! What kind of protein drink you drinking in that thing? What is that? This is just like some bullshit. This is like metrics of just regular. I'm actually, I need to figure out a better powder. Because I don't, I just got on it and just got the basic, like, oh, this tastes chocolate. I'm pretty sure it's not great. But I'm sure you can tell me some good. Yeah, I find it hemp to be the best protein powder. The most easily digestible. I have zero problems with it digesting water. So if I drink way, a hour later, I got to stay the fuck away from people. Otherwise I'm going to be farting. I tend to have a problem with it way, but I always have less of a problem with hemp. That's always good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's just easy. It's also something I can eat literally. I can drink it, rather literally in an hour before workout. I have zero problems. Just take it with a little bit of coconut water, mix it up. No? It's just simple, easy. You know, I use the on it kind, but there's a lot of good hemp powders out there. And it's very absorbable. You know, it's very bioavailable form of protein in terms of plant protein. The two best, I find plant proteins are P proteins really good and hemp protein. I think hemp protein is a little better. At least in my experience. I'm looking to some hemp protein. But metrics is delicious. It is delicious. I can get myself a little shake. Yeah. That's why I do it in the morning when I have my favorite breakfast. I get a rice cake that has a little bit of almond butter and a little bit of apple butter and then I have a shake and I go, ooh, I'm having shake and cake for breakfast. It's just mental games. Yeah. What did you when you first started losing weight? How much did you wear? 360. Wow. So you lost all over 100 pounds. Yeah, one, four, one. Let's hear it right now. Be 130. Wow. That's amazing. What's the ultimate goal? I'd like to be around 200 and just keep staying lean and just keep putting on muscle a bit. But yeah, I'd like to lose like another 15 pounds. Nice. Yeah, you could do that. Yeah, focus. Yeah, I mean, you're at the home stretch. Yeah, that's been the fuck. I don't. Yeah, that's what sucks. Because then I'm like, why can't I have a cookie? And then I have one and then I realize why I can't have a cookie. Because then I eat the whole fucking bottle of cookies. So yeah, I can't fuck with pizza. No. If I have one slice of pizza, I just, the glutton in me goes off and I just want to eat that whole thing. Mm-hmm. That abs thing. Do you miss traveling? I do. Yeah. Actually, I do. I've got a couple of days ago because we were watching some 90 day fiancee and they were, what is that? You never seen it? No. Oh, it's just a show. It's actually a whole complex of shows where people from other countries meet people in America and they get married, they get married within 90 days once they move to America. But then also we've been watching the other way on the recommendation of Eric Griffin where Americans move to other countries for their significant others. That's been insane and beautiful. It makes our relationship look so much stronger. I go, baby, we never said we should start over. I never had lied to you about a gambling problem that I had. You know, it just makes us look a lot better when we're watching those relationships. But they're out the airport a lot and I would go, oh, that's PDX. Oh, that's, that's, that's, that's, and then she's just like, oh, she's like, why are you getting so excited about seeing these airports? And I was like, I think I just fucking miss the, the whole process. I just miss knowing, oh, I'm going to a new city. New people are going to see me. I might meet some new friends. Like, you know, I miss that. Have you been riding? I've been riding in a bit. Yeah. Yeah. Go ahead. Sorry. What's your process? My process is usually from like, if we're talking about from start, I kind of work on this little grid where I just break it down into love, hate and fear. And then I just kind of get stoned or just sometimes not stoned at all. And I'll just play some instrument on music and I'll just write about what I'm scared about. What I'm pissed about, what I'm in love with. And then I didn't take those topics and try to figure out jokes about what's going on in my life. That's interesting. Have you always done that with? Yeah. Love, hate, fear. Mm hmm. Where'd you get the inspiration to do it that way? I think I guess got it from a writing workbook from when I was in like an English class in high school. Well, yeah. It was just about how you would brainstorm writing a paper. It's a great idea. Yeah. I mean, it helped me get the basics down. So instead of like, oh, I'm writing this joke about this, it's like, okay, I'm writing about my wife because I fucking love my wife. I'm writing about my son or I'm scared about COVID or I'm scared about this or, you know, the more specific I can get about it. Well, what exactly I'm scared of or I'm scared. I'm afraid of, you know, or what I'm in love with and just the more specific I can get the better the jokes are. And so it's a lot of work that way. And then sometimes I do it in the morning. I'll just be stoned in something. I'll pop in and I got to go chase down a notebook. Yeah. The stoned ideas that there's pop out of nowhere are the weirdest ones. Like, that's not even my idea. That's the universe is giving it to you. I usually find that it doesn't give it to me if I haven't put in that earlier work. Right. Right. Yeah. It'll give me a gift for putting in the shitty work of trying to figure out this, how the fuck am I going to break this down? And then in the middle of the night, some completely joke, some other other left field joke will just pop in and it'll be fully formed set up punchline everything. Yeah. And I'm just like, I was just always, I'm just like, thank you. Yeah. It is crazy like that, right? It is crazy that that's that put in the work part is what you ever even Steven Press feels the war of art. It's a great book, a real small book too. It's I used to buy stacks of them in the old studio and I just hand them out the guests, like especially comics. And like trust me, just read this because one of the things it's about is about establishing the laws of your work, like the way you wear your professional. You show up every day as a professional and you sit in front of that computer or that notebook and you call upon the muse. And whether or not the muse is real, if you do the work, it acts as if it's real. Yeah. I agree. Yeah. I believe with that all the time. Yeah. I've been talking to myself lately just like then that's what's been keeping me with my health and my writing and my meditating and whatever is just like figuring out who I am and what works for me and then being like you follow those fucking rules. and break your rules. Yeah. Whenever you break your rules, shit doesn't go right. Even though it might look cool and might look amazing and it might be like oh well this time if I break my rule, it's fucking, it looks like it's going to be dope and I'll get a bunch of money. Never works out. So just don't break your fucking rules. And I'm just, it's still, it's hard, but I've been working on that. She's like oh I got to eat well, I got to work out. I trust my intuition. I'm the leader. I'm the fucking boss. I don't let other people leave me. I lead even if I don't know where I'm fucking going. I lead and I just follow those rules. Have you had that issue with like representation like agents or managers trying to tell you what to do or got you into a way that you didn't think was you? Oh no, no not for me. I'm truly blessed in that. Truly but I have like I have like one of the best managers in the fucking world. She's amazing. She's married to the game. My name's Melanie, true at Brian Postain's wife and she's been my manager since before I moved out of LA like she paid my fucking rent when I couldn't afford to pay my rent. Like she's looked out for me every step of the way. That's awesome. There's been, there's been fucking like this show is going to series. They are making an offer on you. This will give you a bunch of money but it's not the right project. That's fucking past. Wow. You know and that was like in the past and I mean that happened a couple of weeks into COVID. We were both scared shitless. I know she was scared shitless about that 10% of guaranteed season and she was like no this isn't she's like this one. She's like you've already done parts like this three or four times. You can do this. This will be there for you. We're shooting for bigger things for you. And just like her belief in me and drive for me to always been there. Like I never ever feel like she's ever sold me short so that she can get a check. That's huge. That's huge. It's rare. Yeah. I do know that. I have many friends that have really bad managers that give them terrible advice and take projects that are just short term financial gain for the sacrifice of long term career options. Oh my manager. She sees the word exclusive in any contract. He's just like we ain't fucking with them. You are not exclusive to anybody. You are dating around. That's great. That's great attitude man. That's what's interesting about today's climate. It's like you don't get a lot of real managers anymore. You almost have like comics who have two agents. You have your agent agent and then you have your manager who's kind of acting as an agent instead of acting as a manager because they're all desparado. Or maybe they don't really have faith in you so they just want that money. They don't really think that you're going to be that person. It has a long career or that you could keep accelerating and. They don't believe in the development. Yeah. Yeah. I feel like my manager has always been there. She's always kind of seen me two years ahead of where I've been at. I have that story about recently but I remember when I first was in Portland and there's this commercial that reached out to me and they wanted me to play a roach in a fucking bug spray commercial and I was broke as fuck and she was just like no. She's like because we don't know what you're going to be in the next couple of years and that commercial could be around forever. Smart woman. So if you need the money that bad I'd rather just give you the money. Wow. Good for her man. Yeah. She's dope and I have many friends who like they just are tremendous, tremendous comedians, one friend who comes to mind immediately and I've always told him. I was like you need to dump your manager and get a better manager because you're doing your doing your part and I don't see you why you're not getting more money. You're not getting more chances. You're not advancing at things. They're not putting you on these talking head shows. Like you're doing your part and I don't you're fucking like you know, he opened for me once. I was like dude, you're fucking crushing me and I'm the one getting the bigger check. like what the fuck is that? Like get your get your business in order and I've always I think they from having a kid. I've always been very much into the art and very much into the business. Yeah. It's hard for people to find someone like your manager that is dedicated. I got real lucky. I found mine when I was an open micro. I've been with the same manager since 1991 or some shit. Something crazy like that. Yeah. I was like three years in the comedy when I met him and I've been with him and then he's basically not not retired but steps back and then my manager Chandra. She took over 10 plus years ago or more might be more than 10 years ago now and they're just the best in terms of like seeing the big picture and the same thing you're saying about your manager. Just looking at the business in terms of like where do you really want to do like what's going to make you happy? There's things you can do for money but what do you hear for? Yeah. Like what do you want you want you want to like walk away from everything you do going that was great. I enjoyed that. That's what I wanted to do like a special thank you. Good night. You want to go we did it. We nailed it high fives all around. That's how you want to be able to achieve those moments and get those feelings. And I think I know this is unrelatable to some people that are listening to this but I think that way with everything and maybe you don't have a manager for whatever your goal is in life but you kind of have to think about it as your own manager. You got to think like what do I really want to do and are the steps that I'm taking or the things that I'm doing right now? Are they moving me closer to that and if not what the fuck do I have to do different than what I'm doing? Yeah. I mean to me that's I have that manager. I also have my vision board. I have my vision that I do on my own. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What's that? Top of the vision board. My show. Okay. My own fucking show about my son being a single dad of a son with autism making it a fucking dope as comedy. What's what Netflix should do that? That seems like a perfect thing. You would think. That seems like a really good idea for a show. I think so. We found this spot we're working on. Okay. All right. You got to keep the mom. We'll talk later. Is that just more? I want to be leading some movies. I want to do more. I always see myself as like this Rick Moran is Billy Crystal type of unconventional charming lead in man. And I just need a buddy. I could use a boy. You need like you know Christopher like Chris Farley needed David Spade like the two of them together. They played off of each other. You need a buddy. I do need a buddy. Who would your buddy be? I got to think about that. Think about that. That would be wrong. Think about that. Maybe Bobby Lee. He seems crazy for crazy as fuck. You might be a problem. If he gets too successful, he might sabotage. Go back on pills. I mean, he's so wild. He's so wild. He truly. I did Bobby Lee in the early days when he like bring a knife to work. It's just all sweaty and shit. We're at an airport one time and he just goes, oh, the courtesy phones calling for you. And I was like, no, I don't. I've been here too, Bobby. I didn't hear anything. No, no, no, it didn't. And he's like spending the whole time trying to convince me. And he halfway does. And then I just go sit down somewhere else and I go, oh, he's a fucking high school bully. Like I just like fucking play around that like, beat you up. But like prankster, like he just fucks with you all the time. No, I love Bobby. I'm not saying like, I'm just trying to beat me. I'm saying he's just a prankster who fucks with you all the time. And I was like, and see money, no money, nothing. Like he just is, that's who he is. Yeah. And I love it. Yeah. He's a guy who needs a goddamn special. I've been yelling at him forever. Now he has an excuse. There's no comedy. You know, now he's getting an excuse. But Bobby Lee is absolutely the best stand up comic that does not have a special. I mean, he is as legit a headliner as has ever lived. When that guy is crushing, when he's in the OR crushing, you're like, the fact that he doesn't have a special is criminal. Criminal. Yeah, Bobby, he's the fuck. I mean, he's just unique. Yeah. It's just him. And that's to me is the definition of someone you want to get special to. Yeah. I've known to do forever. Known him for a long time back when he was crazy. But it's nice to see that he's gotten his shit together. He's calmer and more stable. Doesn't wrap his balls on you as much. Not much. But Neil is much. Yeah. I got a picture of him standing in the middle of the hallway with his pants down and his dick tucked in between his legs. It's like the, like that's Bobby Lee. Mm-hmm. He's a little thin. You said you meditate? Yeah. Like what do you do? Yeah, nothing like, you know, nothing special. Just sit around to him 10 minute little meditation and when I get up in the morning. Sometimes they're guided. Sometimes they're not. But I talked to, I don't know, you know, Donick Carrey is. He's a writer. He's a tremendous writer. Rope for the Simpsons, wrote for Letterman. And he came on my podcast and he just told me about this thing that he was doing, this acronym that he was doing every day, Mr. Ollie. He just meditate, read, art, write, exercise every day. That was like part of his rules. And so I was like, oh, I'm going to try to adapt that into my rules just as a way to keep that going. So that's part of what I do. meditate, read, art, write, exercise every day. That's awesome. Yeah. I mean, that's a beautiful thing. If you could structure your life like that and make sure you follow those principles, you'll just get more out of your brain. Yeah. And then you're surprised about like, follow the times you're bored and you're like, oh, there's too many hours in a day. You're like, if you've got to go through all those fucking things, you'll be like, fuck half the day's gone. Yeah. I don't understand people that say this too many hours in a day. Like what are you doing? Like I want a hundred lives. I want to live a hundred separate lives. So I could just do different. I literally don't do things because I'm scared. I'll get to into them. And then I will have less time for all the other shit that I'm already obsessed with. I'm the same way. I am all over the decision for extended period of time because I know once I make the decision, I'm all in. And that was like, you know, I started playing video games on Twitch and doing these little comedy nights on Twitch where I show old videos and make fun of people. Because that's part of things that I missed was that not just watching comedy. I always I miss it being in the background room, making fun of this punchline or this tag. And then being like, oh, that's good. You know, I miss that. So I've been doing that on Twitch and playing games with people. And but it took me a long time to decide to do it. Cause I was like, oh, once I do it, I'm anything. I'm just stand up, acting, whatever. If I choose to do it, I go full force. Yeah, you get into it, right? Yeah. I'm going to become a part of your daily routine. And then you're trying to get better at it. Yeah. Podcasting. Yeah, man, you're the Twitch thing and things seems like you could eat up a lot of your day. Just fucking around on Twitch. You can. Do you have a good chair that supports your back. Well, I saw it chair. I could use a better chair. I could have a chair right now. You like that one? It's pretty nice. Very good. Yeah. I like these good for the back. Yeah. Ergenomic can you some ergonomic? Yeah. You don't want to develop back problems because of COVID. You know, like all the people that are sitting down on all the time. Yeah. Well, that's why I end again. The two, two tread, treads of day, just make sure keep myself upright moving. So when you do this meditating thing, you do it every day, 10 minutes. You start your day this way. Do you go to a place like quiet place in your house where no one's around? You usually do it right there in bed. Make up the bed. Get everything together. Sit there, meditate for 10 minutes. Usually try to do it before my son wakes up before the neighbors wake up. Cause their family doesn't seem to be as structurally strong as ours. All you got walking neighbors and they like yelling at each other. Oh, that's a bomb. My whole day. And then the wife went, do you know they had a fight because then in the morning, the wife will come out in the morning and go, I love you. Oh, he's like, he's not saying a back lady. Yeah, they're not doing well. There's a trap that some people get in that fight, break up, make up trap. Cause it makes everything so exciting. That's the problem. High school. Yeah. Yeah. So I like, you know, I got married on Friday. Super chill. Super as chill. That's the wedding was so chill that I was like, this is going to be a great marriage. Like we just got dressed. I got my son dressed and went off with my friend. She got dressed with her friend. We met together at the place. The guy just went over his dumb spiel and then we talked to each other. Went home took some pictures. We ordered in from one of our favorite restaurants. We watched 90 day fiance and then we fell asleep and had sex the next morning. Cause we knew we were going to be there. Did you get married during COVID? Yeah. Oh, wow. No, this last Friday. Oh, you Oh, congratulations. Thank you. Thank you so much. That's why you're so excited about it. Let me talk to you in a couple of years. Let me show you a picture of it. I've seen a picture of her. Beautiful. It's one of the things about being talented. Yeah. Yeah. Box above your weight. Oh, way. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, like, oh, if I didn't do comedy, I didn't ever even see you. That's cool though. That's a bright spot. You always look back on the time you got married and you go, Dan, we got married during one of the weirdest times in the history of the United States. Yeah, man. leaning into what solid when shits all falling apart. That was actually like, we got engaged before it, of course. But I was like, oh, I'm pretty sure I was a little gun chag because I've been, I got married when I was in my twenties and obviously that didn't work out too well. And I had my son and I remember leaving my home there. And I was like, just will never happen again. I will, you know, and still will never happen again. But I was still a little gun chag. But so like, oh, we were in the good times. We go to, to niece. We go to fucking wherever. And sure we hang out at home or we just, she go to and set with me and some indie movie in Oklahoma and we still have fun. And so I knew she was a good woman. I knew that I could trust her, but especially when the shit goes down and everything's going back and she's out there like, okay, well, what do we do? What we need to pull back on? What can we, you know, purchase less of? And then I thought I might have to go out of the country for this role for a few months. And I was like, oh, shit, I'll leave my son with her and I had no worry. And I was like, even, you know, when he was with his mom, I would be worried. You know, but with her, I know she's got him. I know she loves him. I know she's got his best interest at her. And I was, that really was when it clicked in and I was like, oh, this is my wife. Like, this is my person. That's beautiful. I love stories like that. Thank you. That's amazing. Congratulations. Yeah. She's a special part of that thing because it's a little small town Canadian lady. So she doesn't know how hot she is. You know, yeah. It's not gonna be a problem here. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, she's figured it out. She's figured it out. It's like guys, you know, dry hit on her every fucking day, but I'm not worried. Good for you. I wonder when this is going to end the lockdown. Why don't we get back to normal? You're gonna be one of the first in line for a vaccine or you're gonna wait it out. I got to wait in the middle. I got to be somewhere in the middle as a parent of a child with autism, vaccine is scare me in some ways, but it's still obviously, do you think the vaccines cause autism? I don't believe they cause autism. I believe they can accelerate certain things in people who maybe are predisposed to having it. I can only just tell you my, I will tell you a personal story and people can choose to like it or not, but I just remember the day that we got my son hits for its vaccinations and he had been developing normally and just been chill and been talking and doing all the things pretty normally. The day that we got my son hits first vaccine vaccinations and he had been developing Normally and just been chill and been talking and doing all the things pretty normally and then we got him a vaccine and me My ex wife and we just remember he just kind of like was out of it and we even because me and my ex wife a big pot has We were both like oh, he's look how stoned he looks look how fucking he looks so stoned and he's out of it But he fucking never came back and so that was Moment where like you know, I don't know if it calls it or that but I was like this is That's the story I can tell you Wow It's not the first time I've heard that You know I have a friend a friend Johnny at a very similar situation. I don't yeah, I don't know I Know how adamant the people that make vaccines are that vaccines don't cause autism And I know it's a fiercely debated issue and in fact Dr. Peter Hotez who is an expert in vaccines who actually has an autistic daughter is adamant about the fact that there's apparently Different environmental factors that contribute to autism and they think it's all that takes place during the womb But I don't know there's yeah I can never be like well vaccine gave my son autism. I would never say that By go just tell you that story. Yeah The the thing is if that story if that was the case How much do you think would ever get out that all these people who have this similar story all have a case? Against the pharmaceutical companies. I mean do you just just wrap your mind? Around the legal troubles, and I'm not saying that vaccines cause autism what I am saying is if they did There would most certainly be an effort to conceal that yeah Absolutely most certainly absolutely that would be That would be a crazy lawsuit because I mean how many children are autistic in this country Do you know I don't know but I know it's a it's a lot it's a lot and the question is The question has always been are there more now because fathers are older Mothers are older environmental factors or that we're diagnosing it now we didn't diagnose it before we didn't understand it before I Mean the first I've even heard of autism was rain man Remember the dust and hot and movie. That was the first time I ever heard about it. I didn't even know what it was I never met anybody on autism, so I saw that I was like huh what's going on there? Yeah same same to me. I never thought about it never had any Second thought about it at all and then till we my son was diagnosed and then had to become much more aware about it and It's still a thing that I Get hit with because I'll I'm just a dummy because I'll be like, okay My son's got his high school and he's doing well and he's going to his classes and then they had to actually sit there And they go like, okay, you know, he's getting a certificate, but you know this isn't a real He's not a real high school graduate and I'm like, oh What you know, I don't know He's been grabbing a woman son to go to college and then I have to sit back and go like oh wait fuck I have a we have a different road We have a different life and actually this lockdown and everything has really been helpful and going through that It just being like well everything's fucking weird and different and Because I'd always been like well no matter what I'm gonna pick my son wants to go to UCLA So I'll pay to go to go to UCLA even if it's just life classes or whatever, but Now I've been thinking about more like okay, let's just figure out a way for him to be more independent On his own physically financially whatever he can do he might not go to college He might go to college But you know again if I make my show I'm like, I'm like, oh, he's got to be a consultant on this show. He's got to do this did that I just want him To have a good life basically of course Is there anything that helps him like does anything? alleviate some of his symptoms I Mean just The constant therapy that he's been in he's been that he's done those when he's two 17 now So he's been in school since he was two just doing different you know from pre-cinder guard and therapies through voice Voice therapy and I just think has been that constant right now He's getting a lot of social skills therapy where we he was before everything got locked down He was in a thing called the miracle project, which is awesome. They just take kids from with different backgrounds and teach them social skills take them on different outings and my son was doing a play Which unfortunately got canceled because of it, but they sent us a tape of the rehearsal and it fucking was dope because it was a day I got Founded I wasn't getting this role and I was real set upset it was on my vision board of like I want to fucking get this role and Didn't get it and I was pissed off doing the same thing what fuck Hollywood. They don't understand they don't understand I'm go good. I am and then I just watched my son and the on these other Autistic teenagers do this their own production of a play Sillyest thing I've ever seen my son is it's singing the spongebob theme song another kid is singing a Drake song and just Seeing them go from being these awkward in their shell not you know looking down Looking at the floor and then the moment that they're actually interested in something Well, you know my son here's the song play or are they know it's their turn to say their line Them's light up and fucking just nail their line and be fucking great at it And I was like man, that's what art is that's what fucking that's what I love is I don't give a shit about money about it. I mean nice to pay my bills But I like this feeling that I get from it and and and of watching my son get to do it Just makes me feel good. I'm sorry. This is a rambling ass door. No, no, no I'm rambling at all man. You're expressing yourself. It's not rambling at all Yeah, I mean sometimes you need to be Exposed to different things just to put it into perspective Just how fortunate we are and how fortunate, you know How easy we really do have it and how good we really have it and sometimes you know when you have ambitious goals And you have you know your eyes are on the prize you got a vision board and you're like fuck Why isn't this happening for me? Sometimes you got to see some struggle you got to see people that aren't doing that well to realize like oh I'm all right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I've been it made very well aware that I'm fucking Doing extremely well extremely that's one of the best things. I think about covid initially I mean it just took too long. It's been too fucked up now but initially I felt like One of the good aspects of having this thing where you're forced to stay home and everybody's worried about a disease is like you Realize like hey family friends loved ones. This is what's important. All this other bullshit is like when when the world is falling apart The love that you have for your family and your friends. That's what's important Yeah, yeah, they have felt good like that for a couple of weeks and then then everybody felt like they start tearing at each other They got scared. Yeah. Yeah. I mean God social media is so fucking terrifying now Just dive into this just pit of animals eating each other's like whoa Everyone's so angry. There's so much anger and then also It's like the worst timing ever right Trump and then the the fucking elections are coming So it's all this chaos and Joe Biden can't talk and the fucking you know And November's around the corner. It's like oh my god And then everything's still locked up and it's like oh my god And they're talking about dropping down the unemployment check to 400 bucks that is 600 and then they want the states to bait 25% the states like we don't have the fucking money like oh Jesus Yeah, it's fucking nuts It's fucking nuts and but then you know, it's overwhelming to you goes go to the basics of it Something I always believe from when I was very young and I think it's something that's a young African American man You know pretty early we just go Nobody's that my fucking back. I gotta take care of me. Yeah. No one's got my fucking back The government does not have our back not at all. It's not possible Not we have one bit grossly overestimated their ability to actually like manage something like this. Yeah Which is an in turn why like I've seen what we see in that social media of us eating each other and going at each other Especially anyone of that is considered of any stature I mean, I see it happened to you all the time right? What people coming at you for one thing or another and I laugh about it because I'm just like it's just fucking Joe Who cares if he doesn't like video games Fuck like I don't care the problem is they didn't even listen to what I said Yeah, yeah took a chunk of what I said and took it out of context. I love video games. That's the problem. Yeah Yeah, yeah, I Yeah, and I even talked about in that same clip and we have wound up putting the full version of it online Because I'm gonna take him like a 50 second chunk of it But I even talked about those people that do make a living on it a lot of money there are people to do it Yeah, but I'm saying for a lot of people that waste if you want to do something else Like if you're trying to do something with your life You can find things that will waste all of your time and that's one of them Yeah, well, I mean I like streaming and I like playing games But it's also the reason why I do the comedy and I do other things is because I Think at the very base of it There's there's no stability of trying to make your living off of someone else's product, right? You're playing someone else's game. You're doing someone. It's not yours You know so at any moment that can be taken away from you and so that That's small level is what I believe in what you were saying completely but I think the reason why people attack so much is because the people who were told are like supposed to be our leaders are obviously not and there's people are just looking for leaders So if you have a big platform, they're just like oh, you're a leader. You're you know and that I had people do that to me I was um when when The whole George Floyd thing was happening and Breonna Taylor was happening some one guy in particular just kept DMing me and being like when are you gonna talk about it? When are you gonna talk about it? When are you gonna make a post about it? And what he didn't know is I was going through my own personal shit a friend of mine I committed suicide that very week in the home that I had lived in three years prior and I was fucking It dealing with that and dealing with my own life and so I was like, you know who goes to fuck when I talk about anything like And I'm an obligation. I have no obligation And so it pissed me off, but then I thought about and I go oh, he's not fucking mad at me Yeah, give a shit about me. He's scared. Yeah Scared shitless and he's looking for someone to lead him and he was hoping it would be me But there's also people look for an opportunity to get upset at you for not complying Like that there's a narrative where you're supposed to be discussing whatever's in the news Whatever's going on you there's a narrative that you are you know, you're a person who talks So you should be discussing these things. Yeah, you're a public figure So you should you should lend your voice because they think you should dumb it's fucking thing ever because you're like, well How do you assume I think about black like I'm a black man? I would like my life to matter So it makes why do I gotta go around talking about it for fucking all day, you know It makes that's gumming up the works takes up too much fucking time. I agree with that completely You should be able to talk about whatever you want one of my favorite follows on Instagram's little doo-ball Mm-hmm. Oh, yeah, and little doo-ball through all this craziness He's just maintained and being little doo-ball and having fun. That sounds like him always always always always light-hearted Have a good time always laugh and his Instagram is like one of the most consistently happy Thing and like that shows his character like through all this He's maintained his sense of humor in his perspective. Yeah, that's power That's power. Why would you ever let someone take that away from you? We're here to have fun. We're here to have a good time. So no matter what the circumstances I'm gonna have a fucking good time. I learned that my sets longer ago when I went out like well You guys might not have a good time tonight But I will Yeah, sometimes you have to right you have to go internal. I am really interested to see like how we recover from this I'm really interested to see because we're in such uncharted territory Mm-hmm This is a this is new waters and it could go good or it could go bad I mean every single republic every single empire that has existed before the United States is crumbled all of them They all crumble eventually My my fear is the ones that are strong why we are falling apart are dangerous They're dangerous societies that are dictatorships like China If China somehow or another becomes the way they're controlling Hong Kong Controlls the United States. We got real fucking problems on our hands. Yeah, now. I don't know if that's really possible This is just like some fear We say betts of it all the time right. Yeah in business. You see the way that It would be so called independent enterprises Refuse the speak on certain things because there's just so much money involved Yes, you know like at that point you are owned. Yes. Did you ever see that thing where the World Health Organization guy won't talk about Taiwan What if it mentioned Taiwan is in an interview because Taiwan China does not recognize Taiwan They believe Taiwan is a part of China and Taiwan thinks it's independent So the woman interviewer was asking this guy who works for the World Health Organization Taiwan has done a wonderful job of handling this and he's like Click he just disconnects and then he comes back like you could see him reach over and disconnect it She was we seem to have disconnected it but now we're back So what I was saying was that China well China's done a wonderful job You know, there's no no need to talk about that any further So let's keep going like would not even say the word Taiwan and like this is the World Health Organization Like you won't you won't say the name of an actual country Like really that that's bananas like why can't trust you No, you won't even say Taiwan The fuck else won't you say you know, I mean there's there's been a few of those things man What you see and you go god damn Just so many businesses have vested interest in in China and keeping relationships with China and While COVID is happening and the economic downturn they've been buying up shit left all right Oh, yeah, I I mean because there's again is a big game or 10 cent is the big in the game industry is Owners of just about everything and that's one. You know one of the biggest companies in China. What do they make? Everything like what games I think they own fortnight now they own a bit of pub G. I believe they own Just they own percentages of just about every company god damn and China owns them. Yeah I don't know I feel about that Like when Trump was saying he's gonna ban TikTok I was like oh, I want to see how this plays out. Yeah. Yeah, that is actually I was like oh This that's positive In a way it is it is But then Instagram came along with real. Yeah, like their TikTok rip-off. I don't know who's using that though. Is anybody using real? I keep an eye on you little busy to pay attention We've got a busy week You do TikTok no, man. No, no, no, I you know I figure you could use your own vehicle media in over 30 on TikTok That seems to not go with it seems like it doesn't go on mm-hmm So I just got a special off you know basically though. Oh that's Sarah Cooper. Just got an Netflix special You sent me that yeah, that's the lady who Who that is she lip syncs Donald Trump speeches. Oh, okay. That's gonna go good. I'm excited for that It is there's many things that are viral that I understand that is not one of them I've watched that I was like she's just saying what he's saying, but she's doing it Like there's nothing else to it, but she just stand up. Oh no No, what does she do? She just do that? Just host a Jimmy Kimmel like two nights ago. Why I saw that that's why I was like cuz I looked her up and I go Oh, I don't know who that is. Maybe she's not good But then I saw the Jimmy Kimmel thing so then I go oh, maybe this whole time she'd been grinding and I just did not know Not as far as I know. I don't I looked at what does she do? She write her or something. Oh, yeah She's a writer. Oh, should a comedy writer It's my Google says to the American author and comedian based in New York City first book a hundred tricks to appear smart and meetings was published in 2016 Hmm, she's just right her Maybe no, I mean less she might have a fucking Netflix special that turns out amazing Oh, all right. It's a good check. I'm happy for her somebody told me Seth Myers Netflix special was very good and he's I don't think he's really A stand-up, right? That's on his background. He was an SNL guy and then he hosted that late-night show But I talked to people that said his his special was very good. I haven't seen it See Sam J's that's the only one I haven't watched it but I want to which who's Sam J. Do you know her? I do Yes, yeah, she's a writer for SNL I know she's a powerful black butch lesbian. Yes. That's right. That's right. That's right. Yeah, great joke right now I've met her at the store. I believe yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There she is. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Look a lot like me look like my sister Yeah, the Netflix looks like my tougher brother The Netflix things so interesting because they basically taken over the stand-up comedy special now. Yeah Let me change there. They used to be Comedy Central. It's really the Comedy Central Like getting people to watch the streaming online Comedy Central specials. It's just not the same. Yeah, I know and then they geoblog that shit So oh do they really? Yeah. Oh no So like if you're in the UK you can't watch it. Mm-hmm. Oh no. I don't know why that's a smart decision. That's a terrible decision Who made that one? Mm-hmm someone higher than the people I talk to like your special that you did for Comedy Central That's the the geoblog that yeah, they geoblog that and then they put it up So now it's actually it's out on YouTube for free right now for 30 days So I was stoked as like oh people in Canada and the UK can finally see it and then I was getting messages being like no again Oh wow. Yeah That's stupid. It's not the best decision Just not to confuse what we were just talking about Her just not have a stand-up special according to the press release. It's a comedy special that will be full of in yet stealing with issues of politics Christian a class another subject. Oh In more shenanigans. Oh, so right here. She wrote something It's got show event. Yeah, but it's I just got I was weird to me that two things were going viral because She was just lip-syncing things the president had said so it would be like the president's voice and it'd be her lip-syncing it and everybody But like this is amazing and I'm like She's just not she's just saying the words with her lips while he talks like what's Missing something. Yeah. Well, you know we we you're around a comedy a lot That's what I always have to remember is that my palette is You know more refined. Yeah. I think it's also like there's a gene for certain things You know like I don't have that grateful dead gene People love with the grateful dead. They love it. They love it. I listen. I go okay. I don't want to be mad I just You and I are different. It's okay It's okay. Yeah. No need to be angry. Yeah, I had no love. I don't know. I don't know you got it. No I can tell you a song trucking God, that's a good one You said you didn't like them, but you really got into it about I tried to sell it I don't want to tell you in touch of gray Do do do do do do some cool ass Nike shoes. They put out recently. I want it. Yeah, but they Oh, yeah, this name went up to like $1,200. Right. Yeah, so I was like that's out of my COVID price range for sure Yeah, it's a lot of white people that do acid. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah, rich white yuppies wanted those shoes for sure For sure. Oh, Jesus You know I want those. Oh, those are pretty trippy the green ones come on. They do look pretty trippy Mm-hmm really weird put those on this comedy store stage come on What's up with the bear? I think that's their logo a bear. Yeah, I looked into it one time I didn't know either he's named after the they're like engineer who was one of the guys that developed LSD I think something like that what yeah I'll pull up his name again Just second to show one of the guys but Albert Hoffman synthesized LSD right, but I'll hear so he's like a guy who worked with Hoffman I want to look it up He said it had like somewhere in the range of like four million hits of acid He's responsible for Wow, I wonder how many ideas can directly be traced to that guys work The lot of ideas will come to you through acid. I never done. I want to do it now. Mm-hmm. Okay You should try Michael Dozen it. I'd be happy to interesting. I like mushrooms. I'll sleep Stanley He's a clandestine chemist an audio engineer in clandestine chemists He was a key figure in San Francisco Bay Area hippie movement during the 1960s and played a pivotal role in the decades counterculture So he supplied the acid Probably work for the CIA this motherfucker five million dose Stanley was first known was the first known private individual demand in fact from mass quantities of LSD by his own account Between 65 and 67 only in two years he produced no less than 500 grams of LSD Accounting to a little more than five million doses. His professional name was bare. Oh Interesting so that's why so they're just like tied to LSD The dead. That's why he's the engineer that engineered the music. So that's why they say you have to be on that shit to Understand the sound yeah, that's what they say I mean everyone I know who does acid loves the dead when they're on acid He developed the whole it's called the wall of sound sound system He developed one of the largest I thought that was Phil Spector he that's a different thing, but oh he has an own wall sound This Phil Spector case is one of the creepiest Hollywood cases ever Oh, I remember When he got arrested and then I didn't really know who he was and I stood deep dive Into who he was after he got arrested for murder and apparently just that was his thing like pulling guns on people But when you see him in the trial, well always crazy wigs on you realize like this crazy motherfucker was involved with some of the biggest bands some of the best music and It was a psychopath like the entire time. Yeah, but I think Especially back then even now our type of businesses can kind of hide those people, right? They don't I've always hung out As long as they've done comedy like oh, that guy's a drug dealer this guy's this But not in that guy's Jesus His wall of sound is a production formula to make records Whereas the engineers was an actual like wall of sound of physical sound amplifier speakers that was touring around the country to oh Make noise to blast in your face. Oh, okay. So he had both called the same thing Okay, so he had developed something for touring that they call the walls. Okay. Yeah I don't know jack shit about music Do you play any instruments? No never played piano when it's very young But no yeah, that's another one of those things where I feel like if I got into that and Start playing guitar or something like that like how long that that seems like a long road Yeah, you got to choose it has to be your passion and never I picked up an instrument It always felt real foreign never felt at home at all. Yeah, it's But it seems like a dope thing to learn. Yeah, like I wish I could shred I Just where you could play something on piano. It seemed like you know people just fall in love you could play it up Yeah, I'd be sophisticated. Mm-hmm. Yeah, you just sit down someplace and you just start playing the piano Right you walk into a hotel and there's a hotel lobby. He's a nice bar there with the piano. You're like let me sit down and play you a melody Yeah, and everybody starts gathering around. Yeah, they think you're cool. Mm-hmm That's a thing, but that's like that's seen in Animal House with dudes playing the guitar at a party and Remember that scene The emotion Mm-hmm. No, you could tell I was blanking. I know what you're talking about because it's an old joke But I I'm not big animal house guy. Yeah, he steals a guitar from the smash is moving the head with it Or did not it didn't smash him over the head with it. You broke the guitar. Yeah This scene can we give a little volume? Jop blue she's listed to this guy Playing this horrible folk music Yeah, I know people You too will have an issue Google those words. You'll find it back in the day And this is what everybody wanted to do Sorry Did you ever see Animal House? Yeah, probably when I young don't recall it. It's a classic that's what it seems very slow now It is that's the problem. Mm-hmm. There's a lot of those movies that just don't hold up Try to watch porkies the other day. Yeah, this is a great movie Terrible things get announced yesterday that the projects maybe they won't get made but three men and a baby remake and then a potential fresh Prince reboot but a drama not a comedy what yeah What Why can't they just come up with new ideas? I agree with that. Listen. How about a show where there's a comedian who has an autistic kid? Yeah Yeah, it should be like a Netflix thing or maybe Amazon prime they do a good job They've seen the marvelous Mrs. Maisel. I have not it's very good especially the first two seasons I kind of Soured for me the third season, but it's a pretty good representation of stand up It may not not part my perfect, but pretty good pretty good like close enough when you go home That's just funny hearing you that you watch that show I don't think anybody would think that you watch that show. Why's that? Because it's funny like Joe Rogan just going like you know what I like marvelous Mrs. A lot of girly shit I do What did you got get on that 90 day fiance? I don't know if I can go that far think about it. I like Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt That's a mythic and charming That's a funny fucking show though, right? Yes. That's a good show. That's like they got like eight seasons Yeah, I mean and so bleak Yeah, you know, that's the type of shit I like when you can take bleak things and still be so funny the bleakest Mm-hmm Someone who got kidnapped and forced into a sex cult in a fucking bunker And then 15 years later she gets out with a super positive attitude and is facing all the modern world issues Yeah, fucking great. She's such an amazing actor. Yeah, well, it's a Tina Fey show to that lady. She figures shit out. She did have so This vision board this ultimate vision board the ultimate thing is a show and movies and stuff like that Is there anything that you have made manifest that's actually happened because of this vision board? Yeah, yeah my house Was on was one of my first major vision board things I put that when I didn't have a house living in my apartment and What it does for me is just kind of it focuses me gives me a direction Instead of just being this guy who doesn't have his hands on the rudder or whatever the thing that steers the boat And so like I was like oh I want to get this house and so in order to get the house. I had to stop Just like not paying attention to my money I had to stop just buying random sneakers every week I had to start being like okay I need to build my credit I had to pay these old bills from when I was 20 and didn't pay those off because I didn't think I'd ever have fucking money So who cares if I skipped out on this rent? You know I had to go back and undo all these things so that I could get to that ultimate vision of getting the house and then we end up I have had my house for two years now fucking love it I put that I wanted to be on Reno 911 in there and I taped that I don't know if I got cut out or not because it's you know Six-minute quibby thing, but a lot of things I put on my vision board end up happening That's interesting you say that you had to go and like I got cut out or not because it's six-minute quibby thing. But a lot of things I put on my vision board end up happening. That's interesting. You say that you had to go and redo things that you fucked up. What brought you to that decision? It was just that if I wanted to move on a lot of ways in my life, the same with my dealing with my ex-wife and things like that, I had to go to therapy, I had to start. I wasn't trusting anyone. I was like anyone who wants to hang out with me just because I have a little bit of money or because I've been on a couple of shows or did that. And what she's sort of dick is like, no, most people don't even fucking know me, you know? So, but that some people did. And then sometimes that would happen. People would be hanging out with me just because they thought I could introduce them to a fun party or someone else cooler than me. And I had to stop looking for that and being so worried about that. And I had to go and do just a mindset. I think this rapper also really like, walk a fuck of flame. Many people talk about this. I just changed my mindset from a survival mindset to a thrive mindset. I'm like, oh, I am okay. I am fine. So I can go ahead and just take care of this business. I'm going to get more work. I'm going to get more jobs because I've proven myself. It's not a fluke. You know, it's not a mistake that they made in hiring me. They, you know, I'm going to be here. What made you like, what did you come up with this idea to sort of correct your mindset? Was it just like realizing personally that the way you were looking at things was wrong? Or did you read something? It was just mostly that things in my life were getting better, but I wasn't getting happier. I had more money. I hadn't shh, anything I could buy video game wise, all that stuff. I was having a bunch of sex, but I wasn't happier. I was still lonely. I was still like not doing all the things I wanted to do. I was chasing things just for money, you know? And so I had to just kind of take a step back and go like, okay, like don't just chase every single thing you see. Figure out what you really go back to like when you start its stand up. Like what do you want? And all I wanted when I started stand up was to be able to pay my bills and do the things I want to do and that hasn't changed. Was this a gradual process? Yeah, for sure. For sure. Like a couple years. So you just realized was it like you're sitting in, this was not from reading anything, is just from you recognizing that something was wrong. It was me recognizing something was wrong in me and me watching the people around me. Me watching people with more success in me, me watching just seeing that like, oh, like, okay, I feel this way and I have this little bit of money with it, but maybe if I get more money, I won't. But then meeting people with millions of dollars and being like, oh, holy shit. Like some people still don't have their shit together no matter how much money they have. And some people know who exactly who they are and they know what they want. They are happy within themselves and I wanted to be that. That's it's very interesting that you recognize it and made the adjustment. You know, that's the sign of a strong mind. You were you were able to recognize that the current patterns that you were operating under weren't weren't they weren't fulfilling your needs. So you had to like assess, but then also move forward and make a change does very difficult thing to do. Yeah, it's difficult. But you got coincide with weight loss. It's probably a little bit after the weight loss, but that's the weight loss kind of gives me the motivation for it. You know, like my whole life has been motivation for every other step I take. You know, like I came from just being a college grad, drop out with a son who when I was 20, he was diagnosed with all his and my 23. I didn't have any money. My ex wife was more of an albatross around our thing. I have full custody of my son. It was just like, I had her figure this shit out. And once that we had a little apartment and everything, I was like, okay, well, I fucking figured this shit out. I get my health together. And that was a big one because my my doctor even told me she was like, you know, there's so many people. I tell all the time just diet exercise diet exercise. You need to lose weight. You need to get better. You're going to die. I tell this to the people all the time and you go, you know how many my fucking patients have done anything about it. And then she says, you, that's it. You're the only one that I know that I have talked to about this who's just done it through diet and exercise. So you have a, she's just like, you have a strong fucking mind. So I took that to heart and I was like, well, fuck, if I can do that, if I can lose 140 pounds, fucking throw it, you know, I would work out throw up and you know, give this more to my trainer. He would just like, all right, you throw up. Let's. Yeah. Can you breathe? All right, let's get back at it. You know, you know, we're a lot of times people would throw up and they'd be like, okay, well, that was enough for today. You know, he would never push. He told me day one. He's like, you're, you're a very strong man and we're going to just unlock what you've been covering up with bad decisions. That's so, it's so true what your doctor said and it's so interesting when you think about the goals that people have, like one of the major goals, if you asked Americans, like what do you want to do besides be successful? Have a family, have a career. They want to lose weight. But what I said at the beginning of this podcast, you've done one of the most difficult things a person could do because you didn't just lose weight. You lost a fuckload of weight and you kept it off. And that to me is so it's such a, it's the craziest thing is because it's like, it's not like gaining weight, right? Like gaining weight requires you got to eat all that food. Like you got to like, you got to really get after it. Like if you really want to gain weight, man, you got to fucking put on that, you know, you got to be there to eat. You got to get it done. People have no problem with that, you know, but they're not eating. You're literally asking someone to not do something. Just don't do something and it's harder to do than to do something. Yeah. And then the exercise is maybe even harder to do than to not eat. Those are two really difficult things to do that you need to do both of them in order to really get your health in order to really lose weight. And everybody knows it. Yeah. Everybody knows it, but nobody does it. Yeah. And then they always want to know, what's the trick? What's the trick? What's the trick? No fucking trick, bro. There's no trick. Trick is to walk through that door. Especially with exercise, it is just like a door. Like, yeah. And that's what my wife said to me. Oh, she was like, oh, you went from, she's like, you were a guy who didn't exercise. And now you're a guy that exercises. She's like, there's no part of you that gets up and goes, oh, this is hard. Why am I doing this? It's just like, this is what you do because this is what you do. And the hardest part is making that transition because you go through that first three weeks. And you're just like, I have fucking hate this. Why the fuck am I doing it? You're looking at me back when we could go to gyms. You're looking at other people going, oh, well, they're fucking attractive and this and that. And I'm never being like that. You know, and you just got to get rid of all that. I hate that. I hate when I see that in comedy because I just most of the music, I go, I know where it comes from and I had that in myself when people were like, I don't exercise. And they're so fucking proud of it. You know, I'm just like, well, okay, we'll see you in 10 years when you change your fucking mind and are you just aren't successful. So, you know, that's the thing I would tell young me. You're like, everything I've done. I'm like, well, that's my process and I'm glad everything I wouldn't change a thing. The only thing I would have done is told young me, be like, hey, motherfucker, if you want to be successful, you just got to be healthy. So just get at it. It's just better for your brain too, man. You think better. I mean, I am very fortunate in that. I got it in the exercise. I'm working out very, very young. I've never not done it. But for me, if I don't do it, I don't think right. I'm just, and I think it's also, it has to be because I've been doing it so long that my brain has this requirement to burn off this energy. And then also the kind of exercise I do is so intense. There's so much aggression that if I don't do that for a few days, that shit stores up. And then I'm not the nice person. I don't like me. If I don't work out for four or five days, I don't like me. I'm not, I'm not that nice. I can get edgy real quick. But if I work out every day, I'm the nicest person. I want, I'm just, it's like real simple. The body has requirements. The mind has requirements. If you don't give it those requirements, it starts to malfunction. Yeah. It's something I've thought about since I was very young just as our society that we've kind of mislabeled a lot of words like work and play and what those things mean. And I feel like a lot of things that we consider work aren't work at all. They're busy work. They're like a waste of time. They're just spending time in a place for a set number of hours. Whereas what I consider real work is getting yourself better exercising, reading, meditating to me. That is work. That is how you actually get better at things. And that's just kind of how I look at it. This is my job. I work in entertainment, even if I didn't work in entertainment would matter. But the fact that I do, my main jobs are, well, stay ready, keep material going. Make sure I fucking look good and just have a positive attitude. And if I keep it that simple, everything else is fine. Yeah. That work that making sure you do that work for some people is just, it's an alien concept. They never really developed that habit. But if you do, if you just, I swear to God, anybody listening to this like, oh, I don't think I can do that. If you just started just left foot, right foot, right foot, just do it. Please just get going. Just get going. Once you get going, it's so easy to keep going. It becomes momentum. How much harder to start from a stand still position? But once you're doing it and you kind of like, I worked out every day this week. Hey, I worked out every day this month or hey, I worked out four days a week for the past six weeks like fuck, man, you got some momentum now. Yeah. And it just feels good. And especially when I was three sixties and I was like, I was going around doing box jumps and tire pushes and all of that shit. I was walking. I was walking and walking and walking and doing some light bicep curls. It doesn't matter where you start. Did you get all in right from the jump when you said, all right, I'm going to lose weight or did you vacillate? Did you? No, once again, my molar decision and I make it. So once the decision was made, it was more like, okay, it's out of my hands. I will do what my trainer says and that's it. And that's been the crazy thing because he'll then like recently he'll talk about other clients and they'll be like, oh, you know, you wanted to do this. He didn't want to do it. So we didn't do it. I never comprehended it that I could tell you no. You know, I never even thought of that I could be like, yeah, I know I'm tired, fuck it. You know, I thought, oh, I'm paying you this is your job. So I just listened to you, you know. And but I think, you know, so in that way, it's just me having a good attitude about it. I don't, once I was in it, I was in it. And then later came the thing of like, oh, I have to mentally now undo like the fact that I still want these things. You know, it was easier to just say, okay, well, I'm not doing it because I need to protect my health and I'm going to die. But once I got down to a healthy way, it was like, okay, now we have to deal with the mental aspect. I went to like overeaters and not amens for a couple of classes and I didn't like that. What does that like? It's like alcoholics and not a mess basically. It's the same book even that they read from. Yeah. So I think they just need to get, they should change and get, they should together. It doesn't match up because they read you these like things like, oh, I reached my lowest moment. I lost my family. I was living in a train and I was like, well, no, I can't relate to that. My lowest moment is that I, you know, took a bite of a donut and then put it on top of the trash and then came back and got it and then had to put it deeper in the trash. That's what I need to work on. Yeah. That's a different kind of addiction, right? Mm hmm. Yeah. I literally lose your life the same way. You know, you don't come with junkie. No, it's low. You lose your life in a weird way. You lose your physical life. Yeah. You start telling, I just remember mentally the change of being like, well, you know, I just don't want to do that. I don't want to, I can't physically go school, but diving, they won't let me at my way. So you know, I'm just not interested in any of that. You know, and now I'm just like, I won't do anything. I went to, you know, the pro wrestling school for a few months. Did you really? Yeah. Think about going to, you know, the tomorrow, you know, you have me going to class. I don't know how much I did, so I'm up to anything. Clown calls. Thinkin' about it. What is that? Talk to me. I don't know much about it, but he went, he went, Jimar neighbors, but my- Jimar's so crazy. Yeah. And so I was talkin' to him about acting class. And he was like, man, I think you would kill it in clown school. What the fuck is clown school like, what do you do? I bet you, there's a lot of water bits, some prop work. A lot of nose honking. Yeah. But I bet you there's some tumbling stuff too. And so I'd be interested in that, but yeah. What's so? What's so? Tell me about pro wrestling school. Like, what was this because you want to go full David R. Kett? I'm a great reference. Never go full David R. Kett. He'll kill David R. Kett documentary. Yeah, I know about it. I just watched the trailer for it. I'm like, this motherfucker is killing himself. Yeah, he's out there doin' death matches. Getting hit in the head with like light bulbs and shit. Like, okay. Yeah, insane. No. I didn't want to do that. I just, you know, been a big fan of two things my whole life, comedy and pro wrestling. And I subsided I wanted to, when I lost a weight, I was not aware of what my body was capable of anymore. You know, I would still be like pushing myself up off of things and my trainer would be like, what the fuck? Like, you know, you're much lighter than you think you are. Oh, that's funny. And so I decided to go with habits. Yeah. Oh, have it. So I decided to go to school and be like, okay, let me throw my body around. Let me do as many fucking squats as I can. Let me see what I can do. Oh, do they make you do like the body weight squats? Oh, yeah. Like Carl Gotch type workout. Oh, yeah. One day they were just mad at us. So they made us do like 375 squats. Oh, that's a fun day the next day, huh? Yeah, it was a fucking bathtub day. That's what an Epsom song says. Oh, so much. Oh, my God. Body weight squats will fuck you up. Anybody tells me they need to like a gym to work out. I'm like, listen to me. Show me that you could do 200 body weight squats. You don't need a gym to work out. You could develop amazing leg muscles, just body weight squatting. Yeah. I mean squatting. Sit up push ups burpees. That's a fucking, that's a workout. Fuck yeah, it is. You ever do those Hindu squats where you lift your heel up at the bottom and then push up tremendous for the quads. Yeah, Hindu squats are interesting. It's a, you start off like this, right? And then you drop down. You put your your hands behind you as you drop down. And as you drop down, your heels go up and then you push up and come back up to here and then do it again. Oh, so it's like a sweep. Yeah, sort of. Yeah. But it's the thing about it is here. I'll do one real quick. The thing about it is as you go down, when you go down, your heels come up like down here. My heels are up, up like this. So it's like it really works the top of your quads like your quads where it touches the knee, tremendous, amazing exercise. And it's just body weight. Yeah, I was, yeah, especially when I was on the road and can find a gem. Oh, yeah. Squats all the time. Yeah, but Hindu squats, Hindu pushups, regular pushups and a chin up bar, you're good. You're good. You don't need anything. But if you can get other shit in there too, they got you kettlebells. You do shit like that. I need to get some kettlebells. I don't. Currently, I mean, I was going to the gym a lot, you know, so I had everything there at home. I just kind of have up to 50 pound dumbbells. I need to get, I've been trying to buy them bigger dumbbells, but the fuck, they're so expensive right now. I tried to buy some 65 pounds. They want to charge me $700, 700 bucks. $700 for a pair. That's crazy. Yeah. Is that real? Yeah. Is that just because everybody bought them out? I think it's all quarantined up and then they're shipping and the weight of the shipping and all that shit. I don't know. 700 bucks for a pair of dumbbells is hilarious. Yeah. So I'm, you know, you got to go prisons. The whole place gets a rock stick. Sticks on them. But I need to get some bigger weight for sure. Yeah, Jack. Yeah. I'm trying to get as healthy and put together that can, to like 40, 41, 42 and then you can call bars. Yeah. That's crazy from there. Still maintain. I just turned 53. Oh, okay. Well, yeah. See, yesterday. Yeah, I know. Happy birthday. Thank you. I thought about buying you, it's not them. But then I really, I remembered. Then I recalled. Yeah. What could I get? Yeah. Oh, I get sufficient. I don't know anything. Well, man, for real though, happy birthday. Thank you. You're fucking, I think I, you know, I texted you the day I found out that about the things just about just your love ownership of your own shit, the longevity, the how many, because I go back. I look at my podcast. We just two years deep. And I'm like, oh man, we've made it so far, but I could still do so much. And then I go back and I'm watching old episodes of you. And it's like, absolutely five, sixty five, you know. And I'm just like, man, there's a longevity. There's just just those part of like, this is what I do. This is my shit. And I told you directly. The fact that you own that shit and it's yours and you license them is a huge inspiration to me. So I just wanted to make sure I tell you that. Thank you, brother. And like I said before, I really love what you do. I love the energy that you put out. I really do. Because your energy is like consistently positive and friendly. Like I love that you do that. And you put that out. And you like, you say hi to people. I hope you're doing great. And I know it's sincere. You know, and you have big smile. And it's like, that's, that's giant for people, man, to have a place like that where they could tune in and get just consistent positive vibes. This is great. It's all, I mean, you know, she just gets aware of it. But life's, for me, it's been so much better. My life's gravy compared to my childhood and things that I went through. You know, single mom and she had abusive relationship and all this other shit. And just never had structure or knowing, you know, a lot of things were up in the air in my household. And now that I do what I literally do what I want to do for my life, I know my passions. Sure, I don't get everything I want. But it's like, man, I can never, and I get to work with my fucking heroes. You know, and I never lose sight of that. And when Juan de Sykes is like, oh, you're fucking, why aren't you in theaters yet? You're fucking getting theaters. And I'm like, you know, I'm still a fan first. And so it's easy for me to be happy for people because I'm like, fuck, this is dope and success to me just because of the success. I don't look at and go, oh, I couldn't get that. I go, oh, something's coming for me too. Yes. Yes. It's just about maintaining that positive mentality. And that is really putting out positive vibes, like what you're doing really does change people's lives. It really does. You know, I mean, maybe you don't feel it yet. But I guarantee you, there's a lot of people that look to you for that positive inspiration. They look to you for just happiness. And then just like, you give that, you give that to people, man. And then they get it. It's like a little seed you give them. And it grows inside of their body. I just got an email from this guy I'm doing this thing with. And I didn't know too much about him. I know he was referred to me by this other guy. We're doing this project together. And then he sends me this email basically after we're done with this thing. Hey, man, I just want to let you know. Like I didn't tell you this before. But because of you listening to your podcast, I just have this terrible job. I quit my job. I moved to this new place. I started from scratch. I started doing Jiu Jitsu. I lost weight. I got a way better job. Now I have a family, a Marion advocate. I'm a different person. And it's because of listening to your podcast and realizing that you can change your life. And you can do the things you want to do. You can just got to push yourself. And you just got feeding off the energy of hearing someone say that that's actually done it. And recognizing there's no difference between you and me. There's no difference between me and the next guy. It's just I've done it and you can too. That's what people need to hear. You see someone like Kevin Hart and you go, that guy's an alien. I just, I'm not like that. I can't do it. That's not true. He's just a dude. He's just a dude who's positive who works hard. And if you do that too, you will get successful. You will. You will find your fucking groove. People who haven't done stuff are the people who tell you you can't do it. Because that's the reality that they've lived in. I've never met someone who's truly been successful who turns around and goes, well, no, but you couldn't do it. You know? Because they know. They know. And then it's just putting in the work and then it just, it might take decades. You know, I was 20. I was shown again on Twitch showing these old videos of mine. I showed my special and then I somehow found this set of mine for when I was three years in. And so I showed we showed him we were making fun. I said, look at me. Look at how I'm dressed. Look at you. You can tell like these are my only good pants and they aren't good. But man, if you didn't have that, you wouldn't appreciate where you're at now. That's so important. Like that's, that's, there's a message for people that are struggling right now. Like this struggle, fucking enjoy it. Suck it in. Take it in. First of all, it's fuel. Because it's going to inspire you to move forward and become more successful. But also like, man, you're going to look back on these days. The suck that you're experiencing right now will be delicious in five, 10 years. You're going to look back on it's going to be amazing. You're going to enjoy it. Yeah. No, I get text messages. I got text messages the other day from my ex-wife sisters. Just being like, oh, I'm so proud of you. Look at you and your movies and this and that and your amazing and you're doing so well for your son. My nephew and then I was just like, this is so cool coming from the lady that used to call me the N word. That's amazing. Do you still talk to the X? No, not really. Sometimes just, you know, you keep her up the date to what's going on with her son. Make sure that their relationship is still strong. But me and her know, you know, she just she. I understand if I was in her position, I wouldn't like what. Everything turned out. She ain't never been the niece. I don't know what that's like. Yeah. As much as you like to see some people succeed, there's a certain amount of satisfaction in knowing that you bypassing all the pitfalls that other people fall into. Yeah. Especially if you had some non fun relationship issues with them. Yeah. It truly is. I try. You know, I still try that. It's my, you know, my son's mom. So I always have more love for her and I want her to be successful and I want her to be happy. But I'm very, I know I want. It's awful. It's awful to take happiness and other people's failures like that. But yeah, but that's choices. And yeah, it's like also like you can learn a lot from other people's failure. Truly. As much as you can get out of people's success, man, look at someone who you know that's just sabotaging their life left and right and you can learn from that too. The thing, one of the things that you were talking about that I think is so important is take an ownership of your fuckups. Take an ownership of the things you did wrong and try to rectify that. Try to just you don't want to repeat those patterns, recognize them. You know, develop development, getting better, evolve. I think that's a thing, you know, through especially social media lately that we don't, we don't allow people to evolve. We don't allow them to change. We hold them to the same statement that they made 10, 15, 20 years ago. And if someone's an asshole today, that's fine. I understand that. It's okay to not fuck with people. But like to judge someone over things they had to 10, 15, 20 years ago, obviously case by case basis. But you're denying the existence of evolution. You're denying that people change and that people can get better. And I just always believe in that because I've seen it in myself. I've seen it in my friends and the people around me. So many people that if they truly, some people don't want to change and they don't ever, they never will. But I've met a lot of people who weren't the best people and they pulled their shit together because they had to. Yeah, I agree. I agree wholeheartedly. And I know I've grown and become a better person too and through all that hard work. And I almost don't fault people that feel that way because it's fucking hard today, man. You know, it's less hard for us because we had this advantage that we were kind of, we were moving. You know, we were already had momentum when the shit hit and we were in a business where, you know, we're very fortunate that when you do well and show businesses, you can make a decent amount of money, you could save some of it and you can put it aside. But there's so many people out there that have no hope and I understand the bitterness and the anger. I understand it all. I get it. I mean, this is a fucked up time. It's a fucked up time where like half the country can't work. Yeah. And when you have that, you're going to have just a dystopian perspective on everything. And that's what you have with people today. And I just want us to come out of it. I really do. And when we come out of it, man, I hope we look back and appreciate where we are. If we get to a point where we can all gather and go to comedy clubs, you go to restaurants and movie theaters and normal shit like we used to do, sporting events. You can go see pro wrestling live. All that shit, man. I just hope we really enjoy it. Yeah. And maybe we will. I mean, maybe it will be like, we'll be better because we'll recognize like, hey, man, this could all go away. Now we know it can all go away. Yeah. Just learning to my respect to the audience more and to, yeah, I'm clearly nothing without an audience. I'm nothing. Nothing. And sometimes I didn't always go into like every show being like, I need to give these people, you know, I'm sure, you know, sure. And so I'm just trying to be more aware of that in any chance. I've thought it was great. Like I was like, okay, I did this one show where they there's a little stage and a screen and people can see you. And I was like, Oh, it feels so good to get on stage again. And I want to be grateful for it. And they asked me to come back. And then I slept through it. And I was like, man, am I seven first? But then I was like, no, this is like getting back to normal. Yeah. That's funny. I did some stand up. I did a weekend, the Houston improv, but I was like, man, I can't catch COVID. I got to get out of here. I did, you know, one weekend. And I did all the right things. Kept the fuck away from people wore a mask. Did my shows got off, get out of there. I didn't take pictures. Didn't hug anybody. But I was still like, but what if I got it? And what if I give it to someone I love? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I got really high the next day. And I got real paranoid. It's like, what if I have it? Yeah. And then I was like, I can't do this. Yeah. I went through the same mindset because I had a couple of gigs on the dock is still. And, but I went to that same thing. I want to do stand up so bad. I want to perform. I want to fill that feeling of people applauding when I enter a room. But I just fucking have that same paranoia. I'm like, Oh, what if I give it to someone and, you know, I'm healthy and that's fine. But I give it to someone and they give it to their grandma and their grandma dies because they went to hear me do some dumb bullshit jokes. I can't. Exactly. Exactly. But at a certain point in time, like, what do we do if this is normal forever? Like, what if COVID doesn't go away? And this is just the deal. This is just how things are. Then what do we do? Do we decide then? Well, fuck it. Let's just have comedy clubs. People are going to get it. They're just going to get it. There is no cure. There's nothing you could do. Do we just live like this? I don't think so. Then sound good. That doesn't sound good. So the question is always like, are we living like this because we're waiting for them to develop enough hospital beds and waiting for them to develop some sort of a treatment that's responsible that really responsible that really does work well. Is that what's going on? Because if we I mean, we're all hoping for a vaccine, but if there's nothing, if it doesn't happen, let's just just imagine it doesn't. What do you do? At some point in time, we're going to have to say, fuck it. We're going to have to get back to work and get back to life. Yeah. That'll be a weird life. I don't want that. And then I hadn't thought about that until you brought it up. Damn. But now I am thinking about it in like a horror movie. Well, here's the thing, man. There's more than one version of this disease right now. More than one. There's one in India that's so different from the one here that they develop a vaccine for the one that's in North America. It won't work for the one that's in India. And this is it's possible that this thing is going to morph like the common cold or like a lot of other viruses and spread all over the place. Well, if they don't have a disease prevention, if there's no way other than keeping your body healthy, keep your immune system strong. Well, if they don't have a disease prevention, if there's no way other than keeping your body healthy, keeping your immune system strong, we're not gonna live like this. We can't just live like this forever. We're living like this temporarily. This is the idea. So we have to like, that is a possibility that we need to take into account. It's interesting. It means life's gonna be different. A lot of people are gonna die. A lot of people wear masks. A lot of people have fucked up teeth that are gonna be real happy. Okay, what the mask thing, because that's been, I got used to that from Japan from when I went to Japan for two weeks. I was like, oh, that's fine. Oh, when you went to Japan for two weeks, was it COVID or no COVID? Pre-COVID, but a lot of people just wear masks. We have to fill in a little ill. You wear a mask. Well, that's a polite thing over there, right? Yeah. Well, that's why they did an amazing job. They got to a point where like, I think the entire country only had a thousand deaths, which is amazing. But especially if you, because people consider the size of Japan, it's not like super popularly. But if you consider that most of the population in Japan is in just very dense areas, like Tokyo is everyone right on top of each other. And they never locked down. They kept working the entire time. They just wore masks. And they only had a thousand deaths. It's pretty amazing. Everybody might as a political commentator. And he was like, you need to look at this. Send me this article explaining all the things Japan did. They did, basically they follow order. They're polite. If you go over there, I wasn't, I've only had a Tokyo once, but it's like amazing how different their culture is. Like how polite they are and how they are. And how they are on the streets. Like everybody, some garbage everywhere, everybody picks up their shit. You don't even, it's rude to walk around and eat. Yeah. You both go take it to the proper place, get rid of your trash, and then go about your day. It's crazy. Yeah, they just have patterns of behavior and patterns of like they're just what they accept or what they expect rather from society, from people. And they all agree. Yeah. Truly, I just have a plan. Yeah. If you haven't gone, and you can wear a chance to travel, go. Oh my God. It's fucking amazing. I can't wait to go to other countries again. Oh, I want to go to some weird places. I can't wait. Once this shit is, if the shit ever lifts up, I just want to go, I want to take in as many weird cultures. I want to go to Bali. I want to see what that's like. I want to go to Indonesia. I want to go to a lot of the Pacific Islands. I want to go to Philippines. I want to go to a lot of places I've never been. But I've just seen in videos. I just like, and I want to go to Egypt. That's the thing I've been kicking myself in the head about like why didn't I go see the pyramids. I do, I need to go see that. I'd like to do that. Every person that I'm friends with, Schultz went, he went right before COVID. Everybody that I'm friends with, they went there, they're like, bro. I'm like, this shit changed my life. It's so big and so crazy. Like what the fuck is this? Who built this? How did this happen? What was this culture like? And the fact that you got fucked up Cairo right there next to this ancient civilization that's so far more sophisticated in their structures. Like that's one of them things where, I think perspective shifting places are very important to go to. Just because it just gives you, we're so used to like Los Angeles or Boston or wherever you're from. You look used to these cities and this is how people live. And then you go to Chichinita and you go, oh shit. Like whoa, the Mayans doing. You know, these motherfuckers are doing this shit 1500 years ago? Like what is this? How are they doing this? Why were they doing this? What was life like back then? You realize like the pattern that we're in is just the pattern that we're in. It doesn't mean there's the only pattern that human beings follow. It's just like you were talking about Japan. That's a different pattern. They're on a different pattern. Their pattern, they got into this really disciplined pattern being polite wearing a mask. Our pattern is fucking chaos, but also our pattern is more creative. That's a weird thing about our pattern. Over here in America, we do a lot of wild shit, but man, we create a lot of good shit. You know, if you think about all the movies and the art and the comedy and the music, all the shit that comes from this one continent. Yeah. It's like a really crump from a lack of structure. And from chaos and thinking on it. That's why we have so many forms of art that are created here. That's why jazz is created here. That's why hip hop is created here. Stand up comedy invented here. Yeah. Yeah. It is. It's like that is what's interesting. Right? It's like you got a kind of have both of those things. You got a kind of have chaos, but you also kind of got to have some discipline too. That's why I think that's one of the reasons why America is done so terrible with this COVID reaction. We're the worst at it. And all the fucking big countries, we are the worst. Yeah. It's crazy when you really look at it. And they're just like, we don't want Americans right now because you're in a underdeveloped nation medical. You're fucking idiots. You just, you guys don't listen. You want to have like a big protest where you don't wear a mask. Like we want to fucking freedom. And there just thousands of people marched down the street saying, we don't want to wear a mask. Bill Gates, the devil, fuck fouchy. Like people are crazy. They're wild people. But they come up with some good shit. Right? Such a conundrum. Like pardon me, I love America. I look, I'm some fucking American flag behind me. It's a reason for that. I love America. Genuinely, I love the concept. I love the concept of I'm the grandchild of immigrants. My family all came over here from Europe. I love the fact that these people were, we're like the ancestors of these people that decided wherever they were, they just didn't want to be there anymore. You know, they, no, not me. Come on. I was going to get that. Or. Or realize, hey, you know, that's that is for sure. The most fucked up part of America. Right? It is the most fucked up for sure. How it started. Slave owners wanted to be free. But it's also, there's a beauty that people don't see. I think there's a lot of like, in every day, white people that I talk to, there's a little bit of fear of this, just like this black anger of people being like, not only black lives matter that we want, you know, reparations, we want everything back. I don't want, you know, which was also, we'd be great. It'd be fun. But to me, what's so beautiful about America is this level of forgiveness that's built into our structure to the fact that we can have that history, that horrible history. And then there's no other country that freed those people and then they live there right next to their oppressors. You know? And then, and there's forgiveness. And there's balance. And there's like, well, we just want to continue to be a part of this lifestyle. And we want to succeed and have our own freedoms like you. We're not trying to then take over and out white people or slaves. It's just beautiful thing that there's this, like, forgiveness there. And that they want to see the table. Yes. Yeah. And also, the amount of creativity that comes from that culture. Yeah. And just stop and think of that, right? Like through pressure, diamonds are created. And just look at the black American community and think about all the different forms of art that not just originated with black Americans, but were mastered by them to a point where like, like even rock and roll. Yeah. Like Jimmie Hendrix is the greatest guitar player of all time. I mean, you go and look at stand-up comedians. I mean, there's so many musicians, so many artists. So I mean, that's the crazy thing about art, right? Like so much of art is this dynamic expression that comes from pain. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's to me, the beauty and the alchemy and art is to take your traumas, take your pain, and then to turn those things into your successes and the reason why you have finances. Yeah. It's amazing. Yeah. And I'm hoping that through the, I mean, this obviously racial relations are in this really strange upheaval right now. They're in the bad spot. They're in a bad spot, but they're also in a spot where there's a potential for growth. You know, like when you see these black lives matter protests, the thing that gives everybody hope is that people are together walking down the street in unity and that they recognize that this is a unique moment to make things better. This is a unique moment to take a stand, to talk about things, to recognize that there's problems, and out of the brutal murder of one man, this eruption that has existed all throughout, not just North America, but it spreads throughout the globe. It's crazy time. And through crazy times, oftentimes on the other end of it, you get a better world. Truly. Truly. Yeah. I choose to look at those positives, because police brutality is not a new subject. You know, oppression is not a new subject by any means, but the reaction to it, the amount of allies, the amount of times where I see, I get so excited when I see all these young, white allies, these people, these millennials, they're, you know, that people kind of make fun of and they're the ones in the fucking streets. The first, they're their first, come be like, no, this is bullshit. We don't do this anymore. And I love that to me. That's tremendous progress, because I'm, you know, there was a million man march years ago, years ago when I was a child, there was marches about this type of things. And before I was a child, you know, that's the thing I talked about. Yeah. My mom was out in those marches, getting bit by dogs and sprayed by fire hoses. And now we reached to the point where I said at home, playing video games, and I sent my white assistant out to the protest for me. That's true progress. You said you're assisted out to protest? I did. I can show you a picture. Did you test him after he came back? Hey, man, before he come back to my house, I'm gonna have to swab your nose. Uh, trust her, she's pretty safe. It's hard to be safe. It is. But she's fucking, yeah, she's pretty, really particular. Thank you. That's all I know her being so safe. That she did that. She did. She protested for you. But on airplane, I'll find no worries. No worries. All right, man, let's wrap this up and tell everybody where they can get your podcast, social media, all that shit. A lot of things going on. My podcast is called Getting Better with Wrong Funches. You can find that wherever you find your pun name. Getting better. I love it. I am. Not about becoming the best. It's not about we are the best. It's the fact that every single fucking day we're trying to get better. And sometimes we fall back, but we usually try to move forward. And that's what it's about. Great guests. Conan's been on their stone cold. Steve Austin's been on there. Oh, yeah. It's a good guest. Nice. Nice. Nice. And they got Mind Live stream events September 5th. People get this. They get this. Wait, wait, yeah. It's become an event September 5th. 7 p.m. Pacific 8 p.m. Mountain. You get all of it. You wrote the rest of them. And that is a question live. Yeah, that's a real nice company. It's going to be on live stream on YouTube. You can go get tickets at ronflunches.com. Beautiful. Other than that, I'm in a Netflix show called Hoops. In Disney Plus movie called The One and Only, I even both come and out August 21st if people want to check. Oh, Quibi would love it if I mentioned my game show. Oh, you have a game show on Quibi. called Nice One on August 21st. It came up off of midnight. People know me a lot from that show. And this is me basically kind of stealing that idea. And then me being the host. Good job. Thank you. Keep kicking ass, Ron. Thank you, Mr. Mayor. Thank you. Appreciate you, brother. Bye, everybody.