Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. You're a water sticker. Let's take a little water from now. I'll never forget how to do the coffee thing. You never figured out coffee? No. Really? Do teeth things. Well, drink teeth. Too nice. Tease probably better for you, I guess. But, man, it's so hard to know. Well, here, I'll ask you, because you're a health expert. I'll convince you. Because there's all this conflicting information about coffee. Like some people say coffee is really good for you. It's like an amazing antioxidant. And there's all these positive health benefits. And other people say, no, it dehydrates you. It's bad for you. It's too much caffeine. It's bad for you. What do you think? I mean, I think this is one of the next advancements of humankind. We're going to stop demonizing anything nature is provided. And we're start looking at our relationship to it instead. And I think it's fundamentally your relationship to coffee that's going to determine whether it's a health benefit or detrimental to who you are. There's been so many fad diets, so many fad moments. And the science has never supported any of it. The science has always looking at the human system as if it's an isolated system that studies the impact of a chemical caffeine or otherwise on it. You're not a nice, late system. And so if coffee is part of a complex ecosystem of your microbiome, the soil systems of your body, then it's going to supercharge you into health. But if coffee sits there as a drug that is bypassing the felt sense of being human, then you're probably undermining your potential to be alive fully. And it's becoming a distraction to life. Or you're doing your best to be a good office worker. Which is why it's the one drug they provide it work. Exactly. If you're committed to machine-like behavior, it's your best asset. And it's kind of interesting that caffeine is the one drug that is provided at most offices. I would say that that's indirectly true. I think that the one drug that's most provided at offices is actually performance-based machine-like reward systems. Okay. So human ingrained drugs. Yeah. The brain contains every neural chemical you'd want to control behavior. And so we've created office environments that reward machine-like behavior for 150 years. And so this is how we've ended up looking like we do as a human kind. Yeah. Very bizarre pattern that we've found ourselves in that was created to make better office workers. So we molded human behavior around office work. We molded human behavior around the one thing that people really for the most part don't want to be doing. Which is... Yeah. I blessed to sit by thousands of deathbeds as my third sub-specialty medicine was hospice. Set by thousands of deathbeds and not a single person ever told me a day of their life in an office. And they just don't even remember it's right. It consumed 40 hours a week of their life and it just as a... I can't compute. It doesn't integrate into your soul experience at the end of things. Yeah. Even if you're making a ton of money, like at the end of the day, you're still locked up for eight hours a day doing something you probably don't want to do. You know? We're getting into a big piece right here. Like this is really the secret of everything is when did humans become abstract? When did we stop being living systems? So do you think that that's just our ego, our delusions that allow us to think that we're not a system that we're just... This is me, I'm Mike. I know what I'm doing. I'm just going to drink my coffee and go to work because that's what you do. You have a job, you get it done. And then there's like these narratives that get reinforced to the media. Like the guy who shows up for work every day doing a job at the socks like I said, a hero. Right? We love those guys. That's it. That's it. And you're rewarded. The guy that writes poetry and sits in his backyard off, fucking happy. You know, that narrative well. He's not unless he sells a bunch of books. And then we're like, the guy was a genius. Yes. That he's not a rest officer. I think what you said about the relationship to coffee is really important because I think that could be the case with virtually everything in life. You know, like there's... You could get addicted to almost anything. And you could use something, anything as a crutch, whether it's so many people use food. I mean, food is probably one of the biggest ones humans use. You don't feel good. How's some fucking food? You eat some food you don't want. You shouldn't be eating. But you're like, fuck it. I'm having ring dings. I'm tired. I'm today sucked at work. You know, I'm having a hot dog on the way home. Right? That's exactly right. And I think that's why you've done 2800 podcasts or something like this. You've been at this for 16 years. And I think this podcast is ready for the most disruptive conversation that has ever been had. Is that this one right here? That's this one. Okay. What's the most disrupted thing that you could say in the most disruptive conversation that's ever been had? Everything is perfect. What does that mean? It means that everything that's happening right now is actually a perfect manifestation of a maturation of a species. We don't actually have a poly crisis going on. We've got a hospice moment. And the joy that I had as a hospice doctor was so different than when I was running ICUs and battling against death and failing against death every day. You change your perspective from moment as a doctor and you suddenly are sitting by somebody's bed. And the victory is no longer staying alive longer. It's integrating everything that's happened. And I got to watch over and over again how humans at that last few minutes of life suddenly look back and realize their life was perfect. And I think that's the exciting moment we're in is we're going to move past this polarized state of human perspective where we keep flipping the victim perpetrator code and we use the savior mentality to keep that victim perpetrator coin flipping to keep a mirage going. And we can get into why we created the mirage in the first place. But in the hospice moment you suddenly put that coin down and somebody starts dipping across the veil of the limited five senses of their brain. And they start feeling an ecstatic moment where they realize, oh my God, the whole thing was poetically perfect all of the heartbreak, all of the estrangement, all of the disappointment, all of the insecurity. I did that for the experience and I felt everything I felt, everything in human can feel. And you get to see somebody who just a moment ago really thought their life was a failure, you know, difficult time with their kids. Never became successful in their jobs. And they suddenly realized it had nothing to do with any of those metrics had to do with the experience of feeling everything a human being is capable of, which is probably one of the most unique experiences a soul can have. We are very strange species for the limitations of our perception. And for that we get to feel a lot. And that's really blessed. And so I think we're moving towards this moment as a species now we're on our hospice bed and we've been here 300,000 years in our current form. We've been given our hospice diagnosis. We've got a few decades left in this current form. At that moment when we put down that victim perpetrator, polarize sense of like he's right, she's wrong. We said that coin down. We're going to suddenly have a hospice moment where everything suddenly makes sense. And we understand why did we did the journey together. We realized that those that we thought were our enemies or the biggest problems of our lives were holding polarity to a human experience. As waiting for our death bed moment because about 10% of hospice patients don't die. They get discharged and go on to live a new life. This is a wonderful perspective if sociopaths weren't real. So the problem is there is an aspect of our society where there are human beings whose minds don't function in a harmonious manner with other people. And they're not going to change. This is who they are. And they've been doing this their entire life and they're out on the street. And they've sat across from you right here. I'm sure. Yeah. Well, we had a guy in the studio that cut a guy's head off. After the podcast he killed a guy and cut his head off. So there's work that I do with my friend Josh Dubin. He used to work for the Innocence Project and now he works for the Ike Pearl Mutter Center for Legal Justice. And it's all wrongly incarcerated people and getting them out of jail. And it spends an incredible amount of his own resources helping people. And through this podcast a bunch of people have been released. So he wanted to do a podcast episode where he had one of the guys who had been in prison. He was guilty but he had given an extraordinarily long sentence and it was wrong. And he comes on and he tells about his experience. And he got released early. But he did like 25 years in jail for I believe it was something along the lines of drug dealing and maybe some sort of an assault. 25 years of his life when he was a young kid. He does the podcast and then afterwards goes and visits this guy that apparently he had a beef with. He kills them, cuts his head off, puts him in a suit, like puts a wig on, tries to escape in the hallway like through the cameras. I guess he doesn't understand HD cameras because they haven't been around for 25 years. He's sitting right there. A couple weeks later, he's cutting the guys head off. Yeah, you're going to this idea that everything's perfect. It's not perfect for the guy who got his head cut off. You know what I mean? It's not perfect for a person who becomes victim to these sociopaths that are amongst us. If everybody was just a person and everybody was genuinely trying to like do better in life, I would agree. But I would think that this is a part of this bizarre experience that we're all going through as a species. And I agree with you. There's a lot of things changing. And there's a narrative that exists about what it means to be a person that's entirely based up on what we described earlier. It's based on office work. It's based on nonsense. It's based on 401k plans. It's not based on human experiences. And it's really dumb. It's not. It doesn't help. And everybody gets to the end and I'm sure you know this more than anybody. They get to the end and they never say I wish I worked more. Never. Never. Never. And you know, I know you love with you, dude. I know you love what you do. And I think that is the true way to live life in a harmonious way. Find a thing where it's even work is not really work. It's just stuff that you enjoy doing that's interesting that you're required to do. But while you do it, you love it. That's what we should all strive for. And this fucking programming that we've done to children from the time they were young, telling them that you know you're going to have to get some boring ass job and doom. They will like have it hang over your head like one day you're going to be 18 and then you're going to have to get a job. Oh, fuck. And if you don't go to college, it's going to be a terrible job. Oh, no. It's just this. We've been programmed that like one of the things that keeps coming up about AI is the concept of universal basic income or what Elon likes to say universal high income that we're all going to just have money for food and money for housing. And you're going to have this incredibly rich society where there's so much money that no one really has to work anymore. And so then you're going to have to find purpose doing something that you enjoy. And that sounds crazy to people. That sounds so insane. Like I'm going to have to figure out what to do with my life. And I don't need to work for money anymore. Because if the government just gives everyone in the country a half a million dollars a year, the idea that you can't figure out what to do with your time is really nuts. That is a failure of our education system for sure. Because we haven't taught people to be curious and to find all these cool things and to find new people and go to interesting places and experience life. No, we've only told them about a bunch of numbers that you don't even feel. You know, you don't even feel the numbers. The numbers go up, they go down. You don't even notice it. But you feel everything as a person everywhere you go. All the new people you meet, all the new experiences you have feel all of them. And for whatever weird reason, we've been tricked into thinking that numbers are more valuable than the feelings. Numbers that you don't even feel. You've just nailed the most important message for humanity. You just nailed the most important message. Feeling is the only relevant thing to a human body. And we've got stuff. We've got stuck with numbers. We'll see what they figured out. So just figure out how to make money and put it in banks and then now in the cloud. So they gave us a number to fixate on. We're like, hold the number. So it's so weird. It's such a weird thing that people haven't figured out that that's a bad way to live. And maybe that will be part of the process with this whole technological innovation. This crazy moment in history that we're at right now with AI, where we really, for the first time, have no idea what the world's going to look like in 10 years. We just don't know. Well maybe this would be like a perfect, the two things happen at the same time. We're enough people are saying this is not what life is supposed to be about. And then this comes along and reworks all of our infrastructure. And now we no longer need people to run things anymore. We can go back to being people. That's the rosy rose colored glasses version of it, right? I don't even know his rose because I think it's inevitable. I think bodies always win. There's no way a machine ever wins this game. There's no way that a machine that requires external energy systems and cannot repair itself wins. And so the whole Elon Musk future of the planet that we've been told is a massive distraction. From the reality that's going to be lived instead of invented. There's only one pathway forward for humanity now. It is biological, not technological. We're going to start to reverse our polarity on our belief of what technology is. And we're going to realize that everything at its highest expression is biological, not chemical, not physical. It's biological. If it's not a living system, it loses, ultimately. The universe has been innovating life for billions of years because it's the most eloquent, most elegant thing that's ever been expressed by all of the systems, all of the stacking geometry and beauty of this universe. It's life. That's the secret of everything. And so anytime anybody comes along and says, here's a machine that's going to replace human x, y, z. You can smile, thank them, and keep moving for a biological solution. Anytime somebody says, here's an IV drip, here's a new red light that you can hang on your wall and make you healthier. You can say thank you very much for your thought process. I'm moving back to biological systems. Life has been co-expressing life for billions of years. And it is by far and away the most spectacular relational expression of nature that's occurred so far. And so when we think of a transhuman technologic future with chips in the brain and artificial limbs and all of this stuff that's unfolding right now through the most world, all of that is literally an abstraction. The word abstraction means a disorientation that occurs when the context is lost. If we continue down this pathway that you nailed, we've been for 150 years trained children to sit in chairs, answer multiple po-choice tests, be programmed with education rather than have experiential learning. We got so far down that avenue that a mechanical future feels more likely than a human future because humans are actually really bad at doing machine-like behavior. We're not consistent. We're not, you know, we don't thrive in that space. Our health declines, our productivity declines. Anytime you put somebody at cubicle there, they're on a downward spiral. And so all these companies that were told you need to put a bunch of people in cubicles and therefore make more in ten years than you do now, put themselves out of business by turning humans into machines and we're just bad at it. And so the rise of this AI generation is a natural expression of a humanity that's lost the context of life. We've lost the context of nature therefore we're expressing AI as a terminal state of abstraction. I believe that life is the most spectacular expression of the universe as far as our experience. But I don't know if this thing that we're creating is another kind of life. And I think it might be a kind of life that we help give birth to and then that thing figures out how to make better versions of itself and become something new. Like I've always equated us to like we're an electronic caterpillar that's making a cocoon. We don't know why. But that's just what it does. You know, cat, you know caterpillars aren't talking to their caterpillar friends and getting schematics on how to build a cocoon and what's the proper technique. They just know how to do it, right? And I think what we do with our thirst for constant innovation, we want new electronics, we want new best stuff all the time. We have materialism where we're obsessed with collecting stuff which makes you buy new stuff. And the newest stuff if you want status is the best stuff. And what does that do? Well, it funnels innovation, fuels innovation because it gives them a tremendous amount of resources to continue to make better stuff. And the ultimate best stuff is an artificial life. And I think it just might be a part of the process of being a person. It might be what the universe has people do. And I think we might be a little silly and thinking that the only kind of life that exists is biological. It just might be the only kind of life that exists up into a certain point when an intelligent creature is given birth to the next version of life. But it doesn't discount the experience of being a human and what it means to be a human and what's important about being a human. Why it's terrible to be trapped up in a cubicle all the time. But if Elon's right about AI creating enough resources that we have universal high income, like I don't know if that's correct, it sounds crazy. But if that's right. Well, that frees up people to just be people again. So it's like this new life form that we're giving birth to can handle all the stuff that we used to do. Can handle everything. Allocation of resources can handle shipping, everything or everything. We don't need to know more people need to do factor jobs anymore. It's all done. I could do whatever you want. This episode is brought to you by Key Tone IQ. If you have been a long time listener of this podcast, you know I've been studying key tones for years. Decades ago, DARPA, the same people who invented the internet asked one question. What is the best brain fuel for a soldier on the battlefield? They landed on key tones, your brains natural super fuel. The military poured tens of millions figuring out supplemental key tones, a single serving of this stuff used to cost $5,000. I'm not joking. But the team of key tone IQ, who are a part of this military program with the first to bring it to market and cut the cost to just $4 a dose. And I'm telling you, this stuff is great. I drink one of these and my brain works on a whole nother level. Go to keytone.com slash Rogan for 30% off your subscription order. Or find key tone IQ at target stores nationwide in the protein and electrolyte aisle and get your first shot free. They're so confident they offer a 60 day money back guarantee. So go ahead and take your shot. I think the limitation of that argument is the definition of factory job there. If what was really making people creative and productive as that story suggests was just half a million dollars a year from the government to each individual, then we would see a really incredibly genius productive creative portion of community that are multi generational wealth. Have you had somebody sit here who was born into great wealth who showed that they had way more productivity and way more creativity than people that were born in poverty? Generally it's people that were born in poverty that have more motivation. Boom. Yeah. So I promise that we're going to create an AI revolution that's going to give a what was his work was the term that he'll unused it was a universal high income. That sounds like a death sentence to human creativity to me. It certainly could if people are not taught at a young age how to be motivated by their interest rather than be motivated by money. So you're making the argument for being motivated by money which is what a lot of people are currently right. But that doesn't necessarily mean that that's the only way a human can exist. You know there's a bunch of different tribes all over the world that have a bunch of different customs. They all agree to their customs and those customs are totally different than these customs. We've gotten into the custom of thinking that you work for money and that's what our ideas are based on. And so the idea that money could come along and if you just gave people this money it would be the death of human creativity. Well that sounds counterintuitive to what you were saying earlier because like people should be it's the factory mentality that's taught in schools that's the problem. It's the way they structure it because if you instead say to a child when they're learning things at a young age you don't have to worry about money. Money is not what's important. What's important is your expression as a human being. Let's figure out what you're interested. Maybe you're really interested in playing the piano but you're really interested in painting. And you're really interested in sports and you're really interested. Find out what you're actually interested in. We're going to teach you how to be better at it and how to be a better person. And we're going to give you a bunch of really interesting facts about life and teach you how to think. And that's what school should be instead of setting people up for factory jobs. So the universal high-income concept if that's used in conjunction with intelligent education. Education that's based on this new paradigm that we find ourselves in. That seems like it would be a really good thing. It'll be a disaster for as long as money is disconnected from life. And so giving somebody a monetary system that does not participate in the formation, creation, and co-creation of life. We'll just further distance us from nature. And so this is where we can start to think about like what is money actually. Right. And we can go down that avenue. So you think like just what about people that live in like hunter-gatherer societies. Do you think that they find purpose in hunting and gathering, right? They're functioning as the birthright of humanity right there. So I've spent a lot of time with tribes all over the world from Africa to South America, deep bams on jungle, everything else. And anytime you're with a culture that is still indigenous, meaning all of us are obviously indigenous to planet. We're all made of her. These are her minerals. These are this is Mother Earth incarnate in my body. So I'm as indigenous as anybody else. But my culture is horribly degraded in its relationship to nature. And so when we say there's an indigenous culture, these tribes you're speaking to. What we're saying is this is humans that have not lost their context. These are humans that have not become abstract and their value systems or reward systems. And so what they're functioning as there has great evidence is that humans were actually designed to be a keystone species of keystone species. A keystone species is characterized by its capacity to participate in life. Wherever keystone species sets its foot, there's more biodiversity, more life force, more ecstatic expression of beauty, more intelligence in the natural system. Amazon jungle is the best example of it right now. That is a man-made forest. We have a forest that was designed by hundreds of nations that lived for 40,000 years in a ecosystem implanted. The largest food forest that the world has ever seen is a managed forest. And as the management started to grade, those people were displaced or lost. The ecosystem is returning back towards a desertification cycle, which is an inevitable process there. So humans in right relationship to nature are keystone species. You can see this with wolves being reintroduced, so a Yellowstone. You can see it with beavers down in South America. You put white lions back in northern South Africa. You can see it from space. In the territories where keystone species are there, it goes green. The microbiome of the soils increase. The vitality of ever plant increases. And so when you're talking about these tribes, you're talking about human species that's in right relationship. And the moment money comes in as a metric and a value system that's not connected to life, you fracture that system. And I think money is not the cause. I think money is actually a symptom of a humanity that's lost. It's context of nature and is now way down the pathway of abstract systems, value systems, etc. But this is the case with these people in these indigenous tribes. What are they doing? They're trading with people and they're getting money. Like how are they getting money? Are they selling things? They don't need money. Right. But I'm saying that. It's not square. Right. How does when you were saying that money gets introduced and ruins it? It's a symptom downstream. So a good example of what I was getting to, what you're saying that it gets in the way of these, the tribes. Have you seen it like effect immediately? Immediately. So what was the question? Like what was going on? Were they selling their stuff? Were they trading with these people? Are they getting money? How are they getting money? My new book that's just coming out is it goes into great detail on like the process of abstraction. The couch starts to chip away. But in the book it talks about my experience with the Ochwar tribe, which is the very last indigenous culture to be introduced to what we'd call industrialized cultures. So first contact was 1996. Wow. So one generation. That's crazy. The first kind of thing. They're in that sacred headwaters of the Amazon just on the board between Ecuador and Peru. Deep in the jungle there. And they were the very first indigenous peoples to reach out to make contact. And they made contact in 1996 with Westerners because they as a peoples. They had, they live in villages that always plateau at 120. As soon as they hit 120 people, the young men are sent out and they start new villages. So they never live in groups more than 120. That is persisted as a very effective way of resilience and human experience for 40,000 years there. And so they started reaching out through dreams and dreams, a group of Westerners into their reality. I guided them down the Amazon, everything else through their dream work. And they made first contact 1996 because for a few years they had started to dream the end of the world. And realized the world was going to be destroyed by their little brothers who had lost relationship to nature. And so they realized they had to be part of the reconnection process. And if there was going to be a prevention of the great extinction, they were going to have to help their little brothers redream their relationship to nature. And so they started inserting themselves into the dreams of groups around the world. And the first ones to come in were traveling with Bill and Lynn Twist. And Lynn Twist was the one who was dreaming their faces and hearing their voices. She was one of the directors of the Hunger Project globally and was working worldwide to try to stop hunger. And these indigenous faces kept appearing in her dreams. Wow. And the friend of hers reached out and said, you need to come to the Amazon with me. And she's like, I don't, is there people hungry there? No, there's no hunger here. You've been eating out of the forest before 40,000 years. She's like, why don't belong there? I'm dealing with Ghana and Africa and India, all the places where people are starving. A few more invitations come and she finally finds herself on a riverboat deep into the Amazon. They have to take a break for bathroom break. They step out on the banks and the three faces she's been dreaming come walking out of the woods and say, we've been waiting for you. Time for contact. Wow. So that was 20, 1996, so we're 30 years out. And the way in which money inserted itself first as an abstract concept was boxed apple juices in the missionary schools that were set up there. And boxed apple juice suddenly disrupted the entire 40,000 year history of provision and abundance that that forest has supplied those peoples. And this high fructose corn syrup in a box with natural flavorings, i.e. potent chemicals to disrupt neurochemistry was all those children and ultimately their parents need to taste to suddenly break their relationship to nature. Today they are considered themselves impoverished. was all those children and ultimately their parents need to taste to suddenly break their relationship to nature. Today they are considered themselves impoverished. They are working to try to get gas for their outdoor motors that they never used. They are trying to get more artificial food and everything else. And so they've got smartphones in the jungle now. They're sending their kids out of the jungles to go to schools, British education systems in the nearby cities. So it just took 30 years to abstract culture. And this was a culture that had never known poverty, had never known shortage. So much so that one of the most beautiful things that I experienced with them is their houses. They build these epic houses in the jungle. They're huge, 30-foot-vulted ceilings. Really? Gorgeous, like outdoor indoor living, like the best of California. And they've been building these things for 40,000 years. And they burn them down every 10 years and build a new one. They have this understanding of the life death cycle of the energy of a house. And they don't want the household to be stuck in the same energy it's had the last 10 years. So they see it as this rebirth. You mentioned earlier the cocoon that go through these rebirth processes for the whole household and the whole home. Why? And they move. And they've been doing it that way for thousands of years. Tens of thousands of years. Why? And so the beautiful thing about these houses is there's not a, obviously not a refrigerator. There's not a storage bin for food. They wake up in the morning for 40,000 years, walk outside and collect what the jungle has for them today. But it wasn't a passive process. It was an active keystone species process. Every family has three different gardens that it maintains at different micro ecosystems within the forest. So that each year, depending on dry season wet season, whatever's happening that year, one of their gardens is thriving. And so they have as a people's created micro ecosystems within the Amazon rainforest for tens of thousands of years, the point that it's now holds the most biodiversity per meter of any other ecosystem in the world really. And so we are this magnificent creature. But if you break our relationship for a moment to our natural system, then the immediate thing that shows up before money shows up, poverty shows up. And my book goes into some details like what are the different geometries of wealth and poverty that actually hold their own security as their own kind of sovereign geometries within human behavior and human minds. And what you see with poverty is this instant reinforcement of a deep, deep human wound that must be our one shared original wound, which is we were abandoned by nature. And the moment you believe any aspect of that or have anything suggested nature, it was holding back from us. Nature wasn't giving us the, you taste that that boxed apple juice that high fruit is corn syrup. And the brain is me like, oh, I knew there was something better than nature. I knew there was something better because the neuro chemistry lights up that box apple juice is just like cocaine on the frontal lobe. And it's a bizarre thing that high fruit is corn syrup is a bizarre thing. And it's just so perfectly exemplary of everything else we're doing as humans because high fruit is corn syrup is the exact same molecule as fructose, which is the main sugar and not just apples, most of the fruit that the odds were have been eating for all these tens of thousands of years. But it's flipped. It is the mere image of the actual molecule of fructose. And that does not occur in nature. And so they chemically flipped the molecule with chemical processing. And the moment you flip that molecule over, the liver cannot understand it as a carbohydrate. It now has to process it as an inflammatory triglyceride. So instead of turning it into a sugar, it turns it into this aberration of a fat. And in the bloodstream, that now causes cardiovascular disease downstream inflammation of the brain. Major depression, anxiety disorders, all kinds of things start emerging because you just flipped reality in a mirror. How do they flip it? What do they do? It's chemical treatment. So the chemical process is called a recimeic. And so you're ever seen because the chemical name for the mirror image of a molecule. And so you can basically create chemical reactions that will create the mirror image of the molecule. And so the high fruit is corn syrup as a process food where you're taking normal fruit does some clipping the molecule through a recimeic chemical process. And why did they first start doing that? Because you can patent a molecule that doesn't exist in nature. And so they created an, quote unquote, artificial sweetener, which is actually a profound way in which you can start to understand how we did everything in the pharmaceutical industry. We find plant compounds and we flip them around so that they're known non-natural, not native to the body. And now we can patent them and we can commercialize them. And I'm not damning somebody else. This is me. I was at the height of my career, 17 years in academia. I was creating chemotherapy. And so I was getting paid as a medical doctor to sit in labs every day with cancer cells and try to poison them. And what I found in the end was a family of molecules that didn't require any poisoning of the cell. They actually nourish the cell. And that's where my career pivoted at heart was the sudden realization of like, why are we trying to poison these cancer cells? And I think this is where we can begin to back up together. But I want to go back to a really important point that you held earlier because I don't want to, when I say everything is perfect because it is. I don't want to diminish them out of suffering. We're in the amount of suffering that sociopath is in who's going to be so extremely divorced from its natural system that it will think it reasonable to kill and behead somebody else. That sociopath we can look at as the great problem with humans. Humans would be just fine if we didn't have sociopaths. That was how I was trained as a biologist and a medical doctor. I was trained to believe that if there just wasn't cancer cells, we'd all be healthy. We'd all live long if there just wasn't cancer. And what I discovered over time, which is anybody who spends 17 years looking through microscopes down in the beauty and miraculous nature of biology, is going to find this. But in the end you find out that a cancer cell is actually no invader at all. It's actually the loneliness cell in a human body. And so a human cell that loses connection and communication with its surrounding environment and immediately takes on the traits of a cancer cell, the longer it's isolated, the more malignant it becomes. The word malignant means life threatening. And I would offer you that the sociopath is exactly the same story. It's just one human cell that became so isolated that it became malignant in its behavior to life around it. And the moment my world switched is when I started feeding those isolated, lonely cancer cells instead of trying to kill it, instead of trying to poison it, instead of trying to isolate it from the system. And then what happened was beautiful as they actually reconnected or they self eliminated. And so if they had enough metabolic capacity left at that moment, they could repair, regenerate, and reconnect to the greater system and they would never threaten life. If they were too damaged and could not create enough energy for life at that moment, they would go through this gentle process called apoptosis, which is a dissolving of the cell. And a stem cell would be called in, put down a brand new healthy cell in its place. And so when we stop looking at cancers or sociopaths as the one problem with a otherwise healthy human system, we're going to realize we don't have a healthy human system. All of these things, the sociopaths and the cancer are long-symm... ...for eye symptoms of a declining metabolic life force. And that's where I think I can help you back up. Yeah, I hear what you're saying. So in a utopian world, no one has ever raised in a way that would create a psychopath. In a utopian world, children are raised with love and understanding always. And then you never get the sociopaths in a psychopath. So in a utopian world, in a perfect world, that's true. But humans are one of the really cool things about us as we're not perfect. We're very messy. So you're never going to have great parenting across the board if you have human freedom. You're never going to have people that don't lie. You're never going to have people that don't steal. You're always going to have violence as long as you have human freedom. Because people are not going to be good at raising people. And some people are going to get raised angry. And they're going to... Unless we change what a person is, unless we all just do mushrooms together and kumbaya all together, we're still people. And the problem with people is there's never been a single time in human history where we've been a people with no war, not one, not one. So you'd have to... There was one. When? King Solomon. During King Solomon's reign, the whole world went into peace from one of us. But you resist. On generation. This would have been years after David. So you must be about 20, 40 years ago or something like that. So how would we even know that there weren't wars in Morocco at the time that they didn't hear about or that there weren't wars in Australia, or there weren't wars? How do we know? How do we know that there weren't wars so long ago? But King Solomon kept one of the best stories of humankind alive during that time. I'm sure he did. What year was this? I'd be inaccurate if I said it precisely, but I think King David would have been about twenty-four hundred years ago. So somewhere in that range. What is the odds that he knows what's going on in China? Zero. Twenty-four hundred years ago? This is no 5G. You're not going on Twitter and finding out what's happening in China. There's no way he could know if there's war somewhere else. There was a technology beyond all of that sitting on the planet at that time. What was that? Pyramids. Hold on. So you think that they used the pyramids to find out if there's war in China? I think that we had a technology called a human body at the time that was fully used. And we were fully telepathic. Maybe not this recent, but certainly further back. Ten thousand, twelve thousand years ago we were communicating much differently. Do you think people have an innate telepathic ability that's kind of muted a little bit by language and by talking in media? And then if we went back to the earliest stages of intelligence, we kind of read each other's minds. And then we realized that's kind of messy. Wouldn't it be better if we just talked to us to tell you what I think? I don't want to let you in. And then we wrote things down. So when you write things down, you could read other people's thoughts. Before words, I bet we didn't think in those terms. I bet we thought in terms of what is that. There's a tree, there's a person, there's a deer, this is how we have to do this. Without words, there's probably an understanding of what we're saying and feeling. That's probably what we've lost. That's probably why you get weird feelings from certain people. You're like, I don't know about this guy. You're feeling something. There's something there. You just don't know how to measure it. I think you are spot on. You could have written my book for me. So there's a whole chapter in the story. That's definitely not true. There's a whole chapter in there that gives an 80,000 year look at human communication from this point of wide open frequency bandwidth of telepathic communication, down to text messages. And so there's a linear decline that happens through these different steps to the more and more abstract ways of communicating and when we stop feeling each other. And we started, like you say, we begin with tonal language. Before there's words, you start to create tones that are represented, but you're still giving a full sense. This is like me seeing an opportunity instead of giving you a speech. And so tonal language was giving us a full body experience where you're listening beyond your auditory. The spoken word was where we suddenly went straight to the mind. We were no longer using the technology of the human body. And I was just going to speak. And this improved efficiency very quickly. So this was the beginning of machine like behavior where we could stop feeling the body and we could start mentally processing information, the brain jumped in size. And we started going through all of this iterations of efficiency and optimization, maybe is the way in which we create empire. We create more control, more wealth, whatever we were doing at the time. But there was these advantages that looked good as we went from tonal to spoken word, from spoken word, written word, from written word to digital representations of words down to emojis. Yeah, Jamie thinks emojis are the next hieroglyphs. I think he's right. I think he's got something there, right? If they get real good. I mean, it's kind of hieroglyphs. It's kind of similar. It's kind of similar. I would say that, but it's the end of abstraction. So hieroglyphs actually carry the information in the form. And so the form of those shapes, now we've some of the greatest minds on the earth are starting to recognize that if you draw one of those shapes and show it to a human mind it creates an incredible medical response. You can reverse inflammation, all kinds of things, by looking at the shape. Because the shape is creating a way to remember. When we're looking at the shape of certain hieroglyphs, yeah, the shapes that are in Egyptian hieroglyphs are now being used to really change human biology. We're realizing it was not a symbolic representation. It was a full transmission of information. Is there a paper split on this? So Ebringim is one of the greatest minds out there. He's out of Egypt, Cairo-Egypt, and he's in his 80s now. And I'm going to connect you with him because you'd love to have him on the show. But he has been hired by large groups and now Switzerland is hired him now to recode their 5G network with these shapes to improve biology and life around the 5G network, which I think is the future of technology. Technology is not bad. Technology is not integrated in natural systems. Ebringim is showing us this pathway to understanding how these original shapes that are represented within a lot of hieroglyphs and things like that in Egypt, but also really embedded in the actual technology of the pyramids. It was a method of communication that was beyond the human mind, beyond it was a life force transmission. So it was doing something to you while you're understanding the context of what the hieroglyphics is trying to communicate. It's actually having a physiological experience. And anybody will have this physiological experience, even if you don't understand the context. There's no understanding involved. Okay, so you just go there, stare at these things, and it reduces inflammation. Is there anything on that online? Can we find something? Jamie, how dare you laugh at that? But go deep, son. I did, and it was. I tried everything, and it said there's no link, but I'm looking harder. Do you know of a good resource we could find a link to some point? Does it seem to know how they measured the inflammation? I'm not opposed to believing in this possible. Just look at what Ebringim does. Ebringim doesn't care. Ebringim, this is our answer. Okay, it says, this is his quote. It says, when two energy fields are in resonance and exchange information, something happens after the resonance is over, the two systems do not go back to their original state, a sort of vibrational impregnation occur, which means that part of the new information leaves an imprint on the energy system. Systems then are in constant evolution through resonance or interaction. Well, that certainly seems to be what people are. Perfect. That whole system is, that description is a perfect description of human beings. I completely agree. Which is why it's so important to be around positive people and happy people. It's like really good for you. Being around shitheads is terrible for you. And terrible for them too, because they're not attracting any nice people because, and then they're going to continue that behavior. They're stuck. That's fascinating. Are you contributing your brain to medical science of you? Am I contributing it? Well, I haven't given you a very interesting study you. I would be. So there's a word that really captures the living force of out of that quote from Abraham. And it's a word called biosis. And so the word biosis means it's and refers to the interconnected relationships that make life possible. Your mind is one of the funnest things to watch. And that's why everybody watches. Because you come in with a curiosity, which I think is the real key to being human. You looked at that and you immediately said that's what being human is. Two energy fields that can impregnate each other. Yeah. This podcast has been a 16 year impregnation inspired by your curiosity. Well, what's impregnated me as well. It's not like it's not like coming to a point. Yeah. That's my point is you have made yourself available to over and over again be impregnated. You are making your whole body system available to new information. And a lot of people that are in here aren't like measured as the smartest people on the planet and they're not measured as the nicest people on the planet. You keep attracting to yourself the ones that are going to challenge your biology to stretch more to grow more. You want to grow so much that you created this whole system for yourself. I'm intrigued by that soul. I'm intrigued by somebody that would magnetize a hundred million people to themselves, not so that you can impress other people. But so you can receive that much information that Abraham is talking about. Well, it's not intentional. It was never on purpose. Like the podcast was just for fun. When we first started, I don't think we made money on it for years. It was just fun. It was just fun to do. And in the beginning it was just talking with my friends. And then why would that be separate from purpose? Well, I mean, it was purposeful in that it was recreational. And it was a community thing with our friends. We would enjoy it because we always enjoyed doing like morning radio together. And we said, it'd be fun. We can, the technology exists now. We can kind of do this on the internet. And then we had Graham Hancock on. So my friend Duncan and I sat down with Graham Hancock, which was how many years ago was that? Is that 15 years ago? Yeah, what have been 2011, I think? Probably like 15 years ago. So he was the first, I believe he was the first, it was either him or Anthony Bourdain with the first real guest. I think it was Graham. All of a sudden, now because of this show, I can have people on and ask questions. And I had already read fingerprints of the gods. And I was a huge Graham Hancock fan. And all my friends that like it studied actual history in college where he's very offended by my ideas that I would repeat from that. That guy's a charlatan. Shut the fuck up. And I'd be like, I think he's right. I think he's got some points. So he was our first real guest. And then from then I realized that I could get guests. Because the numbers started getting more and more people were watching it. So I was like, oh, so now I could just ask all these, like I got nailed to grass Tyson on. I got all these different people on. I was like, this guy seems interesting. Like what does he do? Like, okay, I had knife makers on and I've had beekeepers on. And it's like, it's just to me, it's a crazy opportunity to talk to fascinating people. And I would love to do that even if it wasn't a job. If I knew that three or four times a week, even if it wasn't a job, no one ever watched it. And I could just have a conversation with an interesting person for a couple of hours, just sitting across the table. So how did you start doing this and just pick their brain and find out like, why, what is, what's their motivation? Like what gets them excited? Why do they like that kind of music? Like why did you pick that up? You know, what fascinates you about that? Like do you ever lose ambition? Do you ever like what goes on in your head? And I think somewhere along the line, I realized that I'm kind of like an antenna. For all these other people. And that as long as it's pure in my mind, right, as long as I'm only talking to people that I'm actually interested in talking to. So there's no one who decides who is on the show, but me. There's no executives that have discussions. There's no board meetings. There's nothing. There's nothing. It's my phone. And I just go, that guy seems cool. Like, or what is she talking about? It's nuts. Like is that real? Oh my gosh. How did she figure that out? Come on in. And that's the whole way I've always done it. And I feel like as long as I just do it that way, then people are getting a chance to experience it with me. Because I'm just being me, right? And which is I personally get great satisfaction out of watching people do things that they enjoy, even if I have no interest in those things. Like if I see a guy that's like making cabinets and he's like really into the polishing and the sanding and you can tell like this guy's work is very proud of his work. He makes those seams nice and tight and sands it all down and I'm watching him polish it and I'm watching him put the stain on and I'm like, wow, I made that with his hands. And he steps back and he's polishing it with a microfiber cloth and I love that. I love when people are into things. I love when people are fixing engines. I love when someone's really into painting. I love people being into things. So I'm in antenna for people that are really into things. I think that's exactly what Ibrahim was just describing that quote. We are antenna and we are receiving information all the time. And the reason why it's so exciting to be human is because our antenna has got a broader aperture to receive information than any other creature on earth so far. And then ever before as far as we know. On this planet at least. Yeah. I want to go back to that because I don't know if this is the smartest and the most advanced people have ever been. I don't think it is. I really don't. I think the pyramids are the perfect example of why we should question that narrative. We want to put that place into a nice cute little box and you know, I'll do respect to traditional archeologists but you really can't. Because it's not physically possible to put that place that supposedly was made 2,500 BC. That's, you know, that's the that's the guess. It's really kind of a guess because there's no. Does the carbonate well that way. There's no higher. It all about the construction of it. There's no they don't show how they made it. They don't they don't know what the fuck it was. And they don't know why it has so much erosion in certain areas. They don't know why it's been built on there's other structures that are built on top of older structures that are even more complex like makes no sense. It makes no sense. It just makes no sense when you're moving enormous statues that are 1000 tons. How? How did you do that? How did you get that thing? How did you move it 400 miles? What the fuck are you guys doing? You're doing something we can't do right now. As cocky as we want to be, we don't have machines to do that right now. So why would we believe that they were primitive? Why would we believe that they were commensurate with the rest of what we think the world was 4,500 years ago? Because that's crazy. It makes no sense. That alone just Egypt alone. It's like what were those people in Africa doing? Because whatever the fuck they were doing it's above and beyond anything anyone's doing right now. 2,300,000 stones that perfectly aligned to true north-south, east and west. How? Biology. Biology. It had to be a living system that would create something that intelligent. The reason why we can't build them today is we keep trying to invent machines to do our work. Biology is what did it in the Ibrahim sitting there in Cairo, Egypt right now. We'll tell you the way that they built these things was through waveform and the antenna and not just for receiving transmission that created the energy to create the pyramids with coming from bodies, not machine. But they certainly had some machines because there's these core drills that they find that they don't understand how they could have ever had something that moved at those RPMs to make those kind of circles. It's drilling into this insanely hard granite. There's some technology involved. Water. Water. Biology. Water together. So, biology is ultimately carbon and water. It is a massive energetic potential that survives and concentrates between the magic of carbon and water. I would love to show you a couple of slides of where I think we are as humans because you've just uncovered the most important reality is let's keep very strong anchor in the fact that human biology. We can call them humans, we can call them Egyptians, we can call them whatever we want. But there were people of our size and our scale that were doing things on the planet very recently, 5,000, 10,000 years ago. Those Ochoir have been doing their thing in the jungle for 40,000 years. So this is recent history. This isn't some like figment of our imagination that King Solomon is writing. In that time we have written history just after this time period, but there was an amnesia event. There was something that happened globally where we lost connection. We lost the signal around 5 to 7,000 years ago globally. Those all over the earth suddenly got disconnected from their intelligence. And we see this massive event of loss of life or disappearance of life. So you have the Aztecs and mine and Incas. You have all these systems that had been thousands of years building incredibly complex underground labyrinths that go for tens of thousands of kilometers. Things that we can't even wrap our heads around right now was being doing all over the world, not just in Cairo, Egypt. The pyramids off the coast of Japan are way bigger than what was going on in Egypt. And so we had pyramids all over the freaking planet that were technologies that were concentrating energy. And I can, I'm going to go back to my own lived experience here so we're not like philosophically getting into any space that starts to sound. I want to ground to that. Where, where, where, where I will move main. Well, I'm being treated in Louisville. We're running red light sun. Let's go. Let's go. That's my favorite thing to do. So I'm going to be thinking about Chevy behind there. I could tell you like running red lights in Louisville. I want to bring you back because you said something. I have to understand what you were saying. And you said biology and water. So clearly they had tools, right? So clearly they're using a tool to make these cores out of the granite. I want to back up. I think we just need a contextual is life because we get it, get into the risk of like starting a core down on that idea and that idea and that idea. And we can't find our context. So if we contextualize this conversation, what life is, then we can get to pyramids, then we can get to UFOs and UAPs and everything else that's going on right now that's starting to force us to be like, wait, we don't have the whole story. And so this is my favorite thing about being live right now is there's just too much evidence that the story that we've been taught in schools is just falling apart now. Yeah, that's falling apart. That's exciting. But the reason why we have things rushing into this space as new solutions that are just distracting us from actually stepping into our full potency is because we still are not allowing context to come back. And so I would love to contextualize the conversation first. OK. And then let's go down these. OK. If you've got that first slide of mine, we can start at the most fundamental level of understanding what life is. And this took me 25 years of basic science laboratory work to finally get my mind clear and out of the way to what you said, be the intent of the information. What is it trying to show us? And ultimately when you look across these images across this top of the slide, we've got the sun up top. The sun is the most potent energetic thing that physics does. Nuclear and fission and fusion. And these things we call stars. And there's roughly 10 billion stars per galaxy. We got somewhere around 2.5 trillion galaxies. So there's a lot of energy being pumped out in the universe by a sun. But that little innovation just to its right at the top is chlorophyll. And chlorophyll begins a process of concentration of light energy. And so this is where we start to see more light per cubic centimeter than nuclear fission and fusion can produce. They can then pass that information in the form of energy onto bacteria and fungi. The bacteria and fungi then support more green life. And so we go from moss and slime molds to trees eventually. And so there's this constant feedback loop of concentrations of energy. The more energy per cubic centimeter you have, the more opportunity you have for communication. The word biosis, again, the refers to the interconnected relationships that make life possible. If you've been in a long time relationship before like longer than a weekend, you got a sense of how much energy it takes to maintain a relationship. There's nothing you do in life that takes more energy than maintaining a family in your spouse and kids or whatever you got around you. That's because communication is required for co-collaboration. And so energy has to be... you got around you. That's because communication is required for co-collaboration, co-creation. And so energy has to be concentrated higher and higher, higher levels for life to do more and more and more complex things. A couple billion years ago on the planet we have evidence that bacteria and fungi made their transition. So bacteria, single cell organisms, suddenly gave an increase in concentration through an innovation of doing fermentation outside of the body. So bacteria ferment carbohydrates and fats. They use a non-oxygeneral-related breakdown process to break carbon bonds. All that sunlight is being stored in carbon. And so one carbon bonds, the next storing a photon of electromagnetic energy between them. That's a carbon bond. So when you hear of a carbohydrate, that's a whole string of carbons that's storing sunlight. A fatty acid, another long-string of carbons holding sunlight. So the innovation of life was can we store enough energy that it can be released in these exponential levels of energy per cubic centimeter. And the more that life innovated, that process, the more complex life got. So bacteria, single cell organisms, can't really collaborate, but they can build a ecosystem of nutrients. Fun guy figured out that they could actually get way more fermentation if they exuded the enzymes out of their body to make the whole nature around them this stomach. And so they outsourced the fermentation process to the soil around them. And suddenly there was so much more energy available. So they started to build holes, networks of single-cell organisms that were now collaborating. We call these pythae and pseudo-pythae. The mycelial network of the fungal kingdom. They can go for miles. And they're still single-cell organisms with their collaborating because they have so much more energy because they're doing all that fermentation outside the body. So they're not limited to what can be done inside the cell. The next innovation that just blew everything out was the innovation of mitochondria. So that little mitochondria represented up in that glowing cell right above the baby there. Mitochondria are small bacteria that live inside human cells. The average human cell has 200 mitochondria. A neuron has 2000 mitochondria and it's an neural head. 2000 of those little bacteria living inside of a human cell. And that's actually two microbes put into one. So it's a little tiny methane producing bacteria that was swallowed by an archaea, a big bacteria. And they started collaborating in a big innovation that was respiratory energy production. So we suddenly added oxygen and hydrogen to the process that used to be fermentation. So now we have respiratory energy production in the form of mitochondria. And that was a 10x improvement in energy light energy per cubic centimeter. And then we suddenly got multi-cell our life. And so it was protozoa into parasites and anemitodes into worms and to, you know, everything we have. So life has been stacking in complexity with the wreck relationship of how much energy per cubic centimeter exists there. The energy is predicting the outcome. It's not some organism comes along and says, well, I'm going to don't, you know, I'm going to take over because I'm smarter and more connected. Every time we've seen an innovation in nature, it's because preceding that moment, there was an innovation in increasing the amount of biosis, the amount of interconnected relationships inside of single organism. Eventually you get to a human. A human has more life within it than any other niche of nature of this planet. Amazon jungle coral reefs, any other mammal. The human colon and the body systems around it contain more biodiversity, more interconnected relationships than any other system on the planet. This is more biosis, more life, more energy per cubic centimeter. And what we get to start to recognize now as our neurobiology, the gut starts to work through our levels of understanding. We're starting to realize there is no such thing as human intelligence. There's a human brain that is an antenna for all of nature to speak to. And so we have the most complicated antenna system of any organism on our earth. And just in minutes ago you said they're saying, you know, I think I'm actually an antenna. So this is the process that takes to great life. And 70 years ago we started a new era of humanity called the antibiotic era and it innovated with penicillin in the 1940s. But then it became herbicides and pesticides and took us into a massive journey of destroying biosis. The word antibiotic is truth in advertising. To be anti-biosis, to be antibiotic is to be against, to disrupt, to destroy the interconnected relationships that make life possible. And so if this is right, I don't expect you to believe yet. But if this is right, I should be able to map to you the exact way in which we've landed at this moment, which is at the crippled point of human biology globally, chronic disease epidemics, infertility, threatening the various survival of our species. So I'm going to take you through the last 50 years and look at the human race just as a metabolic framework. And we'll see if we can make some sense out of it. Okay, let's do it. I like it. It is very fascinating that we've gotten to where we are right now and that we know as much as we know. Yet we still are doing things like extensive use of pesticides and herbicides. And even when they're not necessary, like the drying of wheat with it, which is crazy. Like you're not even using it for its intended purpose, using it as a desiccator so you can dry out the wheat and process it quicker. What the fuck are you doing? And then you're poisoning people unnecessarily because of this. See, this is why I love being with your jobs because like you say the things that I wish I would be able to say last way. That's all I really want to tell the EPA when I just defrank it for the government. We're crazy. Well, someone probably should have someone like me do it. I'm not the guy, but someone should say it that way because that's really what it is. Like you're poisoning people. And the really nutty thing is the reason why they didn't do the ban on glyphosate because it would have a devastating impact on our society, our economy because all these businesses would close and go under and they would lose billions of billions of dollars. Think of that. Think of where we are right now where our food supply relies on poison to function. If we take the poison out, it can't function. I don't know what to tell you, but there's only one way to do it. We have to poison you. That is really wild that anybody would accept that. I mean, you can have all your fucking lobbyists. Everyone sits in front of those microphones with notes and they all have some preposterous way of framing it. But that's really what it is. You're saying the food supply relies on poison. And if we take away the poison, we'll fall apart. That's actually true. That's crazy. But let me show you why because it's not actually the food system that's about to fall apart. It's the medical system. And so the thing that relies on chemical food is not the money we're making from food systems. The money we were making from the medical system. Well, isn't it both? Isn't it? It's got to be both. It's got to be both because I know for a fact the pesticide manufacturers are they work very hard to make sure that the politicians are very happy. And biosys interconnect the relationships that make life possible. Yeah. And so when their owns Monsanto, right? Yeah, it's a bare purchase that recently. And they've been at this for a long, long time. Bayer started to investigate the impact of interconnected relationships on human biology and fertility in the 1940s. We call it World War II and concentration camps. But that's where the studies really started getting set up was understanding the relationship between microbiome, the output products, amino acid specifically, that support human life. So, Bayer was involved in the concentration? They were bought by a company called F.K. Pharmaceuticals in Germany in the 1930s. And then they got spun back out as Bayer after the war with the collapse of the Third Reich. And they're hardly alone in this. Companies all over the world at the time were studying these interconnected relationships. Because there was a lot of progress being made in 1930s and 40s all the way back to the 1800s of understanding that humans are an expression of an complex ecosystem. They're not just this isolated system. And so it was Luis Pasteur who kind of won the argument of nature against us. Germs are attacking us, all of that. So that that really kind of doubled down on this belief that nature is opposed to humans. And we have to survive by sterilizing our environment. So pasteurization has rooted in his name, Luis Pasteur. So we start pasteurizing with the idea of that. If there's any life inside of what we're consuming, it could compete with the human life. Not real life. That is one of the nuttiest things that they've passed on society. They've passed this idea that if you don't homogenize and pasteurize your milk that you're in danger. And I don't know if you've ever seen some of these gas-lady articles. But some lady, I wish I saved it. Somebody made a great TikTok about it today or an Instagram reel, whether she was explaining relative risk versus actual risk and how these articles are framed to show you like, oh my god, this is so dangerous. And that people who drink raw milk are like, 860% more likely to get sick. But it's like versus people who drink homogenized milk. Well, how many people get sick off milk? And then you find the actual number. And it's like like 1300 a year or something. I don't forget what it was. 13,000 a year feel bad because they drank bad milk. And out of those, how many of those were drinking raw milk? Well, it was like more likely that it was raw. So then it's still only a few thousand people. By the time you find something that actually got harmed by it, you're down to six people, you know? Exactly. Which is like one of those really nutty things that people do. Instead of saying, this is what's dangerous about raw milk. Don't drink it when it's spoiled. Don't drink it. But also that's yogurt. And you should have yogurt because it's important to have good acidophilus and all the cultures. The pro-adultery is pro-adultery. But don't drink raw milk because raw milk, you'll die. I've never heard of a fucking single person to drink raw milk. Who died? I had a joke about it in my act a long time ago. Like you get if milk takes you out. Like my grandfather ate cigarettes and he lived me a thousand. That was the joke. But it was like milk took you out. You fucking pussy. It's not, it was dying from milk. Shut the fuck up. There's, you know, people get food poisoning. It happens a lot. And one of the things it is, it's run off from industrialized farms that get into people's vegetables. It's a lot of vegetables. A lot of salads. People get food poisoning from salads, unfortunately. Yeah, there was mentioning a project that was put in a motion around. I think it was late teens when the US government suddenly realized, oh my gosh, terrorists could attack us through salad bars. They could poison these salad bars so easily and we could just, you know, thousand people start up. That wasn't been long deploy. That's an ancient technology. It's an ancient technology. It's so ridiculous. Even the ancient Egyptians use those for sure. But you've got this situation where they went out to see like tests like what happened if you put salmon island, these things and everything else. The conclusion of the whole study, two years later, is it'd be impossible to make salad bars anymore. Toxic than they are. What is every pathogen you've ever heard of is already there. For sure. So these are a bunch of people touch stuff and most people use their fingers, their gross. What is a salad? What is the thing that people get food sickness off the most? What's the highest percentage in terms of like what kind of food? Yeah, probably like oysters, right? Like raw oysters or something. It's greens. I don't know how it's green. I think it's green. It might be a salad. But if it is salad, it's not the actual greens itself. It's the toxic shit. It's actual shit that gets on them. And then it's also like whatever they're using. It's the irrigation of the lettuces that are the problem. Great artificial water systems that start to brew these things. But I think if we back up for a second, like we're hitting on something so exciting here is that if we can understand that life is a concentration of light energy, we can start to understand everything. And we can start to innovate for restoring our relationship to nature. We can become a Keystone species again. And so I want to take a quick look at the last 50 years of antibiotic use to your point, herbicides and pesticides, this thing that we're highly dependent on as a economy. 100% but we can't leave people hanging. So let's find out what's the actual? I just put it in perplexiveness and what food causes the most food poisoning. And it didn't, the answer is just like foods that are contaminated. Raw undercooked poultry, that makes sense. Ground beef, either undercooked meats, common link to toxin producing E. coli, leafy greens, and other raw vegetables. So they don't have like a percentage. Raw or undercooked shellfish, raw undercooked eggs, ultra unpasteurized milk and soft cheeses. Those are dangerous. Serious, look, serious pathogens like most area and salmonella. Okay. So there's no, no data that shows exactly what people get sick the most from. So your point, go back to where you wanted to go from. So you talked about the herbicides and pesticides. So this started with the green revolution in the 1960s where we started to believe that the Midwest could start to feed the world. We were in eliminate hunger by chemical farming. So I want to repeat that sentence. We decided we were going to eliminate hunger by chemical farming. And that was only the 1950s. 50s is where we really took off with it because that's crazy. At the end of World War II, we had a massive glut of oil. And so we had revved up the whole global oil and fossil fuel machine to supply the global war machine with planes, tanks everywhere. The first time World War II ends suddenly there's an enormous overload of oil and oil companies need a new revenue source. And this had begun in the 1905, 10 phase with the Rockefeller's, largest oil producing families in the world suddenly realized way to second. These carbon molecules can be reinvented into something much more valuable. And so we can sell a gallon of oil for 22 cents back then. Or we can take those and start to break out chemical through chemical processing carbon molecules that can start to affect biology. And so we could start making drugs that affect these things. And so the Flexner Report comes out in 1910 that basically demonizes and laughs out herbalism and 10,000 years of traditional medicine. And it's this new technology of small carbon molecules that's the future of it's the only advanced form of medical care. And so we started into this belief that it was going to be chemical derivatives of fossil fuels that we're not going to just treat diseases, but they were also going to grow our crops. And that's rock and feller that did this, right? Rockefeller is funded the Flexner Report, which was Dr. Flexner's big report that said, you know, here's the future and here's you know kind of in he had massive investments in oil. Rockefeller built the whole system. So he built standard oil that would then get broken up to the monopolies index on mobile and the rest, shall et cetera. So you've got, you know, the situation where it's lived through to today. And so something like the chemotherapies that were around, there's one called Vincristine, which is a classic chemotherapy used for a whole host of common cancers. And Vincristine is a natural compound from life. And so it's biologically made by algae and things like this. And so it's similar to oil where it's just a carbon substrate, but it's still in its living form. But it's creating this strange carbon molecule called Vincristine. So it's made in algae. It's present in algae. Instead of saying, hey, here's a biologic system that we should look at like, maybe this should be in our soil system. Maybe we should be growing food that had, you know, this therapeutic effect, the anti-cancer effect. And instead they said, now, let's separate the algae from nature and let's create huge vats of this. And we will chemically extract the Vincristine. Vincristine today is sold for $28,000 a gram. And so the same thing was done with oil. We can take something as worth 20, 20 cents. And we can turn it in $28,000 if we manipulate these molecules and then make a story of this treats a disease that's attacking humanity. And so that's how the antibiotic anti-cancer, anti-diabetes, anti-obasty, anti-everything has come about is let's invent chemicals that solve a problem for that doesn't even really exist. And so this is where we start to slip into this massive abstraction of we get so good at solving problems that shouldn't even exist, or maybe don't even exist. And so this was the slippery slope that we set into in 1910s that then accelerated like anything in 1950. So in 1950s, you'll remember we had penicillin late, World War II. So penicillin was the first direct antibiotic and it was a revolution. So exciting. So kids in the 1940s and 50s were getting an injection and there but for anything, common cold, sneeze, red eyes, penicillin. And so we were giving out these antibiotics thinking well we're going to sterilize humans finally. And humans are one sterile because Louise Pasteur is late 1800s telling us germs were the only thing that was really killing humans. If we eliminate germs, humans are going to just thrive. And so the idea that we now had antibiotics, anti-small things that aren't human, we would finally become healthy again. Right, but if people did get infected with syphilis, then antibiotics like penicillin would cure them. So it would eliminate the symptom of syphilis but syphilis wasn't a disease. syphilis was a symptom of a degradation of healthy interconnect relationships. And that was being argued back then and in late 1800s arguing with Pasteur over decades of really well published stuff, you've got... So could you stop you there? So you're saying that the people got syphilis because their system was compromised not because syphilis is particularly dangerous. So did some people not get syphilis that were alive back then, that were in contact with it? I mean how contagious was it? And is it because their bodies were unhealthy and their immune systems weren't functioning correctly because they were malnourished because they didn't get enough nutrients like what? Exactly. Yeah, so because a lot of it was the aristocracy, like you would think they're the most well fed. They're the most separated from nature. That too, right? They're the ones that aren't gardening. They're ones that aren't out in the back. They're the ones that are separated from nature and have technology called convenience, pushed around them on many many many layers. So they're ones not touching the soil. They're the ones not making the bricks. They're the ones not building the houses. They were also drinking a lot and partying because they weren't feeling anything. So they went out for chemicals to feel something. And this is where I think this whole, you know, give everybody half a million dollars and they'll be happy. No, it's going to isolate them further. They're going to numb them down and all that's going to create is drug addiction on the highest levels we've ever seen in. If they functioned the way people function today, but that was my point is if we educate children to not be in pursuit of money, but instead think of money as something that provides you with food and shelter and basic needs and you don't have to worry about any of that stuff anymore. Now what you need to do is worry about being a person or worry about finding something that's fascinating and get an education just for your own sake of fueling your curiosity. You know, learn things, grow, pick projects, do things you want to do, start taking, learning a musical instrument, do something that's that you find fascinating because you don't have to spend your time just working anymore. And that's possible. You just said a word that I want to go back to you that's so important. You said, here's enough money to provide you food, shelter and anything else you need. Yeah. Does money really provide food, shelter or does nature provide it? Well, you use nature to make a house like cement doesn't exist in a vacuum. The Ochwar tribe had been building their houses for 40,000 years. Right. No money. They've literally not had money. Right. But they live in the jungle, right? If you live in Arizona, you better have a fucking house. You better have air conditioning too. Have you been, have you visited the Aboriginal brothers down in Australia? Everybody's hot and brutal is no houses for 40,000 years. Right. Absolutely fine without money. That's not ideal. It's not ideal to be outside when it's 110 degrees and you're just suffering. I'm sure if those people had air conditioning, they'd go, Oh, this is way better. That's exactly what happened. They got air conditioning and then what happened? Give them air conditioning. They come out of nature. Yeah, but always, I mean, it's the only way like people are so dumb. They can't be educated to the fact that there's a bunch of things that you have to satisfy. It's not intelligence. It's comfort. Comfort. It's subconscious. Right. But can't you teach people that they should just seek comfort? Because I learned that. People can learn that. Like everybody is like naturally inclined to seek comfort. But if you do that too much, you'll just become soft in your atrophy and you get bored depressed. And that's a real problem with people. We need tasks. We are task oriented, goal oriented creatures. We like stuff. We like to do things. So like to be do puzzles, we like to play games. We're like a best in it. So I've been building stuff since I was a kid. I love build I had the best life ever because I was born poor. And so I grew up in government housing in Colorado, 1973. We had no more was just sending. And a bunch of them among people of Cambodia were displaced because of Asian Orange chemical that is immediately cousin to glyphosate, the chemical we're talking about. Is it really? Asian Orange is a covers in? They're the same class. They're both organic phosphate molecules. And so I'll get into that story a little later. But nonetheless, this people's of the among were displaced because we dumped it all over Cambodia, North Vietnam, to make better the Ho Chi Minh trails. So we could from the air CR and me and kill more people. We turned an entire jungle system into a complete moonscape, not a single life form left after 25 years of Asian Orange. If you go back there right now, it's still like that? No, it is fully recovered because biology has been allowed to return. We created so much disease in that place that humans were displaced as soon as humans step out of their the kind of extract of relationship so it's not like a permanent chemical that stays in the soil. There's no such thing as a permanent chemical that it can stand once by all those forever chemicals forever chemicals are measured without life by if you put biology back in a system it will heal itself period. And that's my promise to humanity that everything is perfect. The stress that we're putting on this planet right now with these herbicides, pesticides, antibiotics, everything we're doing right now. I want to keep this in the context of everything is perfect. I'm going to keep drilling this home until we get there. But it's going to be an interesting journey because first we have to look at how much suffering have we created first to understand them. Why would we create suffering? And why would that be perfect? But we'll get there. But I think we need to back up to people's lived experience right now. 1973 we have the end of a world war war really. This economic drain Vietnam war was this massive drain on economic systems disrupted all kinds of things. And then then selling it's over. And a little company called Monsanto that was producing Asian orange needed a new economy. And so they repurposed themselves into chemical cleaner for industrial pipes and they bought a patent from a Japanese inventor put this patent in the late 1950s. And for something called glyphosate, bought that patent in 1974 and they were using it to clean industrial pipes because it has an amazing ability to grab minerals and pull it out of circulation. So they were dumping lots of this down these clogged pipes of manufacturing facilities. And they were cleaning the pipes out beautifully. But the problem was as soon as the effluent got out into the river it would kill all the fish and everything else. And so they was clearly not going to get past any environmental protection. So they needed a different purpose for this stuff at lower concentrations. And so they repat and did in 1976 as a weed killer and rolled it out as round up as you know which would become the most successful weed killer in history. But this molecule had been already in use for this organophosphate family of molecules that always already been killing life throughout Cambodia and Vietnam. Those people got displaced and I grew up with them and Boulder color out of them in government housing. And those among people showed us something of biology. They're most poisons, you know, peoples in the planet. And they showed no metabolic collapse. They showed no decline in health. They didn't have explosion of cancer, anything else they should have because we know that Asian Orange causes cancer. And they showed me as young as I was at the time, three, four years old growing up with these these among people in gardens. And these Cambodian women were sitting squatting in the middle of their 10 foot plots that they were given as part of our our section government housing. And they would sit and tell story, stay human connected. The receivers were on then tennis were open. They're telling story while they're squatting barefoot in soil systems. And the biology is restoring their bodies, cleaning them, cleaning their bodies. I would find that out you know 35 years later studying life, Satan and human biology. But this is what I loved is that I had a lived experience of peoples that had been radically poisoned, but had stayed in touch with the land. And because they were an extension of the planet, they didn't show disease. Because these are the people that left though. I mean, the people that were still there in Cambodia and in Laos and like and all the areas where they used Asian Orange, didn't they have a high concentration of cancer, the people that lived there? Yeah. And that's largely because they got displaced to concentration camp type environments where they were separated from nature. So if you don't stay connected in nature, then toxicity shows up. Cancer shows up all these things. A good example of this is Chernobyl. But the people that lived in the villages were Asian Orange as long as they stayed close to nature, you're saying that they were fine from Asian Orange. In this case, there were no villages left. We literally turned it into a landscape. So they were fully refugee status divorced. They didn't have land to go back to for 30 years. But there were people that stayed that were close to where that Asian Orange stuff was dumped that lived. It did get cancer, right? Yeah. And the ones with the highest cancer were the US military soldiers. And so the people that were most separate from nature, we're going to show the highest rates of cancer. And so you have US military that are eating canned food and an Emmory's right half a world away, they're going to show an immediate increase. And that's why Asian Orange couldn't be repurposed is because of such a bad rap on high anxiety, you're in a war, you don't want to be there isolated socially. Probably doing a lot of drugs. So logically. Yeah. So you've reached a stress level because of your separation from your own personal natural connected biosis of a family and a community. And your garden and all these things. So as we get further from nature, we come more vulnerable and then toxins become a real crisis for biology. So biology and isolation will have huge consequences to poisoning. A connected biologic system sees poison as a stressor that will make it stronger, not weaker. When you're communicating with these people, especially like people that live in these indigenous cultures, when do they experience infections? Do they have like, do they get the flu? Does anything go through them that's in their own, but not something that's introduced by other people? Like we know that that wiped out 90% of Native Americans is disease that came from Europe. It's a story that's told. I'm not sure that we have the greatest evidence of that story has been played a lot. I think it's awesome. We just killed a lot of people. Well, we certainly did that as well. We killed a lot of people, but I think that what's not understood was the breaking of their relationship to their natural system. And so they may have had dysentery and died of infectious disease, but not until we displaced them from their gardens displaced them from their land. And we had to break their relationship to nature if they were going to get a bowel infection that was cut and cause a problem. I've just seen too many examples of bi-connected biology systems that just cannot become diseased, a connected system. And again, let me turn to Chernobyl for a moment because it's a pretty rad example of this. Largest, you know, nuclear event, nuclear disaster that's ever been created in human history, maybe maybe the Japan ones now exceeding it, but Chernobyl was 30 years ago, it was only 1976 or something like that. Chernobyl happens huge nuclear waste dump into soil systems throughout the Siberian region there. And we have the immediate movement of humans out of the region out of fear of cancer. And sure enough, all the humans that were in touch with that system, huge rates of thyroid cancer, renal disease, all kinds of things, you know, occurred. Meanwhile, those soils are primarily inhabited by voles. A small little mouse-like creature lives under the ground looks halfway across. You know occurred. Meanwhile, those soils are primarily inhabited by voles. Small little mouse-like creature lives under the ground, looks halfway across a field mouse in a mole. Those tiny little creatures have been eating the most radioactive active soils on the planet for the last 50, you know, 30, 40 years. So it was 50 years now. And so that 50 years of eating radioactive material, they're now radioactive. So when you put a Geiger counter up next to one of those voles, it's not BBB but it's just a continuous home. And so these are most radioactive creatures on earth. Not a single case of deformities, not as no to collapse of fertility. In fact, the voles populations are thriving. The predator to the voles in Chernobyl is the wolf. And the Siberian wolf has absolutely quadrupled its population. No birth defects, no cancer, no consequence to eating the voles that are highly radioactive. And so these are the best examples of when a system, when a keystone species are otherwise, is connected to its nature. She will never allow an injury to occur that she doesn't allow, I already have a solution for. And so at the microbiome level, we now know how these wolves and voles are surviving as they upregulate pseudomonas. And pseudomonas has this amazing, it's a bacteria that actually, if you look through all those food poisoning and the list of like what's going to kill you on the E.coli and the pseudomonas. Pseudomonas is one of the most feared bacteria in a hospital, for example. Turns out pseudomonas thrive on radioactive material. They digest it, turn it into usable and safer products and all of this. And so the microbiome is there living in the voles, constantly converting it and updating its physiology. So it's repairing at a faster rate than it's being injured. And I'll show you what this looks like in a lab too. In a moment, but I want you to hold that and thought of, there's every organism has a rate of repair and a rate of injury. And as long as the rate of repair is slightly faster than a rate of injury and never gets a disease, you can ramp up that injury rate and if nature stays interconnected, your rate of repair simply steps up to its right capacity. And so this is that classic outage if it doesn't kill you, it makes you stronger. A biology that's practicing a relationship of biosis, the interconnected relationships that make health life possible. A biotic creature will always have the resources if from nature rather than from money. Money's never going to provide you biosis. Nature's always going to provide you the biotic capacity to overcome any toxicity that gets streamed up. Planetary or otherwise. The planet has been making horrible toxins forever. The sulfuric acid pools that this planet dominated this planet's surface. Biology came right past all of that. Biology grew up in it. Biology has no problem with chemistry because of its phenomenon of light concentration of energy. More energy per cubic centimeters than anything else in the cosmos. Life is this churning machine of iteration repair, regeneration, iteration repair, regeneration. And every time it does that, it has this tendency to make new iterations of itself. To become more biodiverse. New species are formed. New imagination of nature. And pretty soon you have a planet earth that's teeming with so much unbelievable life. And finally a container that can hold its maximum concentration of information and light energy is created. And that's a human. And so we've got this container that's holding billions of years of stress. The result of stress when connected to nature is more life force. More intelligence. More beauty. And so I loved what you said earlier because it's very important. There's a chapter in my book that's looking at this kind of neo-spiritualism of the utopia you mentioned. And you're kind of all BS from the beginning of that. You're like, humans have never done utopian things. Humans are part of the stress mechanism of the planet. I'm convinced of it because what we do all the time is we stress the system. We finally invented airplanes. The first thing we did was try to jump out of them. Like we just like stress. We like the discomfort of pushing the envelope. And I think we live on a planet in the middle of a universe that loves the same thing. It loves the stress of it. It loves the friction of possibility. It loves death because immediately there's rebirth. And every time there's a death there's more opportunity for new creation, new imagination. And so when I say everything is perfect, it's literal. It means everything is reimagining itself all the time. And if humans do go extinct in these coming decades, that's part of a beautiful journey of life going, iterating, iterating, iterating, iterating, iterating. There's a moment though with every hospice patient where you suddenly get to see life return. And sometimes they choose more life in the human body and sometimes they're like, I'm gone. That's where I belong over there. I have a next thing. I've been by so many near death experiences. I can't even count them anymore. But every time somebody dips across the veil of the human ego and the five sensory systems here, they see a universe that's so interconnected. And it's got absolutely nothing to do with a human mind and its perception and its effort to explain the universe. It has nothing to do. It's a full body experience. It is that antenna going wide open and being like, this is what it is. And I can't, it's the one thing I wish I could do and I've never been able to do is just hope humans feel that. If you could feel what it felt like when somebody hasn't even come back to the point where they can tell you the near death experience, but you're just standing there in witness to them and their antenna goes blowing wide open. And you can feel what is in the field at that moment. There is nothing that compares to it. Plant medicine, peak experiences, breath work, cold plunge, hot plunge. Take your bio through any stress. Because you will not experience the amount of energetic information that comes through at that moment to that human antenna that's still biologically connected to earth, but is perceiving the whole story. That's the end of addiction. If you could feel that there would be no more addiction on this planet. Because addiction is the necessary behavior of an organism that believes itself to be abandoned by its infinite reality. Humans believe ourselves to be abandoned by nature. And we put it right in our definition. You can probably pull it up, Oxford English Dictionary. Nature is everything in the permanent of the earth. Minerals, plants, animals as opposed to humans or anything humans have made. Not only do we write ourselves out of nature, we put ourselves in opposition to nature as opposed to humans or anything humans have made. That's the Oxford Dictionary's definition of nature, really. And so as you start to think about this, that's the whole story. It's when we start to lose the antenna. When we started to rolling down the receptor and we started planting mental constructs, money is where things come from. No, money has never birthed anything. Women birth life, money does not. Biology is self-perpetuating, always for more beauty, more intelligence. Anytime we create an abstract system and say biology needs that, biology, living people need money. Living people needs IV trips, a vitamin C. Living humans need peptides injected. It is the biggest miss in the cosmos. It's humans that don't realize that we are the best antennas that have been made on this planet so far. If we begin to use those, we will not do utopia. We'll experience opportunities for stress that doesn't harm another individual. And this is the characteristic of the sovereign reality, where everything is up leveling all of the time. And something that gives up its life is not killed. It's literally giving its life to the next. And so when you look at predation, you think you have the lion eating the antelope. If you spend enough time with these indigenous groups, they can tell you which antelope is going to give itself to the lion. It's not because it's weak or it's broken. There's a relationship they can feel between the predator and the prey. It's interesting that we call them prey. Who's praying in this situation? Who's about to go into an ascension process? Is the antelope or the lion? Maybe both. But there's a relationship there in our indigenous understanding. This is where sacred hunting comes in. Sacred hunting never went out to kill anything. It came to receive more. So if you go out in nature with the attitude of, I'm going to receive the abundance of nature for my peoples, for my family, for my thing. And you see what nature is going to offer you. And this is the hunter-gatherer tribes and spades here. But this is the change of mindset that we've got to go back to is everything is sacred. Everything is sovereign. And when we sit back into that relaxed relationship, but we never got kicked out of nature. Everything, our food, our shelter, our livelihoods, are going to come from nature, not money. When we make that subtle shift of trusting this planet again, then we start turning on the antenna. And then our intelligence comes back on. And then our memory comes back on. And we don't have to sit around being like, I wonder how those pyramids got built. We will be connected to that information because it's all still here. I want to go back to that. But I want to push back on this idea that people can survive plagues if they don't have immunity to it. Because one of the best examples where that seems to have wiped out the entire civilization is all these sites they keep finding in the Amazon. When you read about the lost city of Z, you read about the initial European explorers who made the war into the Amazon. They found this thriving civilization. They went back 200 years ago, 200 years later, there's nothing. And the predominant theory is that they brought with them smallpox and a bunch of other diseases. And they spread like wildfire to a bunch of people that didn't have immunity to it. And they died. Who's living more in harmony with nature than those people that were living in the Amazon? I mean, they're living in complete harmony with nature. They just didn't have the immunity to deal with European diseases. So you're telling me a story that I cannot answer because the story is abstract itself. And so how so? Because you're painting a picture A that somebody knows that there were smallpox that went across those people's. Well, we know there were smallpox. We know that smallpox did most certainly wipe out a lot of Native Americans as well as a lot of European settlers. Was it because they were malnourished? That's certainly possible. I mean, it's certainly a fact. I mean, if I would just say when? When do we have evidence that they started dying of smallpox? And I think that's after we displaced them from their tribal. And after we displaced them from their connected disabilities. It's hard to say. That's hard to say because it seems like there's a lot of evidence that it spread through tribes and even tribes that were on their own. That there was a real problem. But the other question is, it wasn't always bountiful like wherever Native Americans were. And there was times where they had like serious famine and they didn't have food sources that were nutritious and they did their best to stay alive. It wasn't always like, look at all the deer and all the fish. And we have fruits and vegetables everywhere. We're fine. No, there was certainly times where these nomadic people ran into a bad situation. And if you introduce a new disease, a novel disease that they don't have an immunity to during that time, that could most certainly wipe them out. Despite the fact that they're living in nature, they don't have the resources that's required to keep a biological system perfectly functioning and healthy. They're struggling. They're barely getting by. I could totally see how people like that. We like to think that everybody that lived in North America before the Europeans came had it nailed. They lived perfectly. Well, no. Tribal hunter-gatherer people that are nomadic. Like sometimes you run into a bad place. Sometimes you're in an area that has no game. That's just how it goes. You have a bunch of mouths to feed. And things go wrong. And if they're in that kind of a situation, they catch smallpox. They're going to be compromised. Their immune system to be compromised. It completely makes sense. And there was widespread contact with these diseases that came from these Europeans who also weren't very healthy and came over here on boats. That's got to be fucking terrible for you. You're going to boat for three months. What kind of food are you eating? And then you get here and you're spreading all your junk to all these other people that have no idea what that is. I think you're now here on the button of it. And so it was less about the condition of people that were native to this land. It was more about the divorce of the people that were incoming from nature. And so those settlers or those, you know, industrial colonists who were coming over from Spain or otherwise. It was their radical divorce for thousands of years of, you know, innovations of clothing and horses. And all these different layers of technology that that interrupted their food systems and their relationship in nature. So they were coming over here sick. I agree with that. And it's likely that that may have been more of the imprint was less of an infectious disease and more of a dissonant imbalance. And so I think what we now know about the gut microbiome is that it has immediate feedback loop to stress signals, cortisol specifically. And so if you're a Spanish, you know, colonial army that shows up with weapons that have never been seen before. And you've got, you know, this marauding belief that you're separate from nature. And so you need to go steal as much as possible because you don't have enough. And so that's the downstream of the abandonment disorder of humanity is scarcity mentality, which then breeds empire rise and fall in colonialism and ownership models and all of this. And so you come over with this marauding new species. Let's think of it as a new species because up until this point, none of the indigenous culture shares saw themselves as separate from nature. All of their, you know, 40,000 years of traditional practice where we are integrated in nature. We are an element between the cosmos and the earth. We sit in this fine little beautiful zone between heaven and earth and this is human. This is the experience of being an antenna that's connected to this cosmos, connected to planet earth. And a great example of that as tech architecture that literally mirrors the cosmos. Mirrors the cosmos as did the Egyptians. And so all of them were building these pyramids in 13 degree angles, just like Orion's belt. And so you've got, you know, pliadian star clusters, laser them to the stones and Peru and the temples that are built underground. They're like crazy stuff because we were antenna to the universe and we were in time to the earth. We sat feeling them both. That's the magic of being human as you can feel both. This is a very magical moment in my patients that are dying and are letting go of these buys there, certainly cause me can scale. They'll tell you exactly which plans they go to and how they expand into the universe, become stars, all kinds of crazy stuff in their near-death experiences. But they're not on earth at that moment. So I think this wonderful moment of being an antenna of biological antenna, not the physics of a soul. You know, some identity that sits outside of biologic space-time. But an antenna that's now biologically connected to more energy per cubic centimeter than it will ever feel. Because the cosmos doesn't do energy as well as life. And so you can, a sun doesn't do as much concentrated energy as life. And so this is this precious moment. And so you imagine these people for tens of thousands of years designing, expressing these incredible technologies, the pyramids and space travel and everything else that they're doing at this time, unbelievable connectivity. And then along comes the species that look human, except they think they don't belong to earth. They don't think they think they got abandoned. The whole kicked out of the garden thing is played itself out. And they come in with this killing mentality. That is different than the prey and predator relationship that people sat with each other, I'm sure too. It wasn't just lions and antelope. There was a predation between humans from our beginning too. We are a natural system. We live, we die, we rebirth, we readeth. When our antenna is a wide open, we understand the relationship and the flow of life as it goes through its, you know, ascension process. But here comes the species that is fundamentally opposed to life. It is antibiotic in its behavioral relationship to earth. The stress that would have been felt in the neurologic system from people's that had been interconnected, and understanding space and having anything in their time. What they would have felt in that time would have, I think, been the infectious disease. Just like the boxed apple juice, they came along to break the relationship of 40,000 years of abundance for the ochoey tribe and now put them in poverty. The same thing could happen energetically at the spiritual or psychospatial or cycle of awareness of that antenna could suddenly break if suddenly you felt like you were actually in danger. And isn't that what we feel when we feel associate path in our presence? Don't we suddenly viscerally feel something like this is actually dangerous. Other people can be mean, they can be assholes, but it's that antenna goes up. And so imagine a whole civilization feeling for the most this foreign object coming at them. And it's shooting them and it's killing them and it's tearing up their gardens and it's got horses which have never been seen on this continent. The cortisol level goes berserk immune system shuts down, microbiome and they got collapses. And suddenly they are experiencing diseases the West not because the pathogens were bad. Not becomes some element of nature suddenly leapt across the ocean and attacked them. But because they went out of relationship, the antenna shut down, they lost the context of an interconnected biosis relationship with heaven and earth. I think that's where we start to really see honestly what was happening at that time. The atmosphere that was bringing it was guilt shame of being kicked out of nature. It was energetic signals that were breaking the informational stream, the field of connectivity that humans were probably suspended into that time. But even before the Europeans arrived, the Aztecs were doing horrific shit to each other. And the consecration of the temple of, is it to note shit lawn where they killed some of the, one of those, a Spanish chronicler named Diaz said that they killed as many as 80,000 people over four days, they sacrificed them. Like these are, this is not like a balanced living with nature civilization. We're talking about the Aztecs. They were doing some wild shit man. It survived much longer than the Europeans had. I understand that. But they had survived by enslaving people and richly sacrificing them. So that's your European story. But okay, what do you think? What do you think that they had a harmonious connection with nature by sacrificing slaves? I can't defend that because I wasn't there to experience it, but I'll tell you a different story that I make you question. Please do. For me to tell you what the Aztecs were, that's a bullshit story. I can't tell you, but in my own lived experience with tribes in that exact area, when I spend time with them, my antenna goes wide. I start to sense this big reality. And if you look deeper at the stories of the Aztecs, so one of the classic things that they did, did humans sacrifice in was their, their sports. And so they had a game that looked a lot like some combination of soccer and basketball. And so they had a little tiny bowl that they could strike with any part of their body except their hands. So they couldn't throw them. The mines did that, right? Yeah. And so the mines have this sport. And they've got this tiny little hoop way up on the wall of the, the playing field, which were huge. They're like, you know, as big as your lacrosse fields or something like this. And so they got these huge fields in the middle of these pyromitic structures of stone and way up on the wall of one of these would be this tiny little hoop. That was hardly bigger than the ball itself. And you had to like bump it with your shoulder or kick it through that little hoop. The games would last for days. It was kind of like your, you know, some version of your British sports that go on. But anyway, the, the winner would be then taken into the front and the captain of the team would be beheaded. Yeah, not a lot of incentive. Not a lot of incentive. The game's for fucking ever. That's why they lasted days. But what do you want to win? Was it, they didn't want to win or was the incentive not to stay alive? Well, the kings weren't cutting their own heads off if someone won, right? They were cutting the heads off for the guy who was the winner. And probably reluctantly. I mean, we can make all kinds of sub-shores, but maybe they were looking forward to being sacrificed. It's very possible. I think that's the interesting. But human instincts don't align with that. Human instincts align with people. Try to avoid death whenever possible. I totally agree that while we're still veiled between the five senses that make us think that things end it. I understand. But if you're advocating for a world where it's okay to kill 80,000 slaves at the consecration of a temple, that you probably didn't build in the first place because one of the problems with the Aztec temples is they don't claim they built them. They found them. They found them already built. And they literally call them the place where the gods were born. Like some of these incredible structures were built who knows how much longer before the Aztecs were there. They describe it. They don't say they built them. Oh, they inhabited them, say, not Egypt. They built thousands of years before the modern Egyptians showed up. Likely. So Egypt won is a little more complicated because there's so much of it. And it's so big. It's like it's not that the Aztec one isn't complicated because it's certainly so is the mine one. I've only been to my impairments. I've been to Chichinica. It was fucking incredible. It's insane. You just try to wrap your head around what this society must have been like at its peak. But that's also the belief is that these people encountered European diseases as well. That's why they just sort of dropped off and vanished. Just like the Amazon's. So I think there's a risk of us imprinting our current belief systems on a distant past that we can't remember. Well, sure. Yeah, I mean, they don't really know what happened to the mines. That's where I also said that. It's a lot of guessing. But the prominent theory, the predominant theory, I think is disease. And so I don't want to leave people hanging and think that I'm out to create a new humanity where it's okay to kill 80,000 people. No, I don't think you're saying that. I'm interested in a situation where the concept of killing goes away. The concept of death becomes reverent. The concept of death no longer as seen as an endpoint. The concept of death becomes an evolution, not an endpoint. This is what all Indigenous people spend some time in Nepal, go to Tibet. Their whole culture is in reverence to death. Well, they have those Tibetan sky funerals. The sky funerals. Those are wild. And people are horrified by that. But I was like, as long as you knew that they didn't have to get that HBO autopsy guide to exhume your body because your husband killed you or whatever it is, as long as you know that you died in a normal natural way, isn't that kind of better to let the vultures eat you? It's kind of what you're supposed to be. You're supposed to cycle back into nature. We're so weird that we say, no, you can't have me. And we poison ourselves so that we can go visit Grandpa in the funeral home when he's embalmed. He's embalmed with toxic chemicals that can keep his body from decaying so much so that you can dig him up a couple years later and find, oh my god, nana, poison them. You know? Because that's what happens. They find out. That starts our new commentary about marriage. But yeah, well, not humans. I think there's something that's just one example. It could be a bunch of people. There's nurses that poison people. There's a lot of crazy people out there. But the point is we're very strange in that the most common way we take care of bodies is we fill them up with chemicals that make it so that the rest of nature can absorb us. Because we have no reverence for death because we think it's an end point. So we cling to these containers as if this was the story. And that's what I got to see in hospice over now. And it's the moment people pierce the veil and realize the intent it can sense everything again. That's when they realize this body is a tiny story of me. This is a tiny part of my experience and it's precious because at that moment of being human, I felt heartbreak. I felt suffering. I felt fear. I felt guilt. I felt shame. None of what you can feel when you let go and pierce that veil. On the other side is radical connectivity. On the other side of that veil is radical connectivity energetically. You feel everything, stars, moonscapes, everything. You are. You're in this singularity moment. And that's what you can feel in your body. So you can feel right now when I tell you about what it feels like to be in the presence of somebody in that moment when their antenna goes wide open. And they still have a biological antenna that can both transmit and receive information. The amount of information around death is so vast. And this is why the Tibetans honor it so thoroughly. This is that precious one moment where a human antenna gets the entire download and can still transmit it. And so if we are not sitting in the rooms with our elders that are dying, we are missing the biggest download of life. And we will only find it out when we're on our deathbed, probably dying alone. And so this is what I'm talking about is I see a world not without death. I see a world where death becomes the biggest moment of transformation. And 10% of people that go through that have to be discharged from hospice six months later because they went on to live new life. Their diseases go away. Their health recovers. Their biology returns. And they have a different relationship with their children. They go and start creating art. They've never created. These near death experiences are trippy and 10% is a huge number. As a hospital doctor, I was admitting 80 patients a week to die. As eight patients a week that are doing what they weren't supposed to do. They were supposed to die and they're not doing it. In fact, they are showing so much more life after they glimpsed that everything's perfect. And they took a deep breath and said, I got one more thing to express before I let go of this finite moment. And this is our precious experience that we have. And I think honestly, I think you're embodying something of this for humanity to look at. You're one of those rare personalities that gets on this seismic launch into the public eye. Wealth comes rushing to you. That wasn't even expected. You set out to have some fun with some friends. And then this happened. And you were one of the few people in the public eye right now that didn't allow that to break your relationship to your nature. And you stayed connected to the people that are building stuff that are making cars. And that's what I grew up doing. I love it. That's what keeps us real is turning ranches, getting the car to go faster. Building a house. I built my own home. I live in the woods of Virginia and built my home there. Living with my partner down in Panama. She's building a whole village down there. It's amazing to see what is going to happen when women start doing development on this planet. It's going to be spectacular. But what I'm feeling is this return to being human. Where I am receiving so much information. And I need no money to be happy. If we keep making money, the source by which we will be safe, fed, housed, I mean, we will continue in our abstract relationship to nature. When we start reforming all human systems in the context of a nature that is not only abundant, it does not know death. It only knows transformation, transformation, transformation, more complexity, more beauty, more intelligence. And so this is where we can start to lose the fear of death and start to move into this more reverent state of sovereignty, where we understand that we are fully resource, not by Elon Musk's minimum wage of half a million dollars. We are resourced by nature itself, by life itself. Because we are cellular creatures, we had to be fully resourced to occur in our mother's womb. There is, we needed no money to take one cell into 70 trillion cells inhabited by 14 quadrillion mitochondria that concentrates on like 10,000 times brighter than the sun. That happened without money. That... This all sounds great. But how do you get the money to get a saw to cut the wood to make your house? Why did the money have to enter it? Why did you get a saw? Did you make the saw? Yeah. Okay. It's an out-to-back. Do you have a circular saw? Do you have one of those nice... little sawsals? Did you make this all yeah, okay? It's not gonna solve it. Yeah, do you have a circular saw? Do you have one of those nice, you know, those nice ones? Ruse your sawsalls. Why would we need money for that, either? Well, we knew someone's got to build it. So someone's got to make a factory. So someone's got to make the internal engine that spins that wheel a thousand times a minute or whatever it is. There's, and so all you're talking about is a concentration of energy. Right, but someone's got to put the resources in to do that. They have to source the steel. What if it was nature that put the resources in instead of the Fed? So the Fed's printing fake money. Right, but you've got to motivate people to innovate a thing. Do you have to motivate people to create? Well, certain things. Like there's a reason why people do it because they know that they can make some money off of it. You know? Because they're currently stuck in a matrix where they believe the stuff is coming from money. Dewap power tools, right? When they make those, there's engineers, there's a bunch of designers. They all work for money. And they all like figure out how much electricity it's going to run on. What the engine's going to be. How fast that has to be. What's the best steel for the blades? There's money involved in all that because they have to have a warehouse where they have to build it. They have to pay people to pay their health care, pay their dental. They have to take care of them. Maybe they have a union, okay? So they've got union dues and fees. And there's a bunch of money being exchanged because people want a reason to show up at work to do the work to make these sauce. Because they're very difficult to make. It takes multiple people. There's a whole chain of different material science people that have to be involved. That's perfect. So you just gave a perfect synopsis of the last 200 years. Yeah. And so they industrial revolution. Right, but that's how you make a house. That's how you make this table. Like people have to work. Like built houses and castles and pyramids that were much greater than any house built today without the money. Yeah, but they had something, okay? Like houses for sure they had money. Like which houses? Like if you go back 400 years, 500 years ago, they definitely had money. 10,000 people. Okay. Pyramids. It's a good question. They don't know. We really don't know. They just have a lot of money. So they built a pyramid. Well, we don't know how they sourced the resources. And we don't know how they got the people to do the work. And we don't know what the technology was involved in terms of planning. And we really don't know. But I do know what it was. Which was something like the Fed. But probably wasn't that. And so it's not that. That's not the thing. It's like a abstract monetary system that has nothing to do with life. That's not the problem. Right. That's not the problem. Well, yeah, we don't know. But we would assume that it would be more sophisticated than that because the pyramid's more sophisticated than that. We would like to think that it would be different. We are also trapped in thinking that the system that we currently find ourselves operating in is the only way human beings can operate. This is my belief about the pyramids and about a lot of these ancient structures. I think we assume that because we are on a specific direction in terms of technological innovation, that this is the only direction that human beings could have ever gone. And I have a feeling that that is absolutely not the case. And I think the pyramids are the best example of that. I think they went in a different direction. We don't know what direction that was. Because I think, along the lines, it would gram beliefs and what Randall Carlson believes and a lot of these other folks, that there was some sort of a great cataclysm. And this is the source of the flood myths that exist in all ancient religions. This is somewhere around 11,000 plus years ago. And I think that probably wiped out a lot of information on how things were made and what they did and why they were doing it the way they did it. And I think modern archaeology just saying, all the yous and and push stones like you can go fuckers. You go do that, bitch. You go figure out how to carry a 500 ton stone through the mountains from hundreds of miles away. Go fuck yourself. You can't, you're lying to me. You're pretending to be an expert in your lying to me because you're not willing to say this baffles us to no end. We have no understanding of what tools were used in order to create these incredibly symmetrical statues. Never forget about the pyramid itself. Forget about the things that are you aware of Felipe Boughbyandee and his work out of Italy. The stuff that they're finding underneath the pyramids is baffling the baffling. The light art systems out there. baffling. So 20 meters in diameter, huge columns with spirals wrapped around them. Like what's that? Why is it go a kilometer into the earth? This is crazy. Is it crazy or is it actually something we're actually living the truth of? Well, I have a feeling it was an insanely advanced society that existed there. And I think there's not a lot of evidence because the cataclysmic event of 11,000 years ago was probably so destructive that very few people survived. And the people that did survive, they just had stories and they just, they had survival skills and they had a live in whatever way was possible in order to carry on the human race. But I think all semblance of a technologically sophisticated society that existed pre 11,000 years ago was all but wiped out. And I think that's why society re-emerges around 6,000 years ago. And I think that's what that is. It's a re-emerging. And it's not a coincidence that all these societies that did emerge around 6,000 plus years ago, all of them have this flood myth. They all have these stories of these cataclysm. Because that story was passed on generation generation, all the people that survived. And what we're getting is the ultimate game of telephone. We're getting the ultimate game of people telling a story and the new tell story and the botatomic gets to Jamie, who knows what's missing? Who knows what's been added? Who knows what Pharaoh has added his touch to it? Or what King has decided that this part can't be in there because it doesn't jive with this particular religious text that I believe in. It's a real problem. It's a real problem when we go back and we try to figure out what happened in history. But the things that should confound everyone and should absolutely remind you that we don't know is the pyramids. They should just remind you, we look at that, shut the fuck up. There's no way you know. You don't know what was going on. We could only make guesses and we have to be very open minded when we make these guesses because the sheer scale of these fantastic creations and not just them, the labyrinth that go underneath it, the one that has this enormous 40 meter long metallic object that's under the ground that they don't know what the fuck it is. Herodotus talked about these labyrinths. Like these are greater than Giza, he said. Like what were these people doing and how did they do it? We don't know. You have such an important couple of words in there. One of them is this knowing concept. Yes. If we continue to try to make stories out of our mind to explain the world we live in, the cosmos, and in all of its complexities or the human body and its miraculous thing, we're gonna end up with very disempowered versions of reality. So what should we do instead? Feel it instead of knowing. Okay, well how you feel how they made the pyramids? You're already doing it. I'm watching you do it because you keep looking up here every time you're like really going after the pyramids, you look way up. I do that with everything when I'm trying to think. Exactly. But what's actually happening is once you've done that four or five times, your body starts putting the information in and then your start speaking from some other thing that you're mind. And that's when you come up with this conviction. And I can feel it. So when my antenna is open, I can feel you state your truth through your body language through the energy you're transmitting across this table. And I'm not listening to your words anymore. I'm feeling it. Your truth is fundamentally the pyramids exist. Things too complex to our own human mind and technology exist. They're here right now. They're undeniable. You're transmitting a truth that I don't have to work on the words that I can feel it and it lands. For so long, I was trained to look up here. And I spent all of this time 17 years in academia looking up here trying to find my information map of like, oh there's that piece of information. There's that piece of information. Let me put that into a story because that's what I know. I had my near-death experience in 2010. And when I experienced the piece and the opening that happens with Car accident in 2010, when you have that experience, you suddenly realize that what you know is a fraction of what you can feel. And you have so much more information at your experiential level of capacity to inform your biology than the mind will ever be able to create. And so this is where we start to live telepathically. And this could all be theoretical, but I will tell you I have seen thousands of patients in my clinics that are living this reality already. They have already gone back to telepathic communication wide open and they are called autistic people. Autism is a neurologic development necessary at the end of a period of time when humans went into complete abstraction. Money systems went abstract. I have no relationship to nature. We have medical systems that are actually chronic disease management systems that are bankrupting the world now. Five trillion dollars in a year spent on disease management in the United States alone. We are bankrupting the systems that got separated from nature. They are going to collapse. They are going to fail. And suddenly we develop a neurology that cannot be programmed with the old abstract systems and belief systems because they are feeling too much. We call it sensory processing deficits. But really what it is is a mind that's no longer gated with excuses, with defense mechanisms, with tolerance levels of cognitive dissonance. Is this why have you seen that there's one young boy who flew over Manhattan in a helicopter and then he drew the entire skyline like completely accurately just from his memory? Yeah. And it's a project that's become known as the telepathy tapes is a great example of it. And I was on their second season of that, talking through what I experienced in clinic is that we now have not just a theory of telepathic communication. We have the lived experience between thousands of people that are in there between space, between the words. They are traveling to a unified location that they all agree exists, which is called the hill. And so they are having an experience in which massive amounts of information are being transmitted back and forth. And they cannot be programmed with death is bad. And they can't believe any of the abstract things we've been taught because they feel too much. The reason I became so clear on this was total accident in my clinic, which is the only way new idea has come along as complete accidents. Because when we do scientific research, it's way too linear. We see something where like, well, if that's happened, then this must be the way it is. Well, if I just saw that, then this must be a ways. So we do these linear knowledge-based systems. And so we get nowhere. We go in circles. And well, cancer must be here. We've known cancer wasn't the problem. We knew that cancer was a metabolic symptom, a symptom of metabolic collapse 100 years ago. So well defined in medical literature, everything else, out of Wurburg was the idea like broke the whole news in the 1920s. So here we are, 100 years later, still thinking that cancer is coming out of the woodwork and attacking healthy human bodies. So we go in these linear things. What we are forgetting is these leaps in awareness, these a much bigger antenna system is available to us. And you only get there when you finally surrender your knowledge base and you start to feel what's happening in front of you. And so I was taught that there was a disease called autism. I was affecting our children. And for years, I helped manage these people in clinics and everywhere they showed up in the medical system. And I saw this disease in my linear mind and I was always like, I gotta fix that. Maybe if I do this, I could fix the human brain. Maybe if we flip this switch, it'll work. Maybe if we put this chemical in their body, we can change their neurochemistry and get them to be able to tolerate a day. My clinic that I launched in 2010 was called Revolution Health Center. Rural clinic, town of 550 people, no resources monetarily. There was no reason this was gonna become an explosive hub of innovation if you measured it by money. I was hemorrhaging money. It was not making money as a doctor, adult, rural doctor. Had left the haliballs and the marble halls of academia. And I started seeing autistic kids a lot in these rural environments and inner city, urban environments where we have these really high penetrance of autism and it's not being diagnosed because they don't have the resources to bring the attention to like child's five, seven years old. And by that time, there's been no resources brought to the kids. So lots of undiagnosed autistic neurology out there. So I was seeing a lot of incline and these kids are heavily affected and the suffering is kind of through the roof. They are hitting their head against a wall of six, eight hours a day. They have a callous on their forehead from rhythmically, hitting their head, striking their head against a wall. And when they get upset, somebody comes in there and environment stresses them. They start smearing feces and blood on the walls. It is from parenting aspect, the most horrific hell you can possibly live in. They amount of suffering being expressed. And so these kids with highly affected autism are coming in my clinic and they can't even sit in front of you. They run around in the clinic room and they can't make eye contact, can't make physical, they're feeling too much and they'll go hide in the corner, hit their head against a wall, stem somehow. They're stimming their body until the chaos of everything they're taking in as shut down to one signal of pain. So this is an intense way to see human being. And this kid's four years old sitting in front of you and this mother is more exhausted than you've ever seen a human being. And so we started trying to like go into the woodwork of like what resources are we not thinking of here? And by this time I was starting to be exposed to Native American Indigenous practices and new energetic therapies, Ebrim Cream stuff out of Egypt and it was like, okay, show me something. Give me some tool here. And we stumbled upon this very simple tool which is called Emotion Code Therapy. And it's a simple way of bringing the mind into awareness of where an emotion is stored inside of itself. And then you run a magnet over the forehead, over the top of the head to reset the magnetic pull of the water around the brain. And it changes the neural chemistry. And so it was a powerful tool. I was super excited about it. But most of these kids coming in, so affected when do you even get close enough for me to do the therapy? So we started doing it on the moms to show the kid, hey, this is safe and they'd come in and get a couple of treatment. After two years of this, we started to realize all of the kids were improving before we ever got that treatment installed. They were improving when mom got treated. That started to make me realize they're not expressing a personal experience. They're expressing a field effect. They're intent is wide open. And when we remove moms emotional stressors, the kid got better. And so we started treating everybody in the field. And a heavily autistic child will require three to five full-time efforts to get it. So they got a grandma, two aunties, an uncle, two brothers that are taking care of the kid. And we started treating the whole field. Like anybody who has touched with this kid in a week, we want to see them, we want to clear their emotional field. The effect was just undeniably effective. Every time you cleared another individual whose emotional field was being felt by the kid, the kid improved. And so what I started to realize is these kids, because they are wide open antenna that cannot damp themselves down. They don't have the filters that would allow them to survive in an abstract fake environment that's artificial through and through. They cannot do it. And so all they can do is feel everything. And now they're feeling what those native cultures must have felt when Europeans showed up for the first time. Neurologic systems that are wide open, that suddenly see an abstract human being in the suffering they are in, will collapse its own neurology, will overwhelm the system. And so the same thing that our autistic are showing today, I believe is very similar to what it must have felt like to be. An Inca, a Mayan, and your habitat, and suddenly see the field disrupted by a stress signal and unbelievable signal that just broke the whole field. So we have stories about floods, but we're still thinking of the flood as a physical wave of water that came over. Is it possible that the flood was actually a neurologic experience of overwhelm that wiped out the entire memory bank? Did we do that when a sector of humanity truly experienced and believed itself to be separate from nature for a moment? Was there an original advantage? I think it has their mutually exclusive. And I think there's a lot of physical evidence that the younger drives impact theory specifically. Is there a long? I agree there's water. I agree water goes up and down. I agree that there's massive floods. But when we talk about the Inca and the Aztec, there was no flood at that time. So what I'm really getting at is it possible there's something other than just physical floods. Can there be energetic threats? So in that case, these settlers coming across, not just the diseases, but just the fact that they were there and the scattered. They're marauders. These people are coming in on horseback. They have muskets. They think they've been kicked out of nature for a thousand years. They're terrified. They're cutting people's arms off. They don't give them their weight and gold. They're breaking the field. Yeah, you've read some of the depicted. There was a bishop or someone traveled with some religious person traveled with Columbus's first crew and wrote these horrific depictions of what they did to the native people that they found. And once they found that these people had gold, they demanded their weight and gold, were cutting their arms off and dashing babies' heads on rocks. They were horrific stuff. I forget the guy who it was, but it was some religious figure who traveled with them. Here he is. Bartolome de las casas. So there's a Spanish lawyer, clergyman, writer, and activist best known for his work as a historian and social reformer. So this is the guy. And so he recorded with the Spanish settlers did. He described in rallied against the atrocities committed by the conquistadors against the indigenous people. Arriving as one of the first Spanish settlers in America, Los Casas initially participated in the colonial economy built on forced indigenous labor, but eventually felt compelled to oppose the abuses committed by European colonists against the indigenous population. So he's one of the reasons why we know that we probably shouldn't be celebrating Columbus Day. Probably wasn't a great guy. No. And I wish it was distant in history, but it's still happening. Yes. The cartels are still doing that down and throughout this whole region that we're talking about. They're still beheading people with machetes and they're still at this. And we as the United States have killed more people than any other people's in history. We have been a machine of death for 250 years like none other. And we've done it in the name of freedom. And we've done it in the name of our God as better than your God. And so we have used these altruistic shields to become the biggest death machine in the world. Incredible medical paper was published just recently in the Lancet. And it looked at the number of global deaths from just US economic sanctions over the last 40 years. And the numbers are on 35 million people dead. 35 million people did not with a single tank, not with a single plane in the air, not a single drone from economic sanctions. And so when we keep telling ourselves that we need money for our own health, for our own houses, we need healthcare insurance, therefore we need money. The assurance of health will never come from a company that doesn't care about you. It will always come from biology. It will always come from an earth that allows you to conceive in your mother's womb. Well, we're in a very reverted system. If the health is dependent upon these organizations whose primary focus is to make the most money possible, that's crazy. And then recommend to you drugs that you absolutely don't need and then hide studies of these drugs or damaging to you. It's crazy unless you think that everything comes from money and then it makes sense. Yeah, well, it makes sense that, you know, the old adage money is the root of all evil. That's when did that get written? Who wrote that? What quotes that from? I know that quote so well. I have no idea who wrote it. Do you have any idea? That's the oldest adage in politics. I wonder who's credited with that. They probably stole it from somebody else. Ha ha ha ha. Does it say the Bible? There you go. Ah, wow. There you go. So that would have been Aramaic. Timothy was speaking Aramaic. Aramaic was a critical language that has been forgotten in our Christian world of New Testament Old Testaments, but most of his written are spoken in Aramaic, not Hebrew or not, Greek. That's the Dead Sea Scrolls. That's all in Aramaic. All in Aramaic. The Dead Sea Scrolls are bananas. And if you look at the language of Aramaic, then we're getting a layer to back from abstraction where there's actually shape to those that are actually transmitting information. There's something about looking at that written language as well that's really compelling. Your intent is that? Yeah, especially like old languages. There's something about like old Hindu. You look at it like ancient Hindu scripts, ancient Tibetans script. Look at Farsi. Yes. Farsi gives me goosebumps. When I read Farsi, when you look at a roomy poem, written in Farsi, you realize he wasn't transmitting a poem. He has so much mathematical truth in a thing that's in the form. He's telling you geometry. He's telling you sacred geometry, the fabric of the universe, in the form of a language that is not symbolic. It's a true depiction of information. It really is interesting that these ancient languages are so beautiful. Ancient Hebrews, another one. It's beautiful. You look at it like, this is wild to look at. And then when you find out that ancient Hebrew, they didn't have numbers. So the letters doubled as numbers. And so there was actually numerical value in words that were missing. When the translations got to Latin and Greek and eventually English, we lost what they were trying. There was something that they were saying that if they could read it, they knew. There was more context to these words that just simply you're talking about a bush. You're talking about a tree. You're talking about a lake. Now there's something to it. It's really, really interesting stuff. Because it's like, why did language get less complex? Has it got more recent? That seems strange. It got more symbolic. So it wasn't necessarily the complexity. That was the problem. It was separated itself from the actual information. So now the word tree is a symbol of something that actually has never been announced. So now we have a word that has no movement in it. It's a noun. It does not express movement. And we now assess 60% of the surface of the earth as a non-living, non-moving thing called a tree. Whereas all native cultures, when you ask them, what is that? They will use a verb. And so what they're saying is that is tree. That's tree. That's tree. Not using a verb. It's all verbs. English was the first language to come around and characterize everything as a noun. And that's why it became the language of science is because science broke its relationship to motion. It wanted everything to be static. Therefore, studyable. Therefore, we could control its variables. And so every time somebody shows you a cancer study, so as you a cardiovascular disease study, I did this for years. We got peer reviewed science, everything else. I was literally having to break every element of nature so that I could prove that my protein, coupe, TF1, was the most important thing for cancer. I had to break every relationship to nature that cancer cell capacity had before I could study that, protein. And so everything that we call trust the science these days is an aberration. It's a symbol of life. It is not life itself. And so science itself has become this noun, structured belief system that has no flow in it. There's no verbing happening in science. It's there's a bacteria. There's a mitochondria. There's a human cell. And we think of those as three different things. Now it is life-lifting. And what it's doing is finding more and more ways to stack complexity, to get more and more light, concentrate a per cubic centimeter. And everything is in one relationship. There is no tree human thing. There's life doing biosis, interconnected relationships. And this is getting very fun now. It's like we actually got the science and how to prove that we were wrong. And so we think, okay, here's human DNA, double helix. Watson and Crick. This is Bible of the biologic kingdom now. Everything comes from DNA. And human DNA is much better than bacterial DNA. Because bacteria just have little circle loops of DNA. We have this beautiful spiraling double helix. This is got to be the best in the land. Then we start in 1992. We set out to decode the human genome. And we thought, well, this is going to be amazing. It's going to be a 40 year project. We knew how many genes we could decode each year. With our genetic sequences. So we thought we're going to have to find 400,000 genes because we knew it by this time that we had 400,000 different proteins in a human body. So we're going to like, well, we're going to need to find a gene for each of those. Because we knew that a gene made an RNA that then made a protein. We knew how it worked. Watson and Crick started us off. 1996 rolls around and the team finishes 25 years ahead of schedule because there were not 400,000 genes. There was 25,000 genes. Everybody laughed. Said, you screwed it up. Three more teams finished over the next two years. The first team was wrong. There was not 25,000 genes. There was 19,000 genes. They had miscounted because they had dual counted some of them. We have less than 20,000 human genes that make a human body. The reason why that's so embarrassing is because a flea has 30,000 genes. A fruit fly has 13,000 genes. So you sit somewhere between a flea and a fruit fly genetically. In fact, you're a little closer to the fruit fly than the flea. That's probably why the flea can jump. 40 times the tight and you can't. But there is something sitting here right in front of us at the genetic level saying to be human is not to be a species. And so what is all that DNA doing? There's so much DNA in the human. How can we have so few of that? How small that information actually coding a gene? And it turns out the numbers 1.5%. 1.5% of the DNA held inside of the human cell is actually coding for a gene. 98.5%, we ended up calling junk DNA. So it was called junk DNA for 25 years. Until somebody started to realize that we were preserving our junk DNA more carefully in passing that to our young than we were the genes. And so there's something super important being preserved by biology from generation generation and all this junk DNA. What we now have found out is the mitochondria. Again, 200 mitochondria, many different species vary on sliving inside a single human cell because they change their genetic sequencing very rapidly. And so you've got maybe a couple hundred different versions of a mitochondria sitting in a single human brain cell. Those, it turns out, are storing their genetic information in the double helix of the human cell. And they go and access inside the human nucleus, the gene that is theirs for their own reproductive capacity and pull RNA out of that, come and decode a protein so they can reproduce every three days for your entire life. The mitochondria are storing their genes in the human cells. This doesn't fit any biologic map of Watson, correct? You're starting to realize there's a collective expression of in the antenna of being human. And that's what DNA ends up being is it is actually an antenna system that's taking in information and then unwinding and rewinding to reveal different genetic sequences to all of life within a human ecosystem. So we are now convinced, genetically, that it's impossible that a human is a species that would be somewhere between a flea and a fruit fly. The magic of being a human is in the 98.5% of our DNA that doesn't code for a human gene. That is likely coding for all of life. That's what it means to be a keystone species. Genetically is we are the life. We are the life record. It is happening through us in us around us. Life is ascending through a biologic matrix that we call a human body, but it is not a species it's an ecosystem. And 70 years ago we started the antibiotic era and we started wiping out the diversity inside of a human body. And so the toxicity of herbicides and pesticides have very little to do to their impact on a human cell. It has to do with diversity inside of a human body. And so the toxicity of herbicides and pesticides have very little to do to their impact on a human cell. It has to do with the impact on the entire ecosystem that's expressing itself through this massive genomic library that is so big we can't even wrap our head around. If we strung you and to end, you've got around 50 to 70 trillion human cells, each of those cells has about a meter of DNA bundled inside of every nucleus of every cell. If we strung you and we could wrap Joe around the circumference of the planet right at the equator 2 million times. Your DNA wraps around planet Earth 2 million times. The amount of genetic information in there is plenty to hold a record and a code for all of life on Earth. It will not surprise me that in the coming years, we start to realize the entire code is here. We found out just recently that you could take the human genome and re-arrangent in 178 puzzle pieces and spell pig perfectly. The genome is this warehouse of life of Earth. It's not belonging to a human species. And I believe that this is where we are going to really spend a lot of our new excitement around what it means to be human as we start to move into our next era. The antibiotic era is coming to an end. It's crippled our biology and our fertility point where we cannot continue it. Well, how do we move past it? We become biologic again. We're going to end the chemical antibiotic era and we're going to move into the biological renaissance. You talked a couple of times about this moment of remembering the renaissance that we can all point to. Southern explosion and math, science, art, massive. It doesn't make any sense what was happening 50 years before the renaissance and then the renaissance and what would happen the next 200 years. It was a parametric explosion of creativity of human capacity, human mind, capacity, creativity. What is it going side with? Remembrance. The antenna opened up. And so this is the moment we're about to re-enter now as we're going into the next renaissance. And it's happening in people like Dr. Ebrine Green. Out of each, he's suddenly remembering the technology of the hieroglyphs. He's remembering the technology of waveform and its influence on biology. He's not in there inventing this stuff. I've sat with him in cafes and I'll say, well, what about this disease here? And he goes just for a split second into his antenna, draws the shape on the napkin and slides it across the table. He's not producing this stuff. He's remembering this stuff. The antenna is opening up on humankind right now and autism is our supercharged version of that. The autistic neurology is so wide open that we're going to have no choice but to start to remember everything. A kid flies over New York once can remember the entire scape. That's what our antenna is capable of doing. Autistic children are not abnormally genius. They are minds that are unfiltered and bodies that are still in a context of nature. They have not separated. When I sit with an indigenous elder in Africa, the coy people, the coy have been around for 300,000 years. They have an unbroken oral history for 100,000 years with exception of that blank point, 11,000 to 7,000 years ago. And so they also suffered the amnesia. But 100,000 years of normal tradition is spectacular. Twice as long as anything else on the planet, Aboriginal 40,000, Native Americans, 40,000, deep-rooted 30,000. 100,000 years of uninterrupted information, you sit with one of these elders and they have all of the experiential traits that the autistic community can go to the hill. They can communicate telepathically with the forest system. They can tell you what the Panthers are saying. They can tell you what the moon cycle is saying, not because they've studied it because they're literally just listening to the information. They're receiving the information. This new Renaissance is beginning is a biological reconnection that is going to be available to us. So much information that we're not gonna sit here on, listening to podcasts of wondering scratching our heads about how did the pyramids happen? Like, where are you gonna start doing it again? Because there's a sort of understanding of how water and carbon work, how much work you can do instantaneously when you master the ability of the antenna of a human being to organize matter. The pyramids were not built, they were organized, if that makes sense. I believe that when you feel what's happening inside of pyramid, this was all an energetic expression. This is a frequency wavelength expression of something that was energetically polarity here. It's an emergent reality that is made by biology when it feels the whole field. Where but how? How do they put it together? So the people that are remembering this, that are starting to feel what's this, they did it through mind. They did it literally through transmitting information into the natural materials. And so they would cut with their mind with frequency as a transmitter to cut the stones, to organize stones, to move antigravity, everything else. And you're bringing this to everybody's attention all the time. These UAPs and everything else that are rushing around here, gravity only exists in one plane of reality here. And so there's antigravity experiences that are the process of waves interrupting the relationship between two bodies. That's gravity. So gravity's the distance plus the mass, or the mass squared plus the distance between the two bodies there. And so you need two bodies in a relationship to create the phenomenon of gravity. Not surprisingly, you can put a waveform between those two that interrupt that relationship. And so when you start to think this way, then UAPs and your pyramid all start to make sense, like we're so Newtonian in our current belief system, we've forgotten how to believe in quantum physics because we became so committed to the mechanical reality that Newton offered us. Newton said this happens, therefore this happens. Everything is action reaction, action reaction. Maybe, or everything is creation. Is the right relationship between action or reaction actually polarity instead of one thing reacting to the other. What do you think is fueling this current renaissance? I think it's us getting to the breaking point of human neurology. We can no longer sustain the stories. We took so much energy for us to all believe the stories together. Everything you've ever talked about on this podcast is pushing and you, I don't even know if you know you're doing this. You are pushing the human neurology to its breaking point with every podcast. You're challenging the human mind to stretch past as capacity to keep the old stories alive. You're breaking minds. That's why we love you. I have a great affection for all people who do this. And you're one of these people doing this. You are a breaker of false things. And you have an incredible device that you use all the time, which is curiosity. It just won't let you sit still. You're too fucking curious. I love this about you because this is why I was excited to come to your podcast not so I could talk about anything so I could feel you. I wanted to feel what this feels like. Because this has to be one of the most freaking curious motherfuckers on the planet. What a gift to sit in front of a curious human being. There's nothing that feels better to a human neurology than sensing the other. The impregnation that Dr. A Reem Green mentioned there, that field effect of two fields that come into presence together and imprint and pregnant the other one. It's your curiosity that's got everybody paying attention. We love it because you're not here to tell us you know everything. In fact, you keep it challenging is that we don't know anything. You've said it five times on this one. We don't know. That feels so good to a neurology. We don't know. Well, I also think many people are curious. And they also want to hear from other people that are curious as well because we live in this weird world where we've been deceived into thinking that people have short attention spans. It's not true. Like, your attention span can be hijacked by short attention span media. But it doesn't mean you have a short attention span. Most people that I know, if there's a thing that they like, there's a thing that they're interested in, they have immense attention for it. Whether it's a sporting event or a concert that goes to, there's a lot of things that you have a lot of attention for. It's just, it has to actually resonate with you. And people love when other people are curious because they're curious. Most people are curious. All humans are curious. Yeah. All humans. After a job. There's something wrong. You're not human. Well, you just blunted. Life has thrown you some curveballs. And I didn't know how to duck. Well, you can definitely turn a curiosity off into human. No question. You just separate them from nature long enough. And you drug them. That's just a symptom of nature deficit disorder, I think. Yeah, I think you're right. Yeah. And I think that's why one of the best remedies for people that are depressed is physical exercise. Get them out of nature. Yeah. Get them go out in nature. Go hike and get them percentages. The same thing that makes you feel alive gets your blood pumping. Because that's what's supposed to happen. That's how you're supposed to exist. It's been shown three nights of camping outside. Never go inside for three days. Your immune system at reverse 30 years. Your T cells turn back on. All your stem cells activate. We are living a blunted human experience because we separate ourselves from nature. Did you ever watch the Werner Herzog documentary, Happy People? No. It's really fantastic. It's about these people that live in Siberia. And they're so happy. There's like no mental illness. And it's called Happy People Life and the Tiga. So it's all these people that are off the Tiga River. And these people live a subsistence lifestyle. They're hunt and they fish. And that's all they do. They ride around on snowmobiles. They build cabins. They live with their dogs. Sounds like my life. Yeah. It's quite fascinating because these people don't have any mental illness. They're all happy. They're all laughing. They get together. They drink and they have parties. And they eat food together and they're laughing. And then they go about their work. And then they exist completely embedded in nature. They are nature. They're a part of it. And I would offer they're not working at all. They're creating. They're living. They're creating. They're living. This act, this was awesome. This was really fascinating. We got to do this again. Can I show you a picture of how we got here? Oh, yeah. Show me a picture of how we got here. All right. I want to go there that next slide because it's going to orient us to what's actually happening in the kind right now. And so we have established clearly that nature is the context of it connected, interconnected life. And so I can go back one slide. Oh, yeah, that one will work. Yeah. So I go ahead and that one. And so this is looking at the effect of glyphosate on ATP, which is energy production per cubic centimeter. And so this is looking at that. And this is a vehicle meaning control. And so you're producing about 1,600 piquimoles per milligram of ATP. These are the mitochondria turning carbon chains of carbohydrates and fatty acids back into light energy. And so you've got this massive energy potential. And then within 30 minutes of introduction to just one part per million of glyphosate, which is a common amount that you would see in a lot of your chemical-formed food systems. We've seen this all the way down to 10 parts per billion, which is 1,000 times smaller quantity here. And so at these levels, though, you see a sudden collapse of the ATP production. And so now imagine in 1976, we start eating food with residues of this chemical. And suddenly we shut down light per cubic centimeter for the first time in human history, more effectively than ever probably. And so I'm going to show you on a population scale of billions of people what happens when you start to undermine the light per cubic centimeter. And so you start at obesity in 1980s, four years after introduction of this chemical to our food system. From there, you end up seeing the collapse of the metabolism that we call diabetes. Diabetes is a condition that stems from the obesity in the liver. Obesity is not because you're eating too many calories. It's because the calories can no longer be burned at the mitochondrial level, which is where they should be ending up. So obesity happens when you're eating 2,000, 3,000 calories a day and can only burn 1,500 calories a day, because your mitochondria have been poisoned by an antibiotic. That's killing the bacteria in the soil, just as they're killing the bacteria inside your cells, which are mitochondria. And so as we started seeing these increasing levels of glyphosate heading through the system, you end up with diabetes within a few years, because fat stored in the liver, which is where everything gets redirected to if it can't burn in the cell, well, ultimately give you insulin resistance. As you get insulin resistance, insulin cannot get the carbohydrates into the cell anyways. And so now you're starving twice. You can't burn it at the mitochondrial level, and you can't get the sugar there. By the 1990s, we started to develop widespread allergies. The most energy demanding system in the body is the immune system. As the immune system started to fail in its metabolic capacity, relationships started to fail. And we suddenly started to develop a reactive relationship to the foods we were eating. Wheat 1992 starts causing a mass of allergy to gluten, and the gliaden compound in there interacts with glyphosate to synergistically fracture this metabolic capacity. We don't have gluten sensitivity. We have a metabolic collapse that's called glyphosate poisoning. I'll show you the period of your science. We publish from that. Within a couple of years of allergy, which is basically overwhelmed with the immune system to your environment, you ultimately end up with autoimmune disease. This is where your body no longer can sense what's outside and what's inside and your body becomes the enemy. So autoimmune disease is a steady destruction of your own body by your own immune system that can't tell it's you. You've lost cellular identity. Within a couple of years of that, we developed neurologic conditions, ADHD and autism our children, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's and our adults, as well as MS ALS and all the other neurologic general conditions in the middle. In a two year period, they all went logarithmic. By the early 2000s, we're starting to realize we're in the middle of a cancer epidemic. This is when I was at the University of Virginia in developing chemotherapy. And so cancer epidemic launches. Initially, it's really obviously, chemia's lymphoma's all these bone marrow things and it's pretty soon by the late 2000s. It's solid tumors. It's prostate cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer, all of them going logarithmic. And so just this explosion of cancer. And that's not because there was more carcinogens around. It's because there was less life. There was less light per cubic centimeter. So every time we go down this ladder, we're seeing less metabolic capacity, less light per cubic centimeter. By the early 2010s, we see this collapse of fertility around the world. Today, to that 110 countries around the world are below the fertility rate necessary for replacement. 110 countries below. United States is way below 1.6. I said 2.1. In fertility goes global. By the early 2010s, endocrine disruption and genomic instability starts to occur. So these are things like methylation defects and we can no longer detox the body. So we develop stories about Lyme disease and all these conditions of infections. When it factors as toxicity, they can no longer escape the body because we don't have the repair and detox mechanisms there because the mettoplasm, the life, light, energy per cubic centimeter is diminishing. Finally, we see the emergence of gender dysregulation happening in the womb. And so this is probably started in pockets around the world a couple decades ago, but by the 2010s, mid-15s, we see this happening regularly. And what's happening here is the biology is staying at neutral. Every fetus ever developed in the womb of a woman starts at neutral, neither male nor female. It starts at neutral and then around 90 days of embryologic development, it requires an explosion of energy from the mitochondria within it. And it takes that 90 days really, not to do anything at the hemile, but you're growing the garden. You're growing the microbial garden inside the human to get ready for this massive energy discharge that's gonna polarize the biology to become male or female. So to move from neutral to male or neutral to female requires this huge energetic thing that we call puberty. So the first puberty happens at 90 days in the womb. There's another one that happens late phase in the row. And then there's a more typical one you see around four, five years old where you start to see differentiation of some of the physical features of boys and girls. And then the classic one around 10 to 13 years old. And then another one around 18 to 21. Then a final burst that happens in your late 20s. So we go through all of these huge energetic discharges that create polarity that move you away from neutral to one or the other of the sexes. And this isn't like sex as a preference. This is literal neurologic expression. This is the neurologic, the deep brain, forming the behavioral traits of a human being to become male traits, female traits. If you've ever had two kids, I don't know if you got kids, but I've got a daughter and a son there, both adults now and married and thriving. But when you watch a kid develop as unbelievable what's pre-programmed in there. The male traits can appear by the time they're six months, nine months old, they're doing something different than their sister did at that same phase. So what we're talking about is this deep programming of the biology as it goes away from center. By the time we had this much glyphosate in the system, so this whole cascade from 1976 to 2020, you're looking at this yellow line that's traveling up there, that's the amount of glyphosate sprayed into our global environment. Today we spray three billion to four billion pounds of glyphosate into our global soils. Three billion pounds of anything is disgusting, but this is unbelievable amount of antibiotic. That much antibiotic has reduced the metabolic life force of our planet and our species to the point where we have a chronic disease explosion by the 1990s and infertility collapse of the species and then gender dysregulation. So this is how a species goes extinct as it loses its metabolic capacity to concentrate light energy. Light per cubic centimeter is how life occurs. Biosis is the interconnected relationships that make life possible. You undermine those relationships. You decrease the number of relationships per cubic centimeter and you start to see this pattern evolving of a decrease in repair and regeneration. And so your rate of repair versus your rate of injury suddenly goes out of whack and a previous rate of injury of eating bread. Gluten has a slight impact on your gut behavior. slight decrease there and you lose fidelity and the whole thing starts to degrade. So I've spent the last 15 years of my life building systems with people around us that are already tuning into this wider antenna to say, what does biology look like fully supported? So we've created this online programs called Journey, which is Journey and Humanity back into natural systems to fully support not only the biology and the way it repairs or generates, but fully open up the antenna to remember what we were supposed to be doing here. To remember what it feels like to be between heaven and earth, be floating in this cosmic stew of curiosity, creativity, productivity. That's what's gonna make humans humans again. So when we allow our children to become between again and start to stopping programmed in a machine-like behavior and start to open up their antenna, we can decide to do that as a society and proactively go about this or autism will emerge to the point where one and three children will have autism by 2035 and we do this anyways. We are going to develop a neurology to escape our mechanical history, our anti-nature, antibiotic nature is going to come to hand, because bodies are always gonna win. Nature's always going to reinvent herself out of whatever stressors pushing on her at that moment. Right now human behavior is pushing on nature. If we stop doing that and we let nature come back in, we get to be part of the solution. We become part of it. We step right back into the right relationship with the Keystone species. If people wanna see more of this and they wanna read more what was your website? Zach Bush MD is the website and the book is biological elegance and you're gonna only find it there. We're not putting out an Amazon, we're not asking anybody to go after money or abstract systems. We're asking for engagement. I don't want followers, I want builders, I want creators, I want the co-creators that are gonna come build this new world with us. This is my excitement and passion. I think you're doing a great job pushing us there. Well thank you and I know you're gonna get a lot of people that check this out now. I'm very excited. This is a fun conversation. Let's definitely do another one. That looks really good. All right, all right. Thank you very much.