Sam Harris ladies and gentlemen. All right. There we go. We're live to the world Yeah, I do I read yeah, fuck that I don't do that anymore. Oh, I do it before or after That way the conversation isn't garbled by five minutes of ads. Just got annoying. Yeah No, it's a good call. Yeah, well, there's two different versions of this the one that goes up on YouTube So the one that goes on YouTube has no ads in it unless YouTube puts up ads And the one that goes on podcasts or iTunes rather has the ads Right, so there you go. So we could just talk. Yeah. Well good to see you. Yeah, absolutely It's an interesting time. I know you're at MMA fan. You know about the John Jones situation You know I've heard rumors about it, but I don't actually know how far the misbehavior runs So he got stripped of his title today Wow yesterday actually they announced a new title fight between Daniel Cormier and Anthony rumble Johnson they'll be fighting for the now vacated title John Jones is likely going in jail What's what it was a hit run crashing to a pregnant woman allegedly I should say It broke her arm she was rushed to the hospital But pregnant, you know, it's gotta be terrifying for her We got car crash and smashed by a guy who runs a red light and then flees a scene in the crime So he drove away ran away ran away cars wrecked. Wow. Yeah, the cars wrecked You see the images of her car. I couldn't imagine unless he was driving fucking Humvee on how he could get away It's pretty bad. Yeah. Was it a DUI or was we don't know because he disappeared for like 24 hours at least probably even more a couple days. I think he disappeared for Which you know obviously the speculation would be that he was on something that he would worry about getting tested for for 24 hours or 48 hours whatever it was yeah, I think of how desperate a move and Happily some move that is to run away from the car that you're leaving in the scene which is obviously traceable to you It's not like worse you're getting out of the problem worse and you're leaving an injured person there to Yeah, it's it's disaster, but it's worse because he actually ran back to the car Got stuff out of the car and then ran away again. Oh man. I deed by a cop Yeah disaster all across the board But not what we hear for no, but I know you're an MMA fan. So no, we have it, but bring it up Yeah, I actually have a question for you though, and close topic And we have a list of questions that as you know, we got from Twitter, but McGregor or Aldo Who knows that's my answer for all the every fight It's gonna be interesting though, right? It's gonna be a very interesting fight We've never seen McGregor in with anybody remotely as talented as Joe's a Aldo not even remotely It doesn't mean he can't win because everybody that McGregor has been in with he's steamrolled You know steamrolled really talented guys like Dustin poor. Yeah, and just he's fucking good Yeah, he's really good He's really good really confident and he really fucks with people's heads He's so confident and so good at talking and so There's so much charisma about him that I think it's intimidating to his opponents I think when they get in there with him his just overwhelming belief and belief is a Incredibly powerful thing if you really truly believe that you are the best and you say it Your opponents have to wonder because everybody's everybody questions themselves especially in the world of fighting because you're no one is if you were born a rhino okay and You were about to get into a fight with a parakeet You'd absolutely be confident because you've always been a rhino and that parakeet is just a parakeet that parakeet's fucked but a person is a is a work in progress and not just from your fighting style, but your ability to manage your own mind Your ability to manage insecurities and anxieties just the existential angst that comes with being a human being That's navigating their way through this complicated world. There's variables There's con there's days you're up and days you're down and then you add into that martial arts and you don't get good at martial arts Unless you get your ass kicked. There's only one way through I mean you can be one of those John Jones types It's unbelievably physically talented and have a leg up on a lot of people but even John had to get his ass kicked You had to he had to he had to compete in wrestling against guys who were better than him He had to learn martial arts. You had a spar. I mean there's gonna be days you're up and days you're down There's no way but so when you get in there with a guy like Connor McGregor. Yeah, we went out here to take part All that crazy he's just like fuck this guy's overwhelming He's like if you can put on a show like that So you can put your peacock feathers up and and puff up your back hairs Get those bristles up nice and high like a cat when it's angry and hunt your back up like there's a reason why that exists in nature Yeah, well, it's beyond what Muhammad Ali used to do. He's just taking it to it's gonna be fascinating Psychologically to see him when he loses if when that day comes it'll come eventually Well, he has lost he's lost who got him Joe Duffy who's now in the UFC and he's very good This guy Joe Duffy is fucking very good, but he had he lost since no his rise to no He has not lost since he's been in the UFC and He but in all fairness the the one style that he has not faced which is the most difficult style He's never faced a wrestler He's never faced a guy who can get in there and get him to the ground and outwork him and just sap his energy Where wrestlers they get on top of you and you can't get them off and you get exhausted trying and they've their punch in the face and Elba in the face and punching you in the body and constantly trying to strangle you and then The round is up and you get up and the next round comes and they do it again Boom you're on your back. Boom. You're getting punched in the face. He's never faced a guy like that before all the fighters He's faced have chosen to stand up with him and he's a very high level boxer He was amateur champion as a boxer. He's got very good Chugitsu skills very good moy Thai very good everything We just never seen him against a top flight wrestler, but although it's not that right nope All those not that but although is a world class Brazilian Jiu Jitsu fighter like people who are not aware of his ground skills Although beat a guy named Kobrina in an actual Jiu Jitsu competition Wow, which is very high level Yeah, Kobrina's world championship caliber So Aldo is gonna present him with some things inside the octon that he's never faced before however although has been fighting professionally for a very long time and Like a race car that doesn't ever get its tires changed or doesn't ever get its suspension Redun you're as a human being your body can literally only take so many miles There's only so many times you can go to war there's so many so many sparring sessions You can take part in only so many wrestling sessions. You can take part in There's just a certain amount your body can take and we don't know when that number is Right when when you reach that number though, that's it You know, there's no turning back unless you're using testosterone or growth hormone or some some things that turn your body into Superhuman sort of experiment Yeah, unless he's doing that which we've seen from Vtor Belfer like Vtor Belfer It's the only guy who actually got better as he got older right talking my guy from UFC 12 miracle of science It's exactly what you're gonna. It's absolutely fascinating and you you can't completely discount his training Because his training is what made him better but his ability to recover was essentially supernatural You know, he's fighting in the same car that Jones supposed to fight he's fighting Chris Wiedman But now Nevada has made testosterone replacement therapy illegal So his last three performances which are some of the best performances of his career The knockout of Michael Bisping the knockout of Luke Rockhold and the knockout of Dan Henderson those were all while he was on testosterone So yeah, okay. Yeah, so things get weird now. I see what a 37 year old man really looks like You know optimizing his hormones his best. He can naturally hopefully Yeah, right well 37 sounds younger. It sounds like yeah. Yeah. I would like that level of testosterone Well, you know, it's also the the level of testosterone of a regular 37 year old man versus the level of testosterone Someone going through a camp right when you're going through those camps It's absolutely brutal like John Jones and Daniel Cormier both got tested randomly before their their Title fight and their testosterone levels were so low People were wondering like hey, maybe these guys are doing something maybe they were doing steroids and that made their testosterone levels drop But what's most likely it's testosterone to epithe's a restaurant. It was very low testosterone levels Most likely it's just the brutality of training. It's so hard. It's so hard to do You you're showing up every day exhausted and your muscles are sore and your body's exhausted You got to go through it all again tomorrow And you get in kicked and punched and you lift and weights and you're doing sprints and you jump it up on boxes and then the next day All over again and your body just can't keep up especially when you get into your 30s. Yeah All right, well, that's the answer to that. I will watch it with interest. It's gonna be very exciting Let me know if you want to go it's in Vegas way. I yeah, I would we'll talk about that Yeah, yeah, we'll talk about yeah, same Harris goes to the vights as a Neuroscientist to disturb you at all when you're seeing these guys getting getting their heads rattled Do you when you're you're very aware of what's going on behind the scenes in the actual brain itself? Yeah I just I just talked about this on my blog with this this writer Jonathan got y'all who I Told you about at one point. Yeah, he's I'm trying to get him on the podcast. Yeah, working out the date. Yeah, he's great And so we had a conversation which which we published the transcript of but he's got this book The professor in the cage where he's he's an academic he's an English professor and he decided to get really into MMA and and fight a real you know cage match and so it's interesting book and so he and I were talking about The discomfort we have it's just seeing people get brain damage in real time for our amusement and Yeah, it does make me uncomfortable, but I'm you know, it's also part of what's Thrilling I mean, you know, I'm as thrilled by the prospect of a knockout too It's kind of it's not even a conscious thrill is just when when things start going that way you feel your own you know testosterone or something kick in and But I am his recommendation was That and I'm sure he's not the only person who's thought of this he thought the gloves should come off and the gloves are making it Making it realistic to just send endless overhand rights and other crazy punches You know full force into people's heads for for you know 30 minutes Whereas if you if you were to if it was a bare-knuckle fight You couldn't really it'd be fewer knockouts, but you couldn't deliver that kind of Brain trauma because you'd be breaking your hands now obviously there are things like elbows and knees and kicks and so people would still be getting hurt But what do you think about that was that change? I'm a big advocate of that and I've been said it many times I've said on the air I've talked about it on this podcast I think it's very unrealistic the way you're allowed to not just put gloves on But also wrap your hands up tape your wrists your wrist is a joint it flexes and when you tape it up and they you know Get that sucker nice and tight then it becomes something completely unrealistic You if you punch someone with your hand without a glove on and with no hand wraps It's way easier to hyper extend your wrist or twister tweak it or break it Your hand breaks you hit someone in the forehead four heads are far harder than your knuckles are most likely You're gonna break it unless you hit them on the nose in the eye on the jaw You're you're gonna hurt your hand and you can only throw so many punches like that Even just hitting a heavy bag without being wrapped up you just screw up your wrist in your hands Yeah, you have to really learn how to tighten everything up And you have to really strengthen your wrist and you have to strengthen your your your hand muscles It's a it's a completely different thing which is why the Caratika's the Karate students would hit a maki water Which is a board that's wrapped with rope and the idea behind punching that board wrapped and rope over and over again As you develop these intense calluses all over the front two knuckles Which is really the only way you're supposed to hit someone those are the knuckles that are reinforced by the wrist Whereas the where the pinky finger is and the ring finger those knuckles are not reinforced nearly as well Especially if you have a larger hands like your hand like my hand spreads out past my wrist It doesn't go in a straight line from my wrist to the pinky It actually goes out to the side. Yeah, so that that that knuckles not enforced by anything if you punch someone with a boxing glove on with that Knuckle you're fine right if you punch someone with an MMA glove on it's less supported if you punch someone bear knuckle You are very likely to break your hand if you punch someone full force on the forehead and you hit the with the pinky knuckle You're very likely to break your hand. It's a high possibility Also it it also impedes your grappling to have those gloves on right Yeah, so huge issue my cello Garcia fought in Japan I believe it was had the skies back and couldn't finish them right It was just grabbing the gloves and gloves Grab his gloves holding onto the gloves the guy just worked on his defense and the gloves you with Like Marcelo's specialty is the rear naked choke and the rear naked choke a big part of it is sliding your hands Underneath the guy's chin like and you have the glove there There's all this extra padding that makes it very difficult to get your hand in the proper position to form it to get the choke right Right in the back of the head. It's also very difficult to get the glove in the back of the head So a lot of times you'll see in an MMA fight guys who use poor technique and still finish the choke will they'll use their palm on the top or the Back of the head because they can't do this right they can't do this movement where it's actually The back of your hand that should touch the back of your opponent's head It's all like to put someone who doesn't understand you just this is very complicated, but I agree with them I think that gloves would help a lot. Yeah, I get the gloves. No gloves. Yeah, I think would help a lot but I think it's also it would be it would be beneficial for everyone to have some intensely Comprehensive scans done on a regular basis. I don't know if that would be prohibitive Financially, I don't know how much that would cost. I don't know how much that would even reveal because apparently one of the things that is Troublesome for these NFL players is when they die and they do autopsies on them and they they reveal damage that they had no idea before I mean, I don't know how much like an FMRR and MRI can detect When it comes to actual damage well it can but to what end because you know you're getting it if you're just gonna Being a job where you have to get hit in the head forget about competition just training I mean these guys train hard as you know and so they're just gonna hit in the head to prepare them to get hit in the head in the the match You're just You it's not even it's like smoking. It's like it's the causal linkage between getting hit in the head and brain trauma is 100% it's just a matter of just a matter of how much you can you individually by dint of luck can take until you actually have damage that matters So you know, I you know, I obviously haven't had an experience anything like an MMA fighter, but I regret all the Head injuries I took just training as a I mean now in martial arts. I just don't let myself get hit in the head But in the teenager I got hit in the head of air mount and I played soccer and headed the soccer ball And that always felt totally weird, you know that you had a some did you play soccer? Mm-hmm You know you had a soccer ball you immediately get a kind of a rusty taste in your mouth, you know And it's just unlike anything else that happened that day except the other time you got hit in the head And isn't that crazy that no one would ever think that soccer? Yeah, and so are another give you traumatic brain injury. It's because it doesn't knock you out We have this until recently I say like in the last couple decades We had this erroneous assumption that you had to get a knock out if you had to get knocked out to brain damage Right, but she's a little thugs just a little like I was talking to a doctor Who said that water skiing can give you brain damage? Water skiing just The boxing oh, just the bouncing just wave riding, you know You're doing that like that bouncing that stuff can give you brain damage right like your brain gets rattled around the side of your head The connective tissue dislodges and it doesn't heal back Yeah, well, I mean so I spoke about this with Jonathan too that there's obviously all of these sports and Just you know forms of recreation that that entails some risk of injury and death, right? And so and people should be able to do these things informed of the risks and so you know cheerily of an example He brought up his cheerleading him cheerleader sometimes hit the ground and just you know fantastically injured so all these things that don't necessarily seem like high testosterone high risk you know just foolishly reckless sports can be very dangerous and Skines very dangerous to and rock climbing there things that are That are even just non violent that don't entail much risk of injury until they kill you like you know free solo rock climbing You're climbing everything's fine. Maybe you've hurt your hands in the past But then all of a sudden you're dead because you've just went up 500 feet without a rope and fell so There's all these kinds of risks that people can take but the problem That the problem that I think differentiates striking sports from even something like football is that the the progress in the sport is synonymous with the damage so you know if you and I are are in a boxing match or you know kickboxing match hitting each other the every instance of Successfully degrading each other's performance with respect to you know the head He's one of the head is synonymous with delivering injury to the brain It's not like it's not incidental like in football where you know I was trying to tackle you I was not hoping to hurt your brain, but you know you fell fell down hard and it did this is just you know a trade of brain damage and Yeah, so it's it's Interesting ethically, you know, I don't know again I think people should be free to do it, but I think people you know We should be informed about it and I would I would certainly vote to Pull the gloves off and make it more it would just make it more realistic combatively too. It's insofar as you want to see what works combatively I'm more interested to see what two people can do just with their bare hands Then when they've got these you know most certainly and you know One of the interesting things has been brought up online over the last couple days About this John Jones situation is this irrational erratic behavior Does this imply That or does it somehow or another is it is it correlated to brain damage? I mean certainly can be can be right? I mean that's one of the issues with brain damage impulsive behavior Yeah, especially in the frontal lobes Because you your frontal lobes regulate your You know emotional and behavioral outbursts and when those connections when either the the cell bodies or the connections between the gray matter And the frontal lobes and your your limbic system and your basal ganglion and other areas in the brain When that gets damaged. Yeah, you you have these Classic impulse control problems where you just you know You just reach out and you know grab the woman standing next to you at Starbucks because you you know couldn't dampen the The impulse to do it, you know, that's hard for people to grasp because every I mean and again This should be really clear. I am without a doubt Not trying to let him off the hook what he did was horrible If it was someone in my family that he hit with that car. I would be unbelievably furious I'm incredibly disappointed in him. I think the UFC absolutely did the right thing in Stripping him of his title and I think law enforcement is going to do the right thing by putting him in jail I mean they're going to this is just you can't do that you can't hit someone with a car and leave the scene of the crime that it is a crime Yeah, um, but There are things that people do because they have brain damage and that's where the real question comes up is Obviously they're responsible ultimately for their own actions, but what is it that's responsible for making them do that action? We had this long conversation once two podcasts ago. I think it was about free will and determinism Yeah These are variables that come into play when it comes to the ultimate actions that you choose to do the ultimate movements that you choose to take the the thought processes are Unquestionably dependent upon the brain itself and if the brain is getting damaged and if we have proven that some of the Some of the issues with people that have brain damage is impulse control You got to wonder man when you see fighters do wild crazy shit. How much of that is dude again? Just Bumped in the fucking head all yeah, yeah, except for me that it breaks down a little differently because the My views on free will Change the picture of how I view moral culpability in those situations so that so even if Even if we knew his brain wasn't damaged right so he let's say had never got hit in the head or we did a scan on him before the car accident and We saw and it's the perfect scan. It's the scan of you know that we'll have 50 years from now if we don't fuck ourselves up and So we just know that he's got a totally healthy brain By whatever metric of health we have but He got into that situation behaved exactly as irresponsibly as he did His behavior still Is the result of causes that he as an agent isn't ultimately responsible for now This has has certain This has sort of the punchline which has certain consequences But one of the consequences is not that We can't respond to his misbehavior that he can't that we can't put him in jail that we can't that we couldn't have intervened at any Point along the way to have made him a better person and it's that there are there are there are There's a difference between voluntary and involuntary behavior even if it's all just Causily propagating from the you know the moment of the big bang But I do view it as I think the brain damage case is a little bit of a red herring because It's on some level. It's all just caught unconscious causes that The the person himself can't ultimately account for so you know there are situations in which he I'm sure in his life behaved like a man. You know he behaved totally responsibly and there's situations where he behaved like this And he can't account for the difference in those two cases he can't account for why I mean let's just say it's a fact that if he had gotten One hour more sleep the night before and hadn't had a fight with his girlfriend Had you know his blood sugar level was a little bit higher and Had had you know hadn't had a friend who had told him to drink one more beer which he Normally would have resisted but couldn't because of all the other factors. I just mentioned And that is the difference that made the difference that caused him to be this You know total misfit on the road Um Whereas if you had just tweaked those dials a little bit, you know no fight with a girlfriend You know one more bite of food in the morning He would have been he would have acted as you would have acted in that case say so ultimately Let's say that's true than that than that there's something There's a kind of bad luck component to to all of this creeping in there's a there's a concept of moral luck which is Due to the philosopher Thomas Nagel who who's done a lot of interesting work in half of which I really agree with and some of it I don't but the concept of moral luck is that it does seem unfair That there are many situations in which people Create immense harms doing stuff that You and I have gotten away with you know I mean they're not they're not worse people than we are like you know they you know you you and I have both driven When we shouldn't have driven you know we had one beer too many or there were there are things that we did or you're You're looking at you look at a text You know when you know you should never look at your phone when you're driving but you decide I'm expecting a text and you look and there are people who are looking at that text right now And just you know killing some child in the crosswalk right and their lives are going to be ruined and You know they're going to go to prison and they're exactly like you and me right so there's there's a there's an aspect of luck here but that the luck actually propagates backward into The kind of brain you have the kind of upbringing you had the kind of parents you had the kind of you The fact that you got hit in the head as hard as you did or didn't and no one has made themselves so I'm a little bit more I'm less judgmental about some of these things given my view of free will but I'm not It's not that I'm not interested in making The interventions that would make a difference you know whatever we could have done to have gotten him to behave differently We should have done Whatever we should need to do now to him to make society better and to make him better and to Get restitution for the woman what we should do all that and so this doesn't tail locking up Certain dangerous people and it doesn't tail um You know we have to keep keep ourselves safe from people who are going to reliably act badly and um I don't know where he falls on that spectrum, but it's just it's not the difference between The feeling you get when you hear oh it was brain damage I sort of have that feeling about everything You know if we if we if he gets a brain scan if he goes to trial now he gets a brain scan And we and we find that his brain is just massively damaged in all the right areas That would have eroded his impulse control Right that would seem to let him off the hook a little bit. It would he would he would look like Someone who was unlucky More than he would look like a bad person Right and I sort of see bad people as unlucky too I mean I recognize that there are certain people who are classically bad people their psychopaths who you just Not only can you not rely on them you you can rely on them to be Bad actors, you know, so you you have to you have to be in a posture of self defense with respect to these people, but um I do view them as unlucky on some fundamental level That's I I share that thought and I share that thought much more as I get older and I Have a more philosophical Point of view when it comes to people that live in impoverished neighborhoods Especially like this Baltimore thing that was going on We're just having this conversation the other day about or last podcast about these kids that rob the RT reporter And if you've seen the video of it there's an RT reporter interviewing these kids that are on the street that are causing all this Havoc and Baltimore and they start swarming this reporter and then they rob her and take her person to go off and like Imagine being one of those kids imagine being in that environment Imagine being you want to talk about determinants imagine being born into this crime-ridden environment Who knows what kind of family you have who knows what kind of influences you have who knows what kind of experiences that you've had That you've had to react to and protect yourself from and developed this hardened thick skin and attitude and Also survival instincts and and you also your your family or the people that you reliably count on are the people that you hang out in the street You're gang when that is the big thing with gang violence one of the big things of gang violence one of the dirty secrets of it is it a lot of it Comes from broken homes when people don't have a strong family environment and people they can count on and trust They don't have anybody who is there for them and then they find someone that's there for them in the gang The gang becomes their new family and they will do anything to to keep that love to reinforce that love Yeah, and we all want to look at it as their criminals. They should be home by 10 There's a curfew on the street. It's completely unrealistic and if you were in their point of view or if you were in their life Rather and if you saw it through their point of view you would probably see exactly What they see you would you would look at life the way they look at life also There's another variable here, which is just the influence of mob behavior people will behave in crowds in ways that they wouldn't Otherwise why is that what is that what's this the mechanism behind that? Yeah, it's a facet Well, I don't I can't speak to the the mechanism neurologically, but it's a it's a fascinating social phenomenon that has been thought about for at least a century. It's you know there was a philosopher Elias Canetti who wrote a book crowds in power Which is very interesting on this topic. I'm a crowd a crowd is almost like a fire You know once they get started the mob will behave by its dynamics that aren't really explained by the individual intentions of the individual It started. The mob will behave by its dynamics that aren't really explained by the individual intentions of the individuals in the mob. And it's actually a great book. You have heard this book, Among the Thugs by Bill Buford. He is high in the heart of the product 20, 25 years ago. He's a not really a nice writer. He edited this literary magazine, and he ran to, I believe, back in the day. And he got fascinated with the phenomenon of soccer, hooliganism. And he wanted, he just, he went to the UK and just started hanging out with these, these just die hard. I guess they were, I don't know, Manchester United or Arsenal fans, but just, he just got in with these guys who were normal guys, like plumbers and like Christians and people have had real lives. These were not just teenagers who were thugs. They were, they were people who had families, but soccer was their life and they became, they became soccer hooligans. But what's, what's brilliant about the book, and again, it's been at least 20 years since I read it. So I could be a little off in my recollection here. But what I recall is that he wrote it in such a way that these guys, he was hanging out with war, really the protagonist. He got you in on their side for about 75 pages or so. And then when they start misbehaving, when they, when they go, go to their first, you know, game against the Italians and, and form a mob and start, you know, just marauding the streets and, you know, bash kids in the head. I mean, it's like, it's, they start behaving like sociopaths in this crowd. But he catches you out totally because you are, these are, you're on their team for about 75 pages and you're, you're, you're identified with them. You sort of laughed with them. You kind of, you bonded with them as he did. And then he reveals the level of, of Thuggery that they're capable of as, as a, as a mob. And it was really, it was, I recall it being a fascinating book. But it is, it's just a fact that, that people will do in a crowd. When you see, it's a part of it's the social proof situation where you see everyone doing something and that on some level gives you license to do it. So, and there's kind of a, it's just contagious. You know, when you see, when you see people breaking windows or jumping on a car or turning over a car or looting, there, it takes a less of any individual to participate in that. You know, it takes less for you to go in and grab a television set when you've seen a hundred of your neighbors do it than if you, and you wouldn't have that morning just woken up deciding to rob the story yourself. So it's a, I mean, we all like to think where the sort of people who would stand against them up, we would be the German who would have hit Jews in our basement and stood against the Nazis. And, and, you know, you can multiply those cases ad nauseum. But what a lot of psychological science shows is that, yeah, there are those people. There are the people who will stand against the tide of individuals who are, you know, going to do something heinous. But most people are part of the tide. And it's, it's just a very common phenomenon. The social license, that's a really interesting way to describe it because that is what it is, right? I mean, isn't that a big part of war? I mean, a big part of war is doing things that you would never do on a normal basis in a normal scenario. On a regular basis, you are asked to put bullets into other human beings. One of the things that I thought was really interesting about the controversy about American sniper, the Chris Kyle movie was, he was talking about what it was like the first time he killed someone. And that he is in a book, I don't believe this was in the movie, but that he had this feeling before he shot someone like, is this okay? I can actually do this. It's okay to do this. And then he grew to enjoy it. And then he grew, it became commonplace in normal. And he's like, yeah, they're bad guys and I'm going to shoot him. But this, the license, the social license. And then it is a accentuated with this, this mob mentality that's, it's mean you're part of an army and you have an enemy. And it's the life or death consequences, the life or death scenario that you're a part of, the whole thing is escalated. It's the highest level of that type of behavior that we have in society, in our culture today. Well, interestingly, it takes a lot to get people to kill in war. I think there's some myths around how easy it is for soldiers to shoot at the bad guy. But there have been studies done in prior war is where some shocking percentage of soldiers either never fired their guns or fired above their targets on purpose. They didn't want to kill anyone. And that's been, and so some of the discipline of training soldiers has been against the grain of those tendencies trying to get people to actually try to kill the other person. And I think we've become more successful probably at doing that. This is not something I know a ton about. I just know that this research is out there. And what the main dynamic I think with soldiers is you are trying to keep your buddies safe. And he's trying to he or she now is trying to keep you safe. And that, you know, they're not only firing at you trying to kill you. They're trying to kill your buddy or just did and or just, you know, wounded him or her. And now that's, it's just a very simple dynamic that you're just, you've bonded with the person to your right and to your left. And you guys are really in it together. And it's a matter of keeping just going home safe, you know. And so what's going to what is required in that situation? Well, you got to shoot at the people and the other trench. And so every so now obviously there are aspects of war making that don't fit that mold. And some of the more disturbing aspects that actually require less of us in terms of you dropping bombs from 30,000 feet of your flying a drone from an office park outside of Las Vegas or wherever they wherever they are. And so we find that sort of telescopic approach to war different ethically. And I think it is, it's different in a variety of ways that are interesting. But I think it's, it's, yeah, it's not so much that that war unleashes in most people this bloodlust that is, that they're, you know, they're struggling to contain in the civilized world. And it's just that once the, the tap is open in a foreign country, you just have, you know, rambos everywhere, people are really conflicted about what they do. And a lot of people try to not do anything of consequence. There's a great episode of one of Dan Carlin's podcast, one of the hardcore history podcasts about World War one. And I believe it was about the Germans and the English that they had been in battle with each other. And they had sort of without verbally agreeing to this, they had sort of agreed to a cease fire during lunch. Oh yeah. Yeah. Fascinating. Do you know the story? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because I've heard I knew the story, but I've also listened to Dan's podcast, which is, I think I got from you. It's just fantastic. He's the best. It's amazing. I think that all of them are great, but that series on on World War one is just a masterpiece. It's just, it's really, you know, he's doing something remarkable there. But yeah, this, this trench warfare was the most brutal of just, it was just this, you know, horror compounded upon horror endlessly for years to know evidence gain. I mean, these people, they're fighting for yards of ground forever and just tens of thousands of people are dying. And they're, they're basically camped out on the decomposing bodies of the people who died before them. And there is just, it's the most horrible version of warfare you've ever heard about. And then there's this no man's land between the trenches where, you know, people who will kind of run out there trying to make an incursion into the enemy trench will get caught on barbed wire, they'll get shot. And then you'll, you see you have this spectacle of people of injured and dying people in the no man's land between the trenches, you know, howling for hours and hours and hours in misery. And when someone goes to try to rescue them, they get shot. And, and so, but there were periods where the, the two sides just agreed that this was just, and again, how that was communicated was kind of interesting. And I don't actually recall the details there, but it was, it was kind of a tacit agreement that emerged where okay, we're going to let you get your, we're not going to shoot at you when you get the injured person or the dead bodies. And there was one Christmas, I believe, where they just basically went out and exchanged cigarettes and, you know, had an impromptu soccer game. And they just, they basically called the war off at a certain point. And then got chastised by the higher ups for doing that. And then the war started all over again. But yeah, they actually socialized at one point. It's amazing. It is really an amazing depiction of what must have been an impossible place to be in, to, to, to imagine being a person standing on the decomposing bodies for being forced to shit in a coffee cup and throw it over the top of the trench. And, I mean, and know that no one's getting out of this. I mean, you might be one of a thousand people that's going to die in the next couple hours. You might be, you know, you, you might make it to next week. You might not. I mean, and it's just the stress that you're, you're dealing with the, the nonhuman aspect of that life. Like this is not a normal thing that you ever expected to deal with. There's not a normal set of of scenarios. It's not your brain, the way you grew up. You're not prepared for this life. You're just thrust into it. And it doesn't make any sense. And then to have that all sort of eroded to the point where on Christmas, you guys are hanging out. And then the, the general's coming and say, fuck this. You got to kill those people. And next thing, you're killing each other again. Like so you had this brief glimpse of, you know, some utopia inside of war. Yeah, well, what was so weird about that war in particular was that the run up to it was so romanticized and idealistic. I mean, you had a, a kind of war fever that happened throughout Europe where this was just looked at as the, in the rosy as possible terms. Like this is just the true glory of, of manhood to be an expressed. Finally, we have a, it's like it was, it was approached like the World Cup or something. It was just, it was like pure exuberance around the prospect of fighting this war in many quarters. And, you know, that, you'd be surprised if that ever happened again. And so it's a little bit like what's happening with G, G hottest globally. But they have beliefs that that cause that to make more sense. I mean, they, they believe they're going to go to paradise when they get killed in this war. So it's, but it's hard to map your own psychology onto the cream of, of English youth where they were just, just going off with this, this level of enthusiasm, having no idea, or it gets part of it was they had no idea just how horrible it was going to be. But they, yeah, the, it's, you know, you read Homer and, and war is this glorious thing. I mean, the, the war ethic you get from, from ancient civilizations is something that we have, you know, I think largely outgrown. But you can really see it in, in World War One. Do you think a lot of people had that similar attitude post 911, especially when the World Trade Center towers went down. And there was this flag waving fewer in America, unlike anything I've ever seen. I remember post 911, I remember driving down the street, leaving the street near my house and entering it to this main street and every car, every car had an American flag, every car, it was insane. I mean, it was a, if you, if you did, I didn't have an American flag. I was, I was like looked at odd, you know, like this is, this is, this is a unprecedented time in history. And then all these people were signing up for war. All these people were signing up, because they wanted to go over there. They wanted to fight the good fight. And then you started hearing things from people like, like Pat Tillman, who left a career as a NFL player, very promising careers of pro athlete and all Sunnies over there in this war. And his impression of it was that it was a huge clusterfoc. It was nothing like what he wanted. It was nothing like what he expected. And he was very verbal about that very, very, very openly critical about that. And a lot of people think that's one of the reasons why he died. You know, there's a giant conspiracy theory that they killed him because he was talking, and he's killed by friendly fire and killed by American troops. And there was the conspiracy theory was that they shut him up because he was so openly critical of what was going on over there, that it wasn't what he thought it was going to be. He thought it was going to be this incredibly organized group of heroes that went over there to fight these evil bad guys that are hell-bout and destruction and suicide bombing their way into America to kill the American dream. And this is the idealistic version of it. Well, I think there is an idealistic version of good and bad actors in this case. It's just the reality of fighting this war is so messy and that it's, yeah, it was, you Afghanistan, I think was pretty clear cut morally that we had to do something against Al Qaeda. And by definition, once the Taliban wouldn't release Osama bin Laden to us, we had to do something against the Taliban. I mean, that's where he was and they were sheltering him. And so I didn't feel ethically conflicted over that. But that was such a mess. I mean, you're going into Afghanistan. The reality of what it takes to go into Afghanistan and kill the bad guys is so messy that there's arguably no good way to do it. There's no way to do it, which at the end of the day is going to look like a success. And so maybe that's something we're now learning that you have to, this is so messy that you have to be, you really have to pick your moments and be far more surgical than we've ever been inclined to be and not even think about defeating the enemy, ultimately, but just kind of keeping the enemy at bay containing this problem for long enough to change minds or change culture in some other way. Because even in this case, I think it was very clear cut. Killing members of Al Qaeda was a good idea. And I think it's still a good idea. It's just a drone strike kills some of them and also kills some of the hostages, as we now see. And it also kills some of the people standing too close to the bomb blast. And it's ethically messy. So it's it's it's but I think there are instances of it that are certainly necessary, but someone has to be thinking very clearly about how we proceed in a world where there really are people trying to destroy us. It's not that there's no bad guys. There are bad guys. And now we're the foreign policy argument comes into play because some people say those bad guys are bad guys because of US foreign policy. Yeah. The way we have intervened and dominated really financial resources. You think it's confusing? Yeah. Yeah. Well, before we dive into that, I'm looking at a list of topics that were brought up by our Twitter people. And so I'm just going to I'll read the list just so we have it in our heads and you can decide what you want to deal with here. But Islam, anything but Islam, Abby Martin, Abby Martin, Abby Martin. I think we have to deal with Abby Martin. Okay. Abby who is a good friend. I love Abby. She's crazy though in a good way, but she's she's wild. And she accused you of being one of the new atheists with your anti Islamic rhetoric. And you know, that's nothing new to you. You don't accuse of that in the past. Did she misrepresent your point of view? Yeah. Did you listen to it? Yeah, I did. I did listen to it. Should we play it or no? I don't think you need to. You don't need to. What did she say and what would do not agree with what she said? Well, she said it was really interesting listening to her because so I listened to the whole podcast and she didn't mention me until like the second hour. I'm listening to this. I'm thinking I'm actually some actually having a conversation with you in my head as I'm listening to this. I'm thinking and Joe, you it's kind of remarkable what you are able to do here because you're having a conversation with her. If I from my point of view, you were just drinking from a fire hose of bullshit, right? It's just like she is what she's saying. There's so much wrong with what she's saying. And but yet you're in a position to have a conversation with her that is where there's just like a ton of goodwill and it doesn't run to the ditch at all. And you can have a conversation with me in the same vein. But then I was thinking I could not I'm sure she's a perfectly nice person and I would be very nice talking to her. But I have a feeling now of more or less total hopelessness talking to someone as polarized on these issues as I view her to be. And so I was kind of praising you in my mind thinking that I couldn't do what you're doing here. At that instance, she just mentioned me, right? So it was like one of those bad scenes in a movie where the television starts talking to the character. She's just kind of called me out and then more or less totally misrepresented my views. So she said many things that are just inaccurate which we can talk about. But in terms of what she attributes to me, she said that I only care about intentions, right? So that all intentions are all that matter. So if we kill a billion people but meant well, we're fine. And if the Muslims kill a million people but don't mean well, they're far worse than we are ethically. And that's intentions are all that matter. And she was, I think in her defense, I'm sure she's never read anything I've written. But she was reacting to a snippet of a podcast where I push back against some of the things that that no Chomsky has said. And I haven't thought that I've said, I said in my first book that Chomsky doesn't value intent, the ethical role of intentions enough. And I said something very brief in a podcast that bounced around. And so that's what she heard. So she missed and screwed me there. Intentions are not all that matters, obviously. But intentions do matter. So if someone if someone stabs you, right, the difference between them doing it on purpose because they want to kill you and them doing it by accident because they were cutting, you know, you guys were cooking in the kitchen and they turned, they didn't know you were there. They turned and they stuck a knife into your belly. It's a world of difference, ethically, right? And the crucial difference is the person's intentions tell you a tremendous amount about what they're likely to do in the future. The guy who stabbed you once because he wants to kill you is very likely going to stab you again until you're dead, right? And he's trying to kill you. The friend in the kitchen who stabbed you by accident is going to be rushing you to the hospital in the next instance. Right? But this is a kind of a dis and genuous comparison because, I mean, are you describing the difference between accidentally killing civilians with a surgical strike in quotes of a drone strike, what versus killing someone with a suicide bomb? What are you trying to kill as many people that random as possible? So I'm just, I'm using a very idealized example just to show you that the role of intention is not all that matters because getting stabbed still sucks, right? So if you assume the same stab wound, you still have the same problem. And one of one of your scenarios is completely innocent and accidental. The other one is murderous and tense. Okay. So those are those are the extremes, right? So then you can have gradations along that continuum, right? Where you have and somewhere more in the middle would be you're trying to kill a bad guy and you accidentally killing them on the same person as well. Absolutely. And it's totally an hour or you think you've got the bad guy and you've just got bad intelligence and you just all you kill is an innocent person. You could be, let's say you were being totally surgical, you're a sniper, you're going to just kill one person with one bullet, but you've got the wrong person through no fault of your own. Right? Or worse yet, the bullet goes through that person and kills someone else. Right. So also all kinds of scenarios like that. And there are very common scenario, I think, which is you're bombing the bad guy, you're reasonably sure you're bombing the bad guy and he really is the bad guy. But you're also reasonably sure that you're going to injure or kill some innocent people and you're okay with that because the reality of fighting war is you never get the bad guy standing all alone. You have 500 yards from the next person. So if you want to fight this war with drone, say you have to accept some level of collateral damage. Now, I don't actually, I mean, I'm not privy to any kind of intelligence. You know, I'm not in those circles and I'm not, I'm not, one of those people. So I don't know just how Obama or anyone in a position of responsibility makes those calculations. What is acceptable collateral damage? But we know that some level of collateral damage is acceptable because otherwise it would be impossible to fight war at all. Right. So we know that some level of collateral damage is acceptable just driving on our roads. You know, we 30,000 people die every year on our roads. We could dial that number down to zero. Right. If we were committed to no death on our roads, we could get there. We would just all have to drive five miles an hour. Right. But the difference is that when you're driving, you're not intending on killing someone. It's an unintended consequence of transportation. But the big difference between that and the unintended consequence of violence. No, no, no, which is definitely let's get into that. Let's get into that. Let's see if there is this is an unintended consequence, unintended, but foreseeable consequence. In fact, certain consequence of our keeping the speed limit where it is. Right. You and I both know, like so, let's say we could vote on this. You know, what do you want the speed limit to be? It's, you know, let's say it's 75 miles an hour. We know that if we reduced it to five, there'd be some other costs and I'm sure there'd be some other ways in which people might die. You know, you'd be harder to get, you could, you know, and the ambulance get into the hospital would be hitting a traffic jam. And so some people would die on the way to the hospital side. But leave that aside, we would save tens of thousands of lives every year. If we just took all the fun out of driving and or just forget about that, forget about let's keep the speed limit exactly where it is. But no matter what car you have, there's a governor on it and you cannot go past the legal speed limit ever. Right. So if you're in a 25 mile an hour zone, you know, whatever your car is, you've got a Porsche or whatever you like to drive, it can only go 25 miles an hour or not a mile an hour more, no matter how you hit the throttle. And that would be true. And every time there are people who would resist that and there are reasons for resisting it is just that it wouldn't be, it would drive me would be less fun. Right. Now that is a, if anything is indefensible when you're talking about kids being killed, that is right. That's a far more superficial commitment than wanting to get the higher ups in al-Qaeda who are trying to at some point blow up an American city. Right. But imagine if as many innocent people died from driving from one activity, like think about the amount of people that die. They do. But they don't. They do. But the numbers are nowhere near, what about the numbers? What about the numbers? What about the drone numbers? What are the percentage of people that have died, the innocent people that have died because of drones? Well, it's more than 80%. Okay. More than 80%. I don't actually, I just have to plead ignorance on that. I don't know those numbers. They're crazy. They're very high. They're very high. But hold on a second. But hold on for a second because you're talking about something like driving, driving the 30,000 a year, every year reliably. Last 10 years has been 300,000 people in the way. How many people who drive on a daily basis wind up driving their whole life and never killing anybody? Most. Most. Well, how many drone strikes? But that's not how many drone strikes wind up not killing innocent people. Almost none. But that's not necessarily the way to analyze it. At least I would argue that's not the way. But let's just talk about numbers, for instance, because there's another problem I had with Abby Martin. She was using this number two million dead in Iraq and Afghanistan. Where did she get that number? There's no, no credible person is using that number. What do you think the number is? That number is almost certainly an order million? No. No. That number is almost certainly an order of magnitude too high. The sober estimates are like 200,000. And most of that, most, is the result of sectarian violence. Right? It's not, we didn't kill 200,000 people. We went into Iraq. It's mostly, we're mostly talking about Iraq. The numbers are much higher there than in Afghanistan. We went into Iraq. We did some very understandable things and also some very stupid but we took the lid off of a simmering civil war. The real catastrophe of Iraq, apart from our going in in the first place, which I never supported. But the real catastrophe is that having gone in, we failed to anticipate the level of sectarian hatred. And we did very little to hedge against it. And we kicked off a civil war, which someone like Abby Martin clearly thinks we are entirely responsible for. So when she, a death squads are taken out the power drills and drilling holes into the heads of their neighbors and the Sunni are returning the favor, that's us. We are culpable for that. Now, I don't accept that. These people were, they're killing one and they've got a blood feud going back over a millennium now. And we popped the cork on it in Iraq. And that's a terrible thing to have collaborated in. And we probably should have foreseen it. So if we're culpable, it's for not having anticipated certain of these consequences of our actions. But we are not the people. We are not the Sunni, her killing Shia and we're not the Shia who are killing Sunni. And the same is true in Afghanistan. We are not the Taliban who are blowing themselves up in crowds of fellow Afghans as a way of making their country ungovernable so that we have to leave. Right. Now again, you could fault us for not having anticipated this closely enough or done something effective to prevent it. And ironically, what you're faulting us for in that case, probably in Iraq is once we saw how bad this was getting, you're faulting us for leaving. Right. The argument there is the compassionate thing to have done there. If in so far as we could have anticipated the rise of ISIS and all of the, just this consequent death toll, death toll, you are faulting us for leaving because we, because our political interests and our stomach was no longer, you know, aligned with this project. And you know, so that's, I'm not sure that's an argument that someone like Gabby Martin wants to make that we should have stayed longer that we should have spent more money that we should have killed more people in an effort to keep the locals from killing so many more people. So anyway, the number of two million is plucked out of a bad dream. Well, he says two million who said, I don't know. I don't know. I'm saying two hundred, I mean, obviously you're not going over their county bodies. No, so who is saying it's 200,000. Oh, who is saying it's two million? Okay. Well, so I'll tell you, the highest number that at one point seemed credible was based on a Lancet article. Lancet is a British medical journal very well regarded, but it has happened or something. Jamie just put this up in the screen here. What is this from Jamie? Yes, a rack body count. So that's 200,000. But what is, who is making this Iraq body count.org website? It says, let's wait, let's just read what it says. Documented civilian deaths from violence 138,000 to 156,000 total violent deaths, including combatants, 211,000. And this is, what is this up from? It says following the 2003 invasion, but is this a current? I think this is 2004. Yeah, they keep counting. They keep counting. So there are different ways to do this. One is you can you can count. invasion but this is a current I think this is to total yeah the key the key counting the key counting so there are different ways to do this one is you can you can count bodies right and the information there is not perfect because some people die and their death doesn't get reported you know there not everyone has a death certificate so you can count you can count bodies you can get reports of of the actual death the other thing you can do is you can estimate the amount of death that would have occurred in the absence of an invasion and then compare the reports of the you do a statistical sample of an area and compare the reports of death based on the past based on yeah based on what's happening now and you see a differential there and then you extrapolate to the rest of the population and so that's what this the authors of this Lancet article they did that and they came up with a number 600 or 650,000 and that article has been widely criticized not to the point of it being unpublished but I don't think it's been retracted but I don't think any serious person thinks that article is representative of the facts and so what they did for instance is they they took they would take a cluster of I think 40 homes in an area and asked the people you know who has died who do you know who has died and how did they die and then they would get they would just based on that sample they'd do that in many different sites around Iraq based on those samples they would extrapolate to the rest of the population and they came up with 600 or 650,000 so one criticism I read about that article was that they they seemed to have focused on areas in near major thoroughfares in big cities where you know where IEDs were far more common than other places and in those same cities or other places in Iraq so like so places that was very place you would you would most likely plant an IED is a is a not especially representative place to pull all the families in the area to see whether they've lost loved ones in the war right so that that was one way to get an unrealistic number the other thing is it seemed that there were just some shady things with the researchers where they weren't releasing their data their in their methods and the communication with them broke down and so anyway the sober people I trust who focus on these things think that's a fictional number and that's one third not even one third of what Abby's working with excuse me I think I caught Aubrey to graze cold just watching that podcast I think I got a cold I think that we can agree that even 200,000 people dead as a tremendous tragedy yeah horrific tremendous tragedy so the semantics argument over whether or not it's tenfold that number or whatever it is well you just you don't think that's disagree with that's not okay it's not you're not semantics manics is a bad word you know it's tenfold is tenfold and but even more important is we didn't go in and kill 200,000 people we went in and killed I'm sure some tens of thousands of people many of whom were were you know the Bathurst you know the Revolutionary Guard right and we unleashed a mailstrom of internesine sectarian conflict religious conflict and we failed to contain it and it would have taken more blood and treasure to contain it and so it's a it's a huge problem not minimizing the horror of Iraq again I never supported our invasion of Iraq the things I've said that have been spun as supportive it are drawn from conversations of the sort that you and I are having now so for instance I've said things like I might have been on your podcast I said at one point even if we had gone into Iraq for purely humanitarian reasons right let's just we're gonna go in to remove Saddam he's a criminal he's a psychopath this is a hostage situation we're gonna get him out of there and we are just gonna dump money on these people to to admit to it so that the standard of living rises to something like Marin County right so this is our goal that's actually our intention right even if that were the intention it still would have been a nightmare we still would have unleashed the sectarian horror we still would have had suicide bombers against us now I believe that to be true right so I say something like that and some people listen to this conversation they say well Sam thinks that we went into Iraq for humanitarian reasons he thinks we went into Iraq just to make it like Marin County right so that's the sort of pushback I get from the Abbey Martin's of the world no I've never said that I'm just saying that the truth is so sinister that even if our intentions were perfectly benign and we're just trying to make raise the standard of living there and make you know even just give them the freedom to practice their own religion right so we're trying to make this like Nebraska it would have been a bloodbath the given the beliefs of the sorts of people who now populate a group like ISIS so anyway that's that's my claim so this is just one aspect of what you disagreed with what she said well just so her two million number well that's a million down to the ground I mean she's she's just has this she's a lefty she's well she but she has a kind of confabulatory style again I'm not really denigrating her personally I don't know her I'm sure she's she's a good person but there's a style of talking that you run into with people where there's just it's kind of confabulatory where you're just sort of talking and it's sounding good and you're just you're sort of spitballing but you're using numbers right you're using numbers like two million or you're saying things like our biggest export is weapons the landmark research proves the US led war on terror has killed as many as two million people but this is a fraction of the western responsibility for deaths in Iraq and Afghanistan over the last two decades last month watching DC-based physicians for social responsibility released a landmark study concluding that the death toll from 10 years of the war on terror since the 9-11 attacks is at least 1.3 million it could be as high as two million let me just finish it just moving it to a 97-page report by the Nobel Peace Prize when he doctors group is the first to tally up the total number of civilian casualties from the US led counterterrorism interventions in Iraq Afghanistan and Pakistan right okay well so so clearly that's where she got this number she got it from somebody who got the number there I think that number is the sort of the people I took so for instance when I as a sanity check when I heard Abby Martin I sent an email to my friend Stephen Pinker who's an incredibly sober scientist just a very careful researcher he wrote this truly landmark book on the decline of violence in the last century that the better angels of our nature came out a few years ago he was like 800 pages on the topic very data-driven book you know he's he did a tremendous amount of research for this and he's he's an incredibly well respected Harvard scientist so I pinged him about this and I said I'm hearing in liberal circles that we killed two million people in Iraq and Afghanistan is there any chance that this is true and he bet he said more or less what I'm saying to you now that this is it's almost certainly in order of magnitude too high the highest briefly credible study was the Lancet one that was I don't know I didn't know about this and I don't know what he in particular would would say about the study but undoubtedly they use the same sort of extrapolation methods they're not counting bodies they're they're doing based on sort of the ambient level of death over the years they think it's gone up by the tune of two million in those in those countries but anyway so so Steve said no this is this is a totally fanciful number and here's why and he broke it down for me and then I did did a little more reading on the topic the but again the crucial I think it really matters whether the numbers 200,000 or two million I don't want to be loose on that but the crucial ethical difference is did we go in and perform our own sort of final solution against the Iraqis and the Afghanistan's trying that Afghanistan is trying to kill millions of people I'll a Hitler or did we wander into a situation where we unleashed a civil war and are we culpable for that and I don't think we are we're culpable for something but we're not we are not the Sunnis killing the Shia and by first you believe that that is the majority absolutely absolutely I don't know if that that necessarily the new study necessarily agrees with that but I'm sure well I would be astonished if they didn't study in here that Lancet study it's it's it's likely to be far more accurate than the figures initially what which study is likely to be the 200,000 one six hundred fifty five thousand deaths so so wait a minute the people who were saying it may be two million but it's at least a hundred one point right now according to the PSR study the much disputed Lancet study, Lancet study that estimated five six hundred fifty five thousand I racked deaths up to two hundred two thousand and six and over a million until today by extrapolation was likely to be far more accurate than the IBCs figure in fact the report confirms a virtual consensus among epidemology epidemiologist on the reliability of the Lancet coming from the so I don't I don't want to totally I'm not saying I'm not open to this information but the website you're pulling this from is just just trash right what we've been at least I is just I mean this is these guys publish the serial plagiarist who's been stalking me who I vowed not to name I miss just the stuff they publish is just pure insanity I mean google me on this site and you'll get madness so but they're they're talking about a study they didn't perform the study right but I can't publishing the study in real time I can't I can't vet their representation study in the see who the help who is it say perform that study I can't read that PSR physicians social response that's a real group but again the problem only one problem here is that this whole area has become so politicized that it's hard to I mean even you know like Amnesty International has embarrassed itself with a supporting you know a jihadist organization in the UK and they just at the 11th hour pulled out their support but the for a very long time they were just in the same trench with geologists and not knowing it or or they should have known it I mean people were telling them but they were still they were very slow to realize it so I don't you know you don't know you should be slow to to take even a humanitarian organizations word for the the significance of a given study but you know I would find I would find it frankly amazing if we had killed anything like that number of people and why well I would find it amazing if that number of people had died I would find it's it's it's unthinkable to me that we killed two million people it's over 12 years of war okay but even if you killed you know but no but no but I'm just nobody just know where all this death is coming from you know where the bombings the the IEDs the truck bombs that the blowing up of mosques we're not doing that right so that's the body count when you look at when you look at the penalty we're paying for killing people and when you look at how much we don't our own soldiers don't want to to die unnecessarily in our own cat level of casualties we are not on the on the other on the other side of all those guns I mean we've just a tremendous amount of internecien violence in both Afghanistan and Iraq and that is just killing you know like a bomb a bomb will go off and a hundred people at a mosque will be dead so Abby Martin I think I don't think I'm being uncharitable here I think she thinks we're responsible for that for the Sunni Shia violence yes okay so whatever the number is right that's that's your argument with that you were saying that I was swimming in a sea of bullshit before that right what what else was bullshit well I think um I don't remember all the the details but so for instance one thing she said is that our main export is arms that's not true that's not true that's not true so it may be what does a main export I think our main export is like machinery like everything everything like farming equipment and pumps and you know road making it was corn that's not I was a guess I think it's techno you know it's like I think it's airplanes and I mean everything that finals jammy everything that's a machine I think is so maybe arms falls into that category but when you look at machines number one two hundred and nineteen billion dollars in machines right 13.5% of total exports number two electronic equipment 171 billion oil 157 billion number three vehicles 135 billion number four aircrafts and spacecrafts 124 billion number six medical technical technical equipment 84 billion number seven gems precious metals and coins 65 billion that's interesting number eight plastics 63 billion number nine pharmaceuticals 43 billion common and strong with the Viagra number 10 organic chemicals so guns aren't even in the top 10 machines yeah but me guns I'm sure that well you you've got a gun you have to think that weaponry is somehow spread across aircraft machines and aircraft vehicles I well you well I mean I'll cut her the the benefit of the doubt there that maybe there's because you know that what's find a more comprehensive list that actually includes arms because it's seen that that's pretty sneaky if it is machines and she might be somehow another way we'll say it's you know well I'll say we export you know 50 billion dollars in arms a year I don't you know I don't know what it is but it's um and that's that's a whole another conversation whether we should should be doing that I think it's that's a suicidal stupid in certain cases that we're arming people who are eventually going to be using these arms against us or our friends but conspiracy theory would be that that's how they perpetuate this whole constant cycle of wars you have to keep arming your enemies right well no yeah so I think you get the economic interest of defense contractors is not something that I am especially saying one about it's not you know I think the the the the role the possible role of corruption there and a sort of callous indifference to the effects of being in this business I think that's that's a very real concern but so to say that we this is our main export is bombs essentially that's not true now maybe what she meant to say is we are the main exporter of weaponry in the world which is probably true but that's not what she said or maybe she said both and I only heard one but not you're correct in what she said so that there's a kind of might be getting you know that's the problem unless you're doing it look we live in a world that's so broad and comprehensive that unless you're doing the actual research yourself and not just doing it doing it over a long period of time and very meticulous most likely you don't know the actual numbers unless there's very few things that I could talk about without most certainty that aren't involved directly in my own life and we deal with numbers like numbers of imported guns exported people dying in a place that you've never even visited boy you're relying on a lot of people's data yeah yeah and it one thing that really is depressing is the degree to which people are sorry this conversation is so politicized that you you just even sign like the climate change conversation the fact that there are people who are to know you can always find someone with a PhD to sit up there and say you know I don't think cigarettes cause cancer right I mean you can find those people you can find the people who are who are engineers who say that 9-11 could had to be an inside job because you know the melting point of steel blah blah blah and you can find on all these issues you get incredibly politicized science and it's so but certain things don't pass the smell test and two million to me two million people doesn't pass the smell test certainly if you're going to say that we kill those two million people that we we you know did we did double the level of a Rwandan genocide intentionally that was what what we did that just seems completely I'm not a sad statistically you know hallucinatory to me I see your point I don't know who's right but I see your point now was there anything else that she said that you needed to dispute I don't think so I mean the thing I can say just categorically is that what she said about my concern about intention is it's just not true is is if you intentions matter because they are the best predictor as to what what the person is likely to do in the future if you know someone is killing people because he intends that he wants that he wants to cause grief and suffering and death well then you know this is a person you have to jail or kill and this is not a good actor if someone does it because they they did it by accident or they didn't foresee the consequences of their actions or they were trying to get the bad guy and they they they produce collateral damage it's a very different scenario and yet the body count may be the same so the thing I've faulted Chomsky for in the past is that he seems to talk about situations where all you need to concern yourself is with this body count so the example I dealt with in my first book The End of Faith was and this was in reaction to a short book he did right after 9-11 called 9-11 he talked about the Clinton's bombing of the Alshif of pharmaceutical plant in Sudan and retaliation for the embassy bombings Al-Qaeda bombings in Kenya in the 90s and he talked about this bombing of the pharmaceutical plant as a great atrocity seemingly equivalent to the atrocity of 9-11 or worse because of the of the consequences for Sudan of having their half the supply of pharmaceuticals destroyed they couldn't you know people would die from preventable illness as a result of this what what what an incredible atrocity except you know the representation of our government was not and I think you know any rational thinking on this topic which would suggest that our intention was not to destroy a pharmaceutical plant we claim to be bombing what we thought was a chemical weapons factory you know you run by Al-Qaeda and we wanted to degrade that capacity of theirs after they had just bombed two embassies in East Africa so let's just say that's true who knows what our actual intentions were but if our intention was to bomb a chemical weapons plant that we didn't know was a pharmaceutical plant and we bombed a pharmaceutical plant that was being used for peaceful purposes and as a result tens of thousands of people didn't get their medicine and died that is not an equivalent atrocity to intentionally killing tens of thousands of people right it's a it's an instance of bad luck you were trying to get the bad guys we bombed it in the middle of the night as far as I know Clinton didn't even think anyone would be there right I mean so it's possible that we weren't trying to kill anyone per se we were just trying to bomb a chemical weapons plant if you accept that to be true then the fact that tens of thousands of people died as a result doesn't have the same ethical significance it is much more like you and I are just trying to get home at 55 miles an hour but we're participating in a system that's going to kill 30,000 people this year based on our speed we're not intending to kill any of those people right it's just and but perhaps we should have foreseen so it was bad data was it bad data well no I mean that's that's what our government said about its actions now let's say let's say that's not true let's say let's say it was a pharma let's say we knew it was a pharmaceutical plant but we also thought it was a chemical weapons plant and we bombed it really knowing what the bad you know we thought we were going to get the chemical weapons facility but we also knew we were going to destroy all of their their pharmaceutical infrastructure and that would have cascading bad effects that all things considered we didn't care that much about all right let's say let's say it was that place on this continuum of moral calluses well that's still different than trying to kill 10,000 people by taking away it's it's it's may may in my sense in my view it may not be so different and it's something that we would be culpable for but I think you have to what Matt the reason why intentions matter is because they are they're the clear expression of what we are committed the ends to which we're committed the kind of world we want to live in so you have I mean this is what I did in that first book I asked them this is a thought experiment called the the perfect weapon where I said you know just imagine what a group would do if they had perfect weapons right where there's no such thing as collateral damage they could just target everyone they wanted to target they would never hit the you know the you know Osama bin Laden's mom who happened to be standing too close to him they just going to hit Osama bin Laden so what would anyone group do with the perfect weapon what would BB Netanyahu do with perfect weapons what would Hitler have done with perfect weapons what would Bill Clinton do with perfect weapons people like Chomsky and Abby Martin talk about the Clintons and the bushes and the net in Yahoo's and the Dick Cheney's of the world and I'm not necessarily equating all those people but they're all sort of in a certain area for me as though they would act with the perfect weapon exactly the way Hitler or Osama bin Laden or Saddam Hussein would act with the perfect weapon that we have a level of malevolence a level of commitment to I mean so much of what she was saying essentially that kind of the the intentions of our government are to go around the world killing brown skinned people and that was a bit of phrase she used and that and the spirit in which he talked about our culpability on the world stage is very much in the sense that we have intentionally murdered millions of brown skinned people because we don't care about them and maybe it's part of the reason why we we want them dead right and that's I do not believe that's a situation we're in I believe I certainly don't believe that someone like President Obama wants to create massive collateral damage and if you gave him the perfect weapon I am reasonably sure he would target the bad guys people who if you and I could vote on whether these people should go down 90 we would have a 90% convergence with him right we wouldn't find ourselves in the presence of a of a psychopath who just was so amped up on his power to kill that he would be killing you know and Frank right whereas there are people who really did kill and Frank because they intended to kill and Frank and everyone alike her right there's a difference is there any culpability is there any do you put any blame on the United States government and our foreign policy and our decisions as far as the domination of global natural resources whatever we've done overseas is is that in any way responsible for the hatred that these people have for America in the first place yeah well yeah and beyond the hatred responsible for our alliances with people who commit outright human rights about Saudi Arabia yeah so the fact that we can't just break all ties with Saudi Arabia the fact that we can't twist their arm and get them to behave like civilized like a civilized culture culture on the world stage at this point the fact so they're they're jailing and and caning blogger this this was this one atheist blogger uh right but that way I'm so I'm sorry if I'm mispronouncing his name you know it's an absolute scandal the fact that we can't apply more pressure to them and that is in as far as I can tell entirely explained by our dependence on oil and our unwillingness we have the technology to break this dependence on oil the fact that we have such entrenched financial interests that's keeping us tied to oil and that the whole military industrial complex is tuned to safeguard those interests for us in the world out of because those interests have been they've been monetized they've been controlled well it's a bit monopolized roll roll back the clock fifty years they're I'm sure was not an alternative to being dependent on oil right there's a certain point so we're totally dependent on oil civilization just needs petrochemicals to survive and they all happen to be buried in the ground and inconveniently under the palaces of these religious maniacs um the that may have been the situation then so how culpable we are are we for securing our interests and not just we the us but you know the west at that point by by entering a relationship with with the house of sound um that's one question that may have been a marriage of necessity and there have been marriages of necessity with tyrants I think in the past but now the fact that we can't sprint to the finish line and get off of oil right we know this is a dwindling resource we know as a disaster for climate change we know that there would be a the the financial and technological renaissance that's waiting if we all you know just grab Elon Musk's coattails and and and go towards sustainable energy um all of this you know our interests and we're funding both sides of the war on terror it makes an absolutely no sense so we should just make a full-court press in the direction of sustainability energy security and getting ourselves into a position to say to people like the Saudis you know you treat your bloggers better or we're gonna bankrupt you right I mean you just you you all all their wealth is coming down the ground right so the moment we don't need this wealth or need to defend it would be in a much better position to demand that they that people treat women better throughout the world and the treat you know they they honor free speech etc so I think it's a scandal that we we are not doing that and I think we yes we are culpable for doing that but given the given what would happen to us in the near term if we lost access to oil and again I'm not just talking about us I'm talking about Europe and and just the whole world it's a it's been a very difficult situation to be and and it's understandable that we have gotten into the situation but you know I don't find understandable now that we we aren't you know sprinting away for so if I could define your point of view your point of view is more of a pragmatic take on what the world is currently at this stage it's not you're not taking away the responsibility of the United States government you're not saying that they haven't made horrific decisions you're not saying that they have been manipulated by these gigantic corporations that are profiting off of the war that we're currently involved in that you are just saying that if you want to look at the actual reality of the good guys in the bad guys and where where the world is fucked right now there's certain things that have to be done and there's certain people that have to be taken out if you do not you put everyone else at risk is that is that a good yeah that's fair I guess I would only tweak it add that and I this is I've been saying this for 10 years at least you know now closer to 15 years and it just never gets heard I I can grant someone like Chomsky you know 80 90% of his thesis right so yeah I mean I think he's he pushes forward into kind of masochistic voodoo a little bit but but we have done horrific things historically right and the question is just how far you want to roll you walk back in your in your time machine but you know starting with you know our treatment of the Native Americans on up and depends on who who the we is but we being the United States right so we get we get here we start behaving badly and we behave badly for a very long while and we have done terrible things and yet it is also true that we We start behaving badly and we behave badly for a very long while. And we have done terrible things. And yet it is also true that we have enemies we haven't made. We have people, there are people who have had the benefit of everything the West has to offer who are waking up today deciding to join ISIS for reasons that have nothing to do with the U.S. foreign policy. Or if they do have something to do with U.S. foreign policy, it's based on a theological grievance. It's not based on any real political concern for the lives of the Palestinians. It's based on, you've got infidels too close to Muslim holy sites. And you have, the problem, the intellectual and moral problem I've spent more time focused on is the problem of someone like Jihani John, right? The guy who's got a degree in computer science, right? He comes from a middle, upper middle class background in the UK. He's got all the opportunity anyone could want. There are at least three billion people, probably something like five billion people, excuse me, who would trade places with him to be in a position of such opportunity in this world. And yet the opportunity he wants to take is to move to Iraq or Syria and cut the heads off of journalists and aid workers. They're not, you know, Navy seals they captured. They want to kill the aid workers. It's not an accident. It's not something that's not like a perversion of their impulse. It's not like, oh, I really wish this guy wasn't an aid worker or a journalist, you know, but he's the only guy we have. No, this is, this is, their commitments are that horrible, right? And you have to explain how, and this is something that someone like Abby Martin and someone like Noam Chomsky, this is the phenomenon they really don't explain. How is it that someone with all the opportunity who's never been victimized by anyone? How is it that he is committed to the most of horrant and profligate misuse of human life where he's just, well, he's ready to burn up the world, right? And now how do you get tens of thousands of people like this coming from first world societies? And so then, so given that, given that phenomenon, then what explains the commitments of the people who don't have all those opportunities, right? The people who are born in these societies are a shell shocked and have been mistreated and who are, who have understandable grievances against us, right? They are part of the collateral damage. We've been bombing over there after all, right? So it's no mystery that they would hate the West, right? Some of them, some of them still love the West, some of them still are trying to get out, some of them that I hear from atheists in these countries who don't hate the West. I mean, they don't follow Abby Martin's line on this. They don't, they understand why we were bombing in their neighborhoods, right? But the fact is, this is really like a science experiment. There are pristine cases of people who have no rational grievance who devote their lives to waging jihad and they're not mentally ill and they're not, and that's the problem that I, that problem is scaling. The thing that I worry about is that as a meme that is spreadable, you don't have to ever meet anyone affiliated with a terrorist organization to get this idea into your head. And so that's the piece I have focused on and it's not that I've denied the reality of the other pieces. Is this related in any way to just a natural instinct that's a certain amount of people have to be contrarians? I mean, there's certain amount of people that when they, when they find any sort of large group that's in power, they want to oppose them. If they find a ban that's popular, they want to hate it. If they find a political party that's in control, they want to oppose it. There's a certain amount of people that are just natural contrarians. When they find a group that is absolutely committed and completely involved in an ideology to the point where they're rabid about it, it becomes attractive to them and they want to join that resistance to fight against the death star that is the United States. I'm not religious by any stretch of the imagination, but what I am is curious. And one of the things that I like to do is I like to watch really pious or really obsessed religious people. I love to watch videos of them because I find it fascinating. And there's a certain amount of, when I see the Islamic scholars that are talking in absolutes, absolute confidence about their beliefs, there's a certain amount of that that I personally find attractive. I don't want to join ISIS. I don't want to become a Muslim. But when I see someone, almost like what we're talking about with Conor McGregor earlier where he just fucking believes when someone believes. I was watching this guy, I forget his name, but he lives in the UK and he's this rabid Islamic scholar that all of his tweets are on how Islam is superior and it doesn't have to be adjusted like the laws of modern society and secular wisdom is inferior to the Islamic wisdom and blah, blah, blah. I watch this guy do this YouTube video where he's describing how Islamic cultures superior to Western culture in terms of the way they manage money. And he made a lot of fucking good points. I mean, a lot of good points about wealth and about building economies and about how you take a company that's only worth $100,000, but you could sell it for a million dollars or trade it. You sell, have stocks and this is invisible wealth and Islam doesn't allow invisible wealth because that's how societies get crushed and that's how rather economies crumble. I'm watching this guy with his moral certainty and his extreme confidence in what he's saying in absolute and it becomes compelling. And I'm not joining, I'm not saying that he got me, but I'm saying that I'm just absolutely admitting there's a certain aspect of human nature that gets compelled to join groups. Oh yeah. Well, there's something, there's that component of it which I understand, but it's also just the religious ecstasy component, the aesthetics, the emotional component of it which I really understand and I'm susceptible to this. So I have a blog post, Liz called Islam and the Misuses of Ecstasy where this is actually the first blog post I ever wrote where I realized I could not possibly have written this in book form or in a newspaper because it relied on embedded video. The only way to have done this was within better video. And I wrote this I think and once again over protest that something was said about me by Glingering Wall or somebody just showing, yes, the charge had been that I totally like empathy. I don't even know what it's like to be, what these people are getting out of their religion. I've just demonized the whole people, I don't understand religion. And so I wrote this blog post to try to indicate how far from the truth that was. So I put the example of the call to prayer, which I think, there's some that sound kind of ratty, but a nice call to prayer I think is one of the most beautiful sounding things humanity has ever produced. I mean that hits me, that gets into my bones. I don't have to imagine what a devout Muslim is feeling when he hears the call to prayer. I think it's absolutely beautiful, right? And without even knowing the language. Exactly. And without ever having been a Muslim or believing any, I mean like so if that sound, again your listeners can just read that blog post. I'm only dimly remember what I wrote. But if that ritual was purpose toward some other end, right? If that ritual just was signifying, let's all get up in the morning and consider how profound human consciousness is and consider our togetherness on this rock spinning through empty space. And realize that we just have this common project to make the world beautiful. Right if that was what that meant, right? I would just want to minaret, you know, right next to my house. And I mean, I would be totally on board with the experience of participating in that. So I'm totally empathetic there. And so I went through many other instances of this where something I'm seeing in the Muslim world, I really grock how beautiful and meaningful and captivating this is for people. But then at the end, I put in a, a, a karonic recitation and sermon by a, forgot his name now, but some shake who's got, you know, like 10 times the number of Twitter followers you have, right? I mean, so he's like, he's not a fringe figure. He's a Muslim rock star. And you know, you see the translation of what he's giving this tear filled recitation of the karon, which again, it's beautiful, right? He's a great, he's a great singer. And it's, you know, it's a packed house in wherever it was, Saudi Arabia, Yemen and, and, but what is being said there is so ethically ugly, right? Essentially celebrating that the tortures of hell, right? And just expressing a certainty that, that, that, that infidels are going to go to hell and how, you know, just, this is a, you have to organize your life around this question. But how to, how to escape the torments of hell. And the only way to do it is to be a true believer in, in the karon and, and Muhammad, et cetera. And this is at the center of the, of the, of the mandala of their ethical concern. There's nothing matters, but nothing, nothing in this life matters, but avoiding hellfire. And so there's a kind of a ghastly perversion of this impulse that I think many of us feel. I certainly feel it to transcend yourself, to experience bliss and ecstasy and compassion. And, and, you know, it's, it is very much, it's, it's very much like burning man for people. I mean, it's like, if, if, imagine a burning man where it's just as ecstatic as it was, and attracting all the smart people that it attracts, but strewn throughout it was a message of just true divisiveness. Like, everyone else who's not here is going to be tortured for eternity and they deserve it. And we shouldn't be their friends and we should fuck them over any way we can when we get out of this place. And if God had wanted to enlighten them, he would have, but he hasn't. So we're the only ones here. And, and, and just a kind of, a durable message of us, them thinking that just cannot be dissolved, right? That's what's going on in the Muslim world. And, and that's a huge problem because it does, it's pulling all the strings of, you know, that means it's not just Islam obviously. Christianity has a version of this and, and all religions in principle have a version of this, but there are differences that there is no version of jihad that, you know, there's no Buddhist jihad. It's not to say that Buddhists can't do terrible things. And it's not to say you can't find Buddhist reasons for doing terrible things. But there, jihad is a, is a, jihad martyrdom paradise. This, this is the, the jewel, you know, the horrible jewel that, that so many millions of people are contemplating in, in, in, and Islam, the context. And that's, that's what I'm worried about. And I'm not insensitive to the, to the experience people are having. Is this version of Islam recent in human history? There's no extreme radical version. Well, I mean, there's some things you can say that have, you know, with, um, Wahhabism and, and Salafi style Islam generally that, that have been, um, politicized and tuned up in a negative way in the last century, um, that you can say that. But the reality is that, I mean, jihad is as old as Islam and, and Islam spread by jihad, but isn't the original version of jihad or on your own vices. No, no, no, that's just, no. I mean, there is that component to it. There is a energy, hot and an out of jihad, but there was always an out of jihad. And that's how Muhammad spread the faith and Muhammad, I mean, so to answer your question very simply as I did, somewhere, I just said, there's absolutely nothing ISIS is doing. And the Islamic state is doing that Muhammad didn't do. Right. I think I said, good luck finding something significant that there's some difference between me. I mean, taking sex slaves, right? Muhammad took sex slaves and gave sex slaves to his, his generals. It was totally kosher. It's a kosher thing to do. If you're going to follow the example of stuff on a kosher, yeah, no, but it could, halo. I mean, if you're going, if you're going to follow Muhammad's example, which is a real, is, is perhaps the main lens through which you have to look at this. There's the, that's just what's in the Quran and there's what's in the Hadith, the larger literature. And there's the example of Muhammad, which is, which is a test to do in both those literatures and in, in the early biographies about him. Muhammad was not like the Buddha. He was not like Jesus. He was not like he was not, he was, he was a conquering warlord who succeeded. And that is an example that is very different from the example of a guy who got crucified. Or the example of a guy who spent his life meditating and then teaching, right? If the Buddha had been lopping heads off, you know, at every sermon and advocating, just talking endlessly about when to kill people and how many people to kill and, you know, how many sex, how to treat your sex slaves. If that was, if that was just strewn throughout the Buddha's teaching, I would expect Buddhists to behave exactly the way we see members of ISIS, now, okay, then Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram behave. How to treat your sex slaves? Sure. How, how many? So, so, yes, you, how do you treat your sex slaves? Not you. Yeah. But how was, how was it taking, taking sex, I mean, taking sex slaves, taking, I mean, so you can, it's not adultery if you're having sex with sex slaves. It's adultery if you're, if you're having sex with someone, you care about other women, right? Well, other Muslim women, but you're convenient. Um, no, you can slavery, I mean, this is, this is the horror of, of Abrahamic religion generally. I mean, these are, this is why we know these are, books were not authored by a moral genius. The Bible and the Quran can't give you a basis to resist slavery. You know, they, the slavery is supported in both traditions. So the fact that we have, you know, after centuries decided to, to, more or less unanimously, that slavery is an abomination, that proves that there's more moral wisdom to be, to be found outside of these books than inside, at least on that point. And I, I, I would argue on, on virtually every other point of consequence. Now it's not that they're, it's not to say they're not gems of, of moral wisdom in, in some of these books, but they're not best found in those books. And there's so much else in there that is just, that gives you the ethic of the Taliban. And that's, and that's, it's an inconvenient fact because it is, I mean, this is what the fundamentalist, the quote fundamentalists do, the, the Islamists and the jihadists look at the books, you know, the members of, of ISIS right now have the theology on their side. It's not like they're ignoring the books. They're looking at the books very literally. And they're saying, you know, what in here, you know, what are we, what are we doing that you don't find in the books essentially? It's like we, we're just, we're just, this is just connected dots. You know, but that was one of the videos that you would, uh, post it up on your blog that you and I discussed, the guy that was standing in front of all those people that was talking about stoning people for adultery or the treatment of homosexuals and how, that this is not radical Islam. This is just Islam. And that was shocking. And that's one of those videos where you posted or you talk about it and you get a million people that get upset at you over it. You get a million people that call you, Islamophobic or what have you and get upset about it. And a lot of those are the same people. There was a weird thing that happened after Charlie Hebdo that really kind of freaked me out where there was a lot of liberals and progressives that were pointing to the callousness of the cartoons as almost a justification for murdering a bunch of cartoonists. Yeah. Yeah. That, you know, the punching down thing kept being discussed this weird liberal obsession with the way humor is disseminated that in somehow or another, it justified or at least, uh, rationalize the fact that they could just gun down cartoonists. Yeah. Fucking cartoonists, you're not talking about people that are doing experiments on monkeys or people that are torturing animals. I mean, you're not talking about people that are imprisoning other human beings. You're not talking about people that are, you know, even even stopping people from doing anything, just mocking them in cartoon form. And in this case, mocking also Christianity and the Vatican and many of the things that were interpreted interpreted as racist weren't even racist if you understood French or French politics. So it's, it's, you know, it's shocking. And people and the people who missed the, the, the train on this people like Gary Trudeau, the, the dunes, Barry, you know, creator. I mean, he just just came out against, um, uh, Charlie Hebdo and a bunch of writers who belong to the Pan-America organization, which is the whole point of which is to defend free speech. They just walked out of a gala event or declined to show up because Pan had given Charlie Hebdo, the, you know, the freedom of expression award this year as they should have. And some prominent people pro, left in protest. And, um, it's, uh, no, the fact that it is that what is that? Well, it's, it's political correctness and fears about being perceived as a racist. And this notion that, um, you should, that it makes sense to have a double standard here where you can that there's some trade off between freedom of expression and freedom of religion where, where when the freedom that's being claimed on the religious side is the freedom not to be offended, right? to not. So I mean, what, what really what's happening here is some number of Muslims are demanding that non-Muslims follow the taboos of Islam. So it's taboo for you to, to say anything negative about the prophet or even to depict him in, in a drawing, right? That's, that's where it gets to it. And we want you, and we want you to follow this taboo though you are not Muslim. And we feel so strongly about this that we're going to kill you or threaten to make credible threats of, of killing you or we're just going to, when people do kill you, we're going to blame you for having gotten yourself killed or having been so stupid and insensitive by caricature in the prophet. And that whole, I mean, that just has to lose. I mean, we have to, we have to hold to free speech. So, uh, unequivocally that all the people over here who think that that there's this trade-off between religious sensitivity and free speech just have to realize that they've, they've lost because we don't play this game with any other religion. We just think about this, the knowledge I have used before, but the book of Mormon, right? It just, it just pillaries Mormonism and makes Mormonism look ridiculous, right? What did the Mormons do in response? The Mormons took out ads in playbill, right? It was very cute what they did. They took out ads like if you, if you like the play, you know, come, come learn the real stuff, right? It was just, it was totally civil, good nature, fine. They're my favorite cult. Right. Yeah. Yeah. They really are. I like them way more than I even like Scientology was my second favorite. Right. But, but Trey Parker and that stone are not looking over their shoulders for the Mormon assassins, but they come here about Muslims, but they briefly, they didn't even, they put Muhammad in a bear suit. It was just a bear, right? And then they had to put the bear suit in a van. Yeah. And then they pulled it off the air. We're still, they had to pull it off the air. And we're still, it made sense for them to pull it off the air given the actual nature of the threat. And so we've, so as I've argued, we have already lost our freedom of speech on this issue and to the people that one individual issue, we've almost, the only issue on earth really. And there are people on the, the liberal side of this argument who think that is a good thing, that that is a, that you are a racist to question the, the, the decency of that situation. And it's just not truly. So it's a completely insane doctrine that is, that we should not have to, we should be able to criticize to our hearts content without threats violence as we, as we can with every other insane doctrine. Do you think that that's fear, that that's a fear of Islam, a fear of retaliation, that they want to be on the side of the others because it's so dangerous because they are the only religion that will come out and kill you. And these same people I've found that will call people out on being Islamophobic will not say a fucking peep about anti-Christian rhetoric. If you start talking shit about Jesus or mocking Christianity, they never have a word to say about it because it's not dangerous. Because it's not dangerous to be on that side. I think it's much more just white guilt and, and political correctness. There's definitely some of that as well. Just a sense. It's just, it is, if you take, again, I don't mean to trash Abby per se, but you'd love her. I'm sure no, no, she's great per she's cool. But, but if you take her view of our foreign policy, if you just agreed with her down the line, just check all those boxes, two million people, we did it all. We, you know, we just kill brown skin people all over the world because we just like to sell bombs. And that's really what our moral core, you know, then yeah, then we should have a fair amount of white guilt, right? Then it's understandable that you think that more or less any non-Western population that expresses a grievance against us has a point. Isn't there a real problem with saying our? Because you and I have nothing to do with that. And we're a part of this weird gang called the United States of America, whenever you say us, what we've done us. I mean, we, we haven't done shit, but we're somehow another lumped into this group. That's a big part of it. But we participated in a system, the existence of which is predicated on some of this shit, right? The existence of which existed long before you and I are ever born. We're born into a system we have zero control over. Well, that, and that's why I think that some of the greatest ethical changes, the greatest ethical progress for us as a species is going to come not with each one of us developing an ethical code that allows us to be a hero, you know, personally and just bucking a system and bucking a trend, you know, from morning till night. We need to design systems that are more benign, you know, so it's like it comes down to the, you know, our smartphones like is there a way to produce a smartphone that has ethically right now at the moment, it seems like there isn't or at least we're not, we're not being so scrupulous as to find one, but you mean as far as conflict, mineral, all of it's like it could we could we actually be good people all the way down the supply chain, slave labor, all the way down. Now I would pay more for that phone. There's no question, right? You know, there was a phone that they were trying to produce about that. It was called the fair phone. I don't know, there was non-conflict minerals. It was, but it was only 3G nobody went. Right. Right. Peace. Shake. That's why I come not kidding. But that's where I come down. I don't know. We're so the fair far our hold on our better nature is so tenuous that that the difference between 4G and 3G could make the difference, right? It's like, yeah, let's see if they've moved up to 4G. I'll fuck them by it. Right. Right. It's kind of beans. I mean, nobody wants a bit of my soul out. Look at that. They're sold out. Wow. My point is no one should have to have a bad phone to be a good person. Right. So true. So we want systems that is adorable, right? Well, you see liberals with an iPhone 6. Right. Like listen, but it's on. But it's, but it's, it's weird. We are those liberals too. Look at that guy with a fair phone. That's what you get when you get a fair phone. That's perfect. That's something I'm correct. Something the size of a toaster that you have. That's the shit from an iced tea video from 1988. Look at that bracket. That guy's got up to his ear. That is an unfair phone. That is a terrible way to the, to sell your phone. Why would you have that fucking ridiculous fault? You can't put that in your pocket, son. Yeah. Well, all of those people that buy those things and have those, those like extreme liberal values progressive values, you have to deal with the absolute reality that at the very least, your phone is being produced in a factory where people are jumping off the roof. Right. That's a fact. Unless they're making them in Korea, the Samsung phones, I think, ethically, I think they have like a leg up on the iPhone. It's in the sense that, you know, the, those Foxconn buildings where they have nets installed all around the building to keep people from jumping off the roof because it sucks so bad there. And I've heard the argument against that. Well, the amount of people that you got to deal with the fact that these factories employ half a million people. And the number of people that commit suicide is directly proportionate to the same number of people that would commit suicide in the regular population. But they're killing themselves at work. Like how many people kill themselves at work? Like that's not normal. And they live at work. Okay, well, that's not normal either. You got slaves. These are essentially wage slaves. Again, these are situations where there's often, or at least sometimes no good option immediately. So when you think of like child labor laws in a place like Pakistan. I know, right? Look at that phone. Look how beautiful it is. Look at that talk, dude. Come on. That's green. Pretty. I'm not going to lose any sleep at night over your owning that phone. Thank you. But it's say, I think you and I would and millions of other people would probably, I mean, I know I would, but I think millions if we could make the problem transparent, we would pay more to be truly good actors from across. In all of the streams of influence. But there are certain situations again where, you know, I just mentioned you know, child labor laws in Pakistan. If you go, if you just say, no kids can work, right? Because this is obscene. This is, you know, we haven't done this in the West for over 100 years. You know, we don't want kids stitching together are soccer balls, right? These kids should be in school. Well, there are situations where that may be workable, right? Where you get the kid out of the factory and where he's been working 14 hours a day. And you get him into school and he's got a better life. But there are many situations in places like Pakistan where, no, what you've just done is you've made it impossible for this kid to work and you've further impoverished his family. Because he wasn't going to go to school anyway. Now he's going to find that he's going to be picking stuff out of a trash heap or whatever it is. And he doesn't, you haven't put in place an alternative that's workable. And so we, in many problems of this sort, we have to find a path forward where the first doors we open, all, you know, the choice between the doors we have to open, all suck, right? And there are, and there are, there are situations, you know, geopolitically that are like that where you can either back a guy who's a dictator, right? But he's secular and he's committed to a first approximation to, so basically saying relations with the rest of the world. But he's, he really is a dictator and he really has a history of treating people badly and he's going to treat political dissent very badly because of the possible consequences for him if he doesn't, because of the society's bursting it coming apart of the seams. Or you can just let the Islamists and the jihadists run the place, right? And that is a, you know, there's no good option and it's understandable that we have in many cases chosen the dictator there. Well, that was sort of the situation was Saddam Hussein, right? Yeah. Me, psychopath, his children were psychopaths, murderers, serial killers. He did horrific things, but it was very secular in the way he ran his country. Yeah. And so there, you know, they're, we're facing this on many fronts. I want to ask you this because you, you have these extreme opinions about these things. You have these extreme criticisms. If you could, if ultimately someone said, look, Sam, you're going to be king of the world. You, you, you were going to be the guy that gets too. If you could, if ultimately someone said, look, Sam, you're going to be king of the world. You were going to be the guy that gets to sort this mess out. We need someone to engineer a global culture. What would be the step that you would take to try to alleviate some of the suffering of the world, to alleviate some of the bloodshed, alleviate all these conflicts, is geopolitical conflicts? Well, in this area, the first few things I would do, we've already talked about. One is I would make it absolutely clear that free speech just wins. So whenever you got into a Charlie Hebdo situation or the Danish cartoons, the riots over those cartoons, we've had half a dozen situations like that in the last 10 years. The people, even our own government, we're fighting a war on terror and we still can't defend free speech when those situations are up. So, for instance, this was over the innocence of Muslims' film. I don't remember that film. Yes. A YouTube film that kicked off riots everywhere. Well, was that true, though, because I've heard so many versions of it? And the Benghazi thing was true that it did kick off riots everywhere. But the thing that was egregious about our government statement there was that we basically just rather than take the totally sane line of saying, listen, in our society we have committed to freedom of speech and you can make films about anything here. And it never gives you license to kill people, right? Or to burn embassies, full stop. What was that? It was a film called The Innocence of Muslims or Innocence of Muslims, made by some crackpots somewhere. And it was just a YouTube video. But it got spun as this major scandal in the Muslim world and it reliably produced this reaction of the sort that the Danish cartoons have. And we rather than just hold the line for free speech, we, I mean, the State Department said something like, you know, we totally repudiate this attack upon Islam. And we just distanced ourselves from it just as a way of trying to contain the madness, right? It was a symptom of just how afraid we are that this sort of thing can get out of hand in the Muslim world because it can, right? If there's a rumor that a Quran got burned or if some, you know, pastor in Florida threatens to burn a Quran, reliably doesn't, people by the dozens get killed in places like Afghanistan. Because there's, you know, it's in a way that a suicide bombing between Sunni and Shia never produces a response of that sort. So it's a, I would hold to free speech and I would just make that. And because free speech is the freedom that safeguards every other freedom. If you can't speak freely, if you can't criticize powerful people or powerfully bad ideas, there's just no way to defend society, from slipping back into, you know, theocracy or any other kind of medieval situation. And so you have to defend free speech. Even for even speech you don't like, you know, it's like these Holocaust denial laws in Western Europe. It's illegal to deny the Holocaust in Germany and a few other countries, I think Austria, I think even France. And it's a ludicrous law. You should be totally free to deny the Holocaust and then everyone else should be free to treat you like an idiot. And you should be able to, you should be free to destroy your reputation. Right? The fact that we're putting people in jail for denying the Holocaust is totally counterproductive. And it does look like a, you know, in defense of Muslim apologists, it does look like a double standard. You're going to put people in jail for denying the Holocaust, but you're going to allow, allow Charlie Hebdo to criticize the prophet? How does that make sense? Right? I totally agree with them there. We should not be, we should not be criminalizing any form of speech. So, blah. That's a fustu. Yeah. And there, so, but there people trying to push through blasphemy laws. There's a politician in the UK who, who recently just said he would make Islamophobia a criminal offense, right? He would, I'm sure he would make the sorts of things I say about Islam criminally actionable in the UK, right? That, this is a disaster. That's the wrong road to go down. So, first thing. And I think that's a hugely important thing. And the other piece we just talked about is just getting off of oil. We just imagine that one change, right? We could get off of oil. And that would prove beyond any shadow of a doubt that spending your life splitting hair is about a Muslim theology and demonizing the rest of the world. And exporting, you know, madras, crazy madrasas by the tens of thousands all over the world as the Saudis do. It would prove that that is not a way to join the community of functional nations. Because absent an ability to pull their wealth out of the ground, they have no intellectual content. They don't, they don't produce anything of value that anyone wants. That, that's a problem they would have to solve, right? If they don't want to be begred in a global community. And that issue also with the ideology of their religion is that you're not allowed to question or change or manipulate the way you approach life because it's all dictated by their religion. Even the finances. Well, it's part of it. And just when you look at societies where they keep half the population, the female half, more or less hostage and unable to get, get educated or to work or to drive cars or depending on which society you're talking about. This economically and socially doesn't make any sense. In a context where you need to produce intellectual content to be part of a global conversation. So the only way they've been able to do this is because of the fact that they have extreme amount of money that comes from more. Many, well certainly if you're talking about the soil. So the oil states, yeah. And so that's if we, if oil were no longer valuable. And we actually could get to a time where that would be the case where it's oil. It's just dirty, dirty fluid that no one wants to have anything to do with, right? It's that would be that would be a huge change. And I'm sure there's another side to this argument where it would be a destabilizing change. I mean, just imagine how things will start to run off the rails in the Middle East if oil is worthless. Right. And what Saudi Arabia can be like. arguably I think they probably hedge their their bets and they have so much money in other investments now that, you know, at least the royal family would be fine. But it's a huge part of the problem and as you've pointed out it keeps us double dealing and being captive to the cycle of defending our very real economic interest. I mean, really like existential interests in terms of our energy supply over the years and producing mayhem as a result. But how do you get someone to abandon such a rigid ideology? How do you get someone to open their mind up to the possibility that this was just written by people? This is just a way of governing people and keeping people in line, which is essentially every single religion that's ever been created. But see it happens. And there's actually another point that Abby Martin made, which I agree with. I just, she doesn't, we don't agree with it for the we don't think this thought for the same reasons. But she pointed out that that religions change, right? That you roll back the clock 500 or so years. Christians were burning people alive and you know, actively propagating people for blasphemy. They had the inquisition in Europe and that was as every bit as much of a horror show as what's going on in Iraq now. So look, Christianity can be just as bad as Islam. Now it's true as a matter of history that is in fact true. There are differences between Islam and Christianity that are nevertheless important. But the crucial piece is that Christianity did not change from the inside. Christianity got hammered from the outside by a renaissance. And I mean a reformation initially, which was bloody and horrible. But it got hammered by the forces of a scientific revolution and an attendant industrial revolution and capitalism. And the rest of culture that didn't want to be shackled to theocracy for very good reason, right? And so like once you have a real science of medicine, you don't have to ask the priest why your child is flopping around on the floor. And when the priest diagnoses it as demonic possession, you don't take it seriously, right? You now have a neurologist to talk to him. This is these are, there's progress made outside of religion which propagates back to religion and applies a lot of pressure to it. So Christianity has been humbled and mastered by the secular world, by humanism, by science, by the rest of our conversation with ourselves. And this has not happened in the Muslim world and it should happen and it has to happen. We have to figure out how to engineer it for Muslims. And it's not again it's not going to come from the outside, you know, the non-Muslims are not going to force it on Muslims. But we have to support the genuine reformers and the people who are fighting for the rights of women and gays and free thinkers in the Muslim world. And the horrible thing is that the liberals on our side don't do that. The liberals on our side criticize people like me and even Ion Herci Ali, you know, a former Muslim who has been hunted by theocrats, right? They criticize Her as a bigot for how unsparing her criticism is of Islam, whereas she is fighting for the rights of women to be equal in the Muslim world, right? And so our liberal liberalism has just truly lost the plot here and we have to be committed to the same kind, I mean, we are concerned about the rights of women in Silicon Valley, right? And that's how a feat our concerns are now, like where, why isn't there an equal number of women in venture capital now? What a fucking scandal, right? People who have gone for hours about that, right? I'm not saying it's not a potential scandal, great. Let's talk about that scandal, but let's talk about the fact that, you know, girls six years of age are getting clear rectimies by barbarians in septic conditions. And everyone around them thinks it's a good and necessary thing, right? And, you know, women who get raped get killed because they brought dishonor on their family. And this is another planet over there that we have to interact with because violence is coming our way for no other reason. But there's another reason. There's the ethical imperative of figuring out how to help people who are hostage to a bad system. And so, yeah, let's be, let's be four women's rights globally, but what does that look like? That looks like a rather staunch criticism of the way women are treated under Islam. There's a lot of seemingly open-minded European cultures that have opened the door for a lot of Islamic immigrants or Muslim immigrants to come over their country. Now they're dealing with a lot of the issues that involve these ideologies being a part of their culture now. Yeah. Well, they are in a situation similar to ours with Latin America where they just, they need immigrant labor, right? They're actually worse than the U.S. in terms of their replacement rate. You've got a bunch of countries in Western Europe who are becoming these senescent populations that are just not replacing themselves. And they need immigrant labor. And the most of the available labor is coming from the Muslim world. And then you also have the problem of political refugees who are leaving war-torn places for obvious reasons and winding up in the closest shores across the Mediterranean. So yeah, the people they're attracting are different from many Muslim immigrants we get in the U.S. who are coming in at work for Google or do they get engineering degrees or different demographic largely? Okay. I think we've covered that subject into the ground. So let me, I'll just mention the things on this list and you can send Abby a big kiss. And again, I hope what I said about Abby didn't seem mean spirited. Like she actually is wrong about me and if I'm wrong about her, I am happy to be enlightened on that topic. Well, I would be interested to be aware of that. You'll be hilarious. You all bring the tequila. Is that what's necessary? For me. I'll bring my own tequila. Okay. So we did free will, I think. And let's come up again. AI, which is that something you're concerned with? Yeah. I actually just blogged about this and did you? I spoke about it. But I think it was in my head to talk about it because I heard you talk about it with someone. It might have been Duncan, trustful, most likely. We've talked about it many times. But I just got on to this on the bandwagon here because I hadn't really thought about it at all. I'm not really a sci-fi geek. I don't read science fiction. And the word in neuroscience has been for a very long time. And really science generally is that AI hasn't panned out. It's not that it's inconceivable with something interesting is going to happen. But it has been old style AI was really a dead end. And we never really got out of that particular cul-de-sac. And we just haven't made much progress. And so we have the best chess player in the world as a computer, the size of this table. But the prospect of having truly general artificial intelligence and superhuman level intelligence, that's not something we have to worry about in the near term at all. But then I heard as many people did, my friend, Elon Musk say something which seemed quite hyperbolic. He thought it was the greatest threat to humanity, probably worse than nuclear weapons. And there was a lot of push back against him there. But I actually know Elon and I knew he just wouldn't say that without any basis for it. And it just so happened there was a conference that had been scheduled long before in Puerto Rico in San Juan that was really a closed-door conference for the people who were really at the cutting edge of AI research. It was organized by the Future of Life Institute, which is a nonprofit purpose toward looking at the existential threat and looking at it. And in this case, how to create a foreseen the existential problems around the development of AI. And it was a conference, it made me of there were 70 people at the conference. And it was all people who were doing this work. And a couple, I mean, I literally think I was one of maybe two people who had sort of talked his way into the conference. Everyone else was just invited and they had a good reason to be there. And what was interesting is that outside this conference, Elon was getting this a lot of push back. Like, dude, you don't know what you're talking about. You're talking about go back to your rockets and your cars, but you don't know anything about computers apparently. And he was getting this push back from serious people, people who, like our on edge.org website, where I also occasionally published and, you know, roboticists at MIT and people who should, you know, form or top people at Microsoft, people who you think are very close to this would say, no, no, this is 50 or 100 years out. And this is crazy. And so anyway, I went to this conference just wanting to see what was up. And what was interesting, and frankly, scary was that at the conference, even among people who clearly drunk the cool aid and are just not willing to pull the breaks on this at all. I mean, they don't even, it's arguably it's hard to conceive of how you would pull the breaks on this because the incentive to make these breakthroughs financially is just so huge that, you know, if you don't do it, someone will, and so everyone's just just pedal to the metal. But basically, even the people who were going at this most aggressively were people who were conceding that huge, it was not at all fanciful to say that huge break. And artificial general intelligence could come in five or 10 years, given the nature of the progress that had been made in the last 10 years. And the scary thing is that when you look at the details, it's not at all obvious to see a path forward that doesn't just destroy us. It's because it's not. You think that most people's default bias, and it was mine, frankly, going into this was, well, this probably is kind of like Y2K, right? Everyone is worried that, you know, the clocks are going to change and all of our computers are going to seize up. And we're going to have a real problem on our hands, but the clock changes and nothing happens, right? So it's just you got a bunch of nerds worried about something that just doesn't happen, right? So is that an analogy for this situation? And it really isn't. What's going on here is you're talking about, even in the most benign, let me just step back, because for assuming that a lot of people understand what we're talking about here. What we're talking about is producing what's called strong AI, or often called AGI, like artificial general intelligence. You're talking about a machine that is, where the intelligence is not brittle. It's not like, you know, the best chess plane computer in the world can't play tic-tac-toe, right? So it's like all it can do is play chess. So it's not a general intelligence. You're talking about something that learns how to learn in such a way that the learning transfers to novel situations. And it doesn't degrade. If you give it a new problem, it won't get worse at the other problems that it got good at because you're giving it new problems now. You're giving it something that scales, that can move into new territories, they can become better at learning. And in the ultimate case, can make improvements to itself. Once these machines become the best designers of the next iteration of software and hardware, well, then you get this sort of, this exponential takeoff function, or you know, often called the singularity, where you have something where there's a runaway effect, where it's just, you can't, this is now that the capacities are, it's just gotten away from you. And so the, you imagine, what's often said is that we're going to build something, the near term goal is to build something that's human level intelligence, right? So you're going to build, we have a chess computer that's not quite as good as a person. And then it is as good as a person, and now it's, you know, a little better than a person, but it's still not so much better as to be completely uncanny to us. And we're thinking of doing that for everything, but the truth is that as a mirage, we're not going to build a human level AGI. Once we build an AGI, it's going to be better at, which is to say, once we build a truly generalizable intelligence, something that can, you know, prove mathematical theorems and make scientific hypotheses and test them and, you know, everything a human can do, it's going to be so much better than a human, because of, for a variety of reasons. One is that your phone is already better than you, I mean, super human in many respects. It has a superhuman memory. It has a superhuman capacity to calculate, right? So it's a, it's a, and if you hook it to the internet, it has potential access to all of human knowledge, right? So we're not going to build a human level AGI. We're going to build something that is going to be not an AGI, right? It's going to be like a dumb chess plane computer until it isn't. And then it's going to be superhuman, right? And when you're talking about something that runs, potentially a million times or more faster than a human brain, because you're not talking about, you know, a biological system. Now you're talking about, you know, photons. It could make, you just, you just do the math and you see that, you know, this thing is running for a week. That is the equivalent of 20,000 years of intellectual progress. So it's just like, what, you get the smartest people alive in a room for 20,000 years, right? With access to all of the world's information and an ability to model, you know, new experiments and, interesting computational abilities of the sort that we don't, we can't imagine. And 20,000 years from now, what are they going to come back to you with? That's going to be one week of this machine running, right? So this is how this thing sort of escapes. Like, how do we feel that we can control the goals and the behavior of a system that is capable of making 20,000 years of progress in a week, right? And what's, when you hear about how they're going about designing these systems, it is kind of uncanny. They're talking about designing, you know, like black box in the systems where, and the first thing you want to do is not give it access to the internet, right? You're, you're just going to cage this thing, right? So, because you don't want it to get out, right? So, but you want to tempt it. You want to see that it, see if it's trying to get out, right? So you're going to give it like a dummy ethernet port that you're monitoring, right? I mean, this is, the people doing this work at the highest level are talking about games like this. Where like, how do you know whether the thing is lying to you that it tried to make, how do you know whether it knows about the internet? How do you know whether it is, so this is called a honey pot strategy where you tempt it to make certain moves in the direction of acquiring more power than you wanted to give it. And then you can just, you know, just shut it off immediately. But you're talking about guys, you know, who are, a lot younger than us, who, you know, many of whom are somewhere on the Asperger's continuum, who are drinking a lot of red bull and have billions of dollars at their disposal to do this work. And there's a huge responsibility not to do anything that obviously destroys the world. And the problem is, even when you think, even when you think about the most benign versions of this, the possibility of destroying the world is not fanciful. So like, just a matter, forget about what I just said about 20,000 years of progress. Just imagine we build this, we have an AI as someone, you know, working for Facebook or whatever, builds this thing. It's totally, we've solved what's called the control problem. We figured out how to keep this thing doing our bidding, right? It doesn't, it's not going to design come up with near term goals that, that are antithetical to human happiness. Like, it's just a non-trivial problem. If you say, okay, just you have to be committed to human well-being, right? If that's the foundational architecture of the system, it depends what that means in certain cases. I mean, what if the thing besides, well, okay, if I'm committed to human well-being, I'm going to kill all the unhappy people, right? Or I'm just going to plug, you know, electrodes into the right part of the brain of every human being and give them just pure pleasure, right? You have to solve these problems. But so let's say we build something, it's totally under our control. It works perfectly and we don't have to worry about the control problem. We still have to worry about the political and economic effects of building something that's going to put the better part of humanity out of work, right? I mean, you're talking about now something that can build further iterations of itself, where the cost of building versions of itself now is going to plummet to more or less the cost of raw materials. You're talking about a labor-saving device of a sort that no one has ever anticipated. And we don't have a political system that can absorb that. We have a political system where we would see the cover of some, some, the picture of some trillionaire on the, on the cover of Ink Magazine. And we would hear that unemployment now is, you know, 30% even among white collar people. And so we need, we need to, even if we were going to, I mean, it's humbling to realize that even if we were given the perfect labor-saving device, it could still, it could screw up the world. We couldn't, we couldn't, we couldn't reliably share that wealth with all of humanity, which is of course what we should do. But we're in a system where the Chinese and the Russians would probably reasonably worry that we're going to use this thing to, as the ultimate tool of war, right? So we have terrestrial and cyber. So just imagine the cyber war and the drone war, we could unleash on the rest of the world if we had the ultimate war-making computer, right? And they didn't. So this is like a winner-take-all scenario that is unsustainable politically. So we have to get, politically we have to be in a position and economically where if this thing were handed to us, we could use it for benign purposes and share the wealth. And that is the best case scenario. That isn't even dealing with any of the problems of this thing having a will of its own, which of course it would. Is it possible that it's the next stage of life? Yeah, well, that's the other uncanny thing at this conference. You had a few people whose names escape me, unfortunately. Actually, no, the rules of the conference were I couldn't even mention their names if they hadn't escaped me. So really? Yeah. Whoa. There's secret rules. It's called the Chatham House Rules. Certain conferences are organized under board meetings or organized under these rules where you want to encourage, so there's no press there, right? And you want to encourage just a free exchange of ideas. And you can talk about what was talked about there, but you can't give any attribution and you can't. Nothing's on nothing's forming on the record. I pour a Rico. Whoa, you had to go to another country sort of. Not really, but sort of, right? Yeah, I don't know that that was, I think it was just they were looking for good weather. It was in the middle of the trees. They had plans. They wanted to go to where that giant, erasebo is not where the, one of the big telescopes they used to search for extraterrestrial intelligence from the movie contact. Was that in Puerto Rico? No, I don't know. Erasebo Disc. I don't know. I don't know like that. So they have some of those things in the southern hemisphere. So, So, Senate? Oh, so your question, your question about whether this is in the next stage of life. I mean, are we a caterpillar? So they were giving birth to a butterfly that we're not aware of? Essentially one, one of these guys gave a talk that was all purpose toward making that ethical case that this is. Is that Puerto Rico? Yeah. Yeah. They're talking aliens, bro. They're not even letting you know. They're already, they're already planning. Aliens are making these things. They're making an alien. That's what an alien is. But that's the thing. This thing that gets that weird. Like when you imagine this thing getting away from us, yeah, it would be its own. Now whether or not it would be conscious. I'm actually agnostic as to whether or not a super intelligent computer would by definition be conscious. It could be unconscious. It could be nothing that it's like to be that sort of system or it could be conscious. But in any case, this one guy gave a talk. It's one guy gave a talk where he just speculated about this thing taking off and more or less standing in relation to us, the way we stand in relation to bacteria or snails or life forms that we just squash without a quam. And that's a totally benign acceptable, not only acceptable, but to be hoped for, right? Because I can follow him there at least halfway. Totally, but not only acceptable, but to be hoped for, right? Because we are... And I can follow him there at least halfway if you imagine that these are conscious and actually become the center of the greatest possible happiness in the universe. So if we give birth to a conscious machine that is essentially a God, right, that has interests and states of pleasure and insights and meaning that we can't even imagine, right? That thing, by definition, by my definition, becomes more important than us, right? Then we really are like the chickens that, you know, hope we don't kill them to eat them, but they're just chickens and we're more important because we have a, you know, with this greater, greater scope to our pains and pleasures. And that's not to say that I don't see any moral problem with killing chickens. I'm just saying that we are more important than chickens because of the nature of human experience and its possibilities. But if we build a machine that stands in relation to us the way we stand in relation to chickens or far beyond, right? I mean, there's nowhere written that the spectrum of possible intelligence and somewhere close to where we are. Not only that, there's nowhere written that they cannot create far better versions and we could ever postpone that. So that's what, that's implicit in what I'm saying. We're imagining that this, this take off would be this machine create, it makes, yeah, it makes recursive improvements to itself or to, or to new generation. Yeah. So it's just, it's changing its own code. It's learning how to build better versions of itself and it's just, it just takes off. And if you, but the one horrible possibility is that this is not conscious, right? That there's no good that has come of it. This is just blind mechanism which still is God like in its power. And, and it could be, it could be antithetical to our survival or it could just sort of part ways with us. You know, that's the mind fuck of all mind foxes that we really are just a caterpillar and we're giving birth to this ultimate fractal intelligence that's infinite and it's spanned. It could create something within like as you said a week, 20,000 years of, of human intelligence and the greatest minds and it could do that in a week. And then a week later, another 100,000 more fractal keeps going on and on and on. It's exponential and it's, and it's reach and then we really will be outdated like almost instantaneously. And sort of kind of crazy that, as you said, a lot of these guys that are creating these things are on the spectrum. And like what is that from? Is it, is it possible that this, that these super intelligent human beings that a lot of them do have the sort of asperger's he way of, of approaching life and a lot of them are on the spectrum? The nature sort of design that in order to make sure that we do create these things. I mean, if everything in life, if life itself, everything in life, we look at alpha wolves and the way caterpillars interact with their environment and bugs and whatever, all that stuff's natural is human behavior. Human cognitive thinking is human creativity is all that nature is all that just a part of human beings ultimate curiosity. Almost inevitably leading to the creation of artificial intelligence and was it sort of programmed into the system to create something far better than what we are. Well, I wouldn't say it's programmed into the system, necessarily. I think you can explain all this just by everything being pushed from behind by it's, you know, we're following our own interests. We're trying to survive. We have all of the, the inclinations and abilities that evolution has selected for in us. And we have an ability to create increasingly powerful technology. And the, but the inevitability of this is hard to escape when you, they're really only two assumptions. You all you have to assume is that we are going to build better and better computers, which I think you have to assume, apart from the possibility that we're just going to destroy ourselves and lose the ability to do so. But if we don't destroy ourselves some other way, we are going to continue to make progress in both hardware and software design. And the only other thing you have to assume is that there's nothing magical about the wetware we have inside our heads as far as information processing is concerned and that it's possible to build intelligent machines in silicon. Right. And I don't, I can't imagine any, at this point, serious scientist fundamentally downing either of those two assumptions. I mean, there's nobody thinks that there's something magical about being, you know, neural material when it comes to intelligent, you know, the processing of information that is underlying intelligence. And we're just going to keep making progress. So at some point this progress is going to birth a generation of computers that is better able to make this sort of progress than we are. And then it then it takes off. And so, and so it will, some people, the benign version of this that some people imagine. And this is where the whole singularity begins to sound like a religion. But there are many people in Silicon Valley imagining that we are going to merge with these machines. We're going to upload our consciousnesses onto the internet eventually and become immortal and just live in sort of the dreamscape of, you know, the paradise. And that we have engineered into our machines. And I mean, that vision presupposes a few other things that are more much more far-fetched than the first two things that I first to assumptions. Listed. One is that before this happens we will crack the neural code and truly understand how to upload the information in a human brain into another medium. And that you could move, you know, consciousness, mind and consciousness into the internet. Or onto some other, you know, you could back yourself up on a hard drive. And there just philosophical fundamentals, philosophical problems about what it would even mean to do that, right? And what sense are you surviving? If you back, if you copy your brain, the full contents of your brain successfully into a new medium, having that, having we just doubled you. And then when you die, aren't you just dying every bit as much as you would be dying? If we hadn't done that, I mean, there are problems of sort of identity that come in there that are sort of hard to solve. But, no, there are people who are looking at this as a, you know, it's very much like we're building the matrix in some sense, and we're going to leap into it at the opportune moment and it's going to be glorious. Listed. That is such a utopian possibility, like that's the utopian version of X-Mackinga, right? Which comes out this is another out right now. Yeah, I saw it. I haven't seen it yet, but I mean, this is what we're talking about. That's probably the most benign version of it, an artificial person that's like you can't sting your shit between that and a real person. But not if you say the film. Right, well, I had it. But our own spoil, consciousness is, I mean, it's so archaic in comparison. If you're talking about something that can exponentially increase in one week, 20,000 years, and then on and on and on from there. Yeah. Why would you want to take your consciousness and download it? Noria, it's like a chicken-ass game. You know, how do I stay a chicken? Exactly. Like, where are my feathers going to go in this new, if you've taken me in the world and turned it into Einstein. Would you really want to go back to being an aunt? I prefer digging in the dirt, just dropping my eggs and cutting leaves. And what would it do? I mean, ultimately this isn't as capable it seems like. I mean, our thirst for ingenuity and innovation is just never going to slow down. And our ability to do that is never going to slow down either. Unless we, unless the Supervolcano hits or here. Well, and the other side of this is there are so many problems that we would want artificial intelligence to solve for us. I mean, do you think of curing Alzheimer's or solving, you know, met global economic problems? Or how great would it be to have a reliably benign superintelligence, which literally would be like an oracle? Right? Or a God to help us solve problems that we're not smart enough to solve. And that, you know, but the prospect of building that and keeping it reliably benign or keeping ourselves from going nuts in its presence. That's just a non-trivial problem. Would you almost instantaneously recognize that part of the problem is us itself? Or us? That's where the problem is. That's one reasonable fear, yeah. And then it would also immediately recognize like, hey, this planet has only got like another billion years of reliable sunlight. Like we've got to get the fuck out of here and propagate the universe. Well, there's a great book. If you really want to get into this, there's a book by the philosopher Nick Bostrom. And he actually might have been the one who convinced Elon this is such a problem. And I read his, he was one of the organizers of this conference. And virtually everyone had read his book at the conference. He wrote a book called Super Intelligence, which is a lay is out the whole case. And virtually everything that you've heard me say on this topic is some version of a concern that he expresses in that book. And it's very interesting because he just goes through it. You know, it's like 400 pages of systematically closing the door to every utopian way this could be. go right for us. And he just says like, yeah, well, here are the things you're not foreseen about how even a, we just have to anticipate absolutely everything. So if you're trying to create a machine that is going to block spam, right, you need to create a machine that will not as a strategy for reducing spam just kill people. Right. That's a way to reduce spam. And but it's the only way. Yeah, it's like common sense things that you can't that you can't, you can't assume common sense in a super intelligent machine. Unless you unless you have engineered it into the architecture or you have, you have taught it, you've built it to emulate your values, the strategies where that where you would build a machine where it would not only, it would not merely emulate current human values. It would seek to to, ultimately you want a, you want a machine that instantiates the values that we should have. You know, that not that we necessarily do in any moment. And what was interesting, one thing that's interesting may in thinking about this is that the moment you think about building a machine like this, you realize that you have to solve some fundamental philosophical problems. You can't pretend that that everyone, everyone has this equivalently valuable values, right? You can't like because you have to decide what to engineer into this thing. So do you want to engineer the values of geotists and islamists? I mean, did the Taliban get a vote on how we should design the values of this thing? Well, I think it's pretty obviously the answer that is no. But then you have to cut through basically every other moral quandary we have because this thing is going to be acting on the basis of values. But initially, wouldn't it be, if it's independent and autonomous, it's going to automatically realize that a lot of our ideas are based on our own biological needs. And that a lot of those are unnecessary for it. Oh, yeah, but we will be building it. And if we're saying we're going to build it not to be merely self-interested, we're going to build it to conserve our interests, whatever those deepest interests are ultimately. Again, utopian though, because otherwise we're building a Satan, we're building a wrecking ball and we're going to swing it out away from the the planet and watch it hurdle back. So essentially the Unibommer was right. Have you ever seen people have done this with his texts because there are sections of his texts that can read, you know, saying totally irrational and people are people occasionally put a section there and then it's not until you turn the page and have already agreed with it that you see who wrote it. But yeah, well, yeah, it's interesting to see that whether we are kind of headed toward some kind of precipice here. Do you know how he lost his mind? Do you know the story about Ted Kuzinski? I don't know. He was part of the Harvard LSD studies. They did. Those did. They shit out of that dude. Yeah, they dosed him. He went to Berkeley, started teaching and saved up all his money from teaching and went to the woods and started blowing up people that were involved in technology. Yeah, there's a documentary called the net and I believe it's from Germany. I believe it was a German documentary, but it's very secretive like who was and was not involved in those Harvard LSD studies. What I know people on the other side of the studies and I know Richard Alpert who became rumbdos. Right. Yeah. But didn't kill everybody didn't break out what he's brain. But I mean, he might have had a vision that he chased down, you know, add to the final point and he recognized from his experiences. Like, whoa, if we keep going, this is inevitable and became obsessed with it. Obviously, you know, one of the things that people try to connect is various drugs with schizophrenia and mental illnesses. And most of those have not been able to stick because there's a certain percentage of people that will inevitably have issues. Yeah. And if those, the percentage of people that have issues with schizophrenia or various mental illnesses are almost mirrored by the percentage of people who do psychedelic drugs, various psychoactive drugs and develop these mental issues. So it might not be the cause, but it is some, it's a concern. And if you get a guy who may have a propensity for mental illness and you dose the shit out of him with LSD, you might get a Ted Kuzinski. No, I think there are some people who certainly shouldn't take any drugs. Yeah, there's nothing. Yeah. There. And you know, I've had bad experiences on a variety of psychedelics and, you know, as well as good ones, obviously. But the, the bad experiences I could see in the wrong mind affecting you permanently in a way that it's not good for you or anyone else. Yeah, you can go off the, I went off the rails for a couple of weeks once. Not really off the rails. I was totally functional. Most people probably didn't even know that I was off the rails. But my, the way I described it is that my grip on reality had gotten very slippery. Like I was kind of hanging on, like you ever done chin ups with sweaty hands? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly sure. How many you can get on before your hands give out? Right. You know, and that's kind of how I felt. I didn't feel like I had chalk on my hands and wrist straps. I felt like I had a slippery grip on reality. Yeah. And thankfully within a couple of weeks it came back to a felt normal. Right. But especially the first few days afterwards, which is very intense psychedelic experience. It was like as boundary dissolving as you can get. I mean, it might be like an argument that there's, it's probably several versions of, of each person based on your reactions to whatever experiences you have, but that might have been version 2.0 of me. Like after that, like I'm a different person. Like I became a different person because of that. And that could easily be what happened to poor old Ted. Yeah. Like, yeah, like you said, like some of his, his assertions, if you look at the direction the technology is headed, I mean, obviously he was fucking batshit crazy. But he said some things that weren't batshit crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's nothing. So if we can make a meme, if you could just say Ted Kaczynski was right. Right. And we'll just put that on Twitter. Put that on Twitter. Isn't that what it boils down to today? Is you putting a photo of you with a quote taken completely out of context and everybody sort of shits on it or agrees and disagrees. And it's fun. But honestly, I think it's you're doing well if you just, if you never knowingly do that. I mean, if you never knowingly misrepresent your opponent, then you can get into, just knock down drag out arguments about anything. Right. And then it's all fine. But as long as you're interacting with a person's actual views, then condemn those views and criticize those views to the, to whatever degree. If part of your project or the entirety of your project is simply knowingly sliming them with a misrepresentation of their views because you can get away with it because you know, because you know their views are either so hard to understand for most people or just people aren't going to take the time to do it that you just are intellectually or less blaming people. What's also that there's a desire to win that a lot of people have that they apply to debates and it makes them intellectually dishonest because they don't want to agree that someone that they might have a disagreement with may have a point or two. I mean, you might disagree with the entirety of what they're saying, but somewhere along the line you might, it might be possible that you could see where they're coming from, even if you don't agree, but it just throws your argument into a bad position so you abandon it. So the thing is that the merit of an argument has no relationship to its source, really. It's like either the argument succeeds or fails based on the structure of the argument and its connection to evidence or it doesn't. And it doesn't matter if Hitler's argument for the destruction of the Jews or Ted Kuzinski said something true about the progress of technology. It's whether it's true or not about the progress of technology has nothing to do with the source, but people imagine that you can, if you don't like the source, there's no burden to actually address the arguments. And if you don't like the arguments, a successful rejoinder is just to trash the source. That's neither of those are true. If you want to deal with, if you want to get at what's true in the world, you have to deal with arguments on their merits and you have to deal with evidence. And it doesn't matter if the evidence is coming from a thoroughly obnoxious source. It's not sufficient to say, well, I hate the source. Or I mean, as shorthand, we all have to privilege our attention in time. So if you know a source is disreputable, you can just decide, well, I don't need to hear it from this person because I know this person doesn't understand what he's saying and his lied in the past. So I'll wait to hear it from somebody else. So yeah, it's not that the source doesn't matter at all, but you're not actually addressing truth claims if you're just disparaging the source of those claims. We don't have much time left. We have less than 10 minutes. Is there anything else you'd want to get into? I mean, we had the only other thing on this list, which is just too big for 10 minutes. And we're going to get in trouble is people, a lot of people hit us with cops, Baltimore, self-defense, violence, weapons, all that stuff. Yeah. That's a big one. That's an hour. That's, yeah. At least. Yeah. And it's also, it's also, we don't need to talk about it. Once artificial intelligence kicks in, we're not going to have crime anymore. Yeah. We've pretty much cured it all with the final hour. The artificial intelligence conversation sort of trumps the whole thing because it is long not going to be important when this robot's like, read your brain. I mean, we're going to not need people anymore. So you don't need religion. You don't need lies. Charlie Ebedo's completely irrelevant. It'll be a footnote in history. It'll be like there were monkeys. They threw their shit. And then there were robots that could think for themselves. And that was it. They'll forget about all that, all that building the Eiffel Tower and what's scary about this thing is that it's, it's very hard to, I mean, so I read the book. I went to the conference. I've written about this and spoken about this. I hang out with people who are worried about this. And it's actually still hard to keep this concern in view. It does. The moment you spend 10 minutes not thinking about it, to start thinking about it again, makes you feel like, maybe that's just all crazy. What am I, like, oh, what they're really going to be a super intelligent machine that's going to take, you know, swallow the world, right? Wasn't that the devil's greatest trick? Yeah, right. But it's, but this is freshness. The devil's greatest trick is to make something that he doesn't exist. But it's, I mean, this is on you unlike other, I mean, other things have this character. Like it's hard to really worry about climate change because it's an abstraction. I mean, it's hot out there today. But how much hotter is it than it used to be? Or during the Cold War, we knew that we had, I mean, we still have these ICBM's pointed in all the wrong directions. But we're living under the continuous threat of something going wrong and annihilating the better part of humanity. And it's yet as hard, it's much easier to worry about other far more. It's easier to worry about Twitter than it is to worry about that. But this thing is so lampoonable. And it's, I mean, there's kind of a goofy notion which seems just too strange to even be the substance of good credible fiction. And yet when you look at the assumptions you need to get on the train, there's only two. And they're not, and they're very hard to doubt the truth of. Again, we just have to keep making progress and there's nothing magical about biological material in terms of an intelligent system. And by the time it becomes a threat to everyone, by the time we recognize it as a threat, ideally it'll be too late. That's even that people have different timings of the tape, what they call the take-off. You know, whether it's a hard take-off or something more gradual. Yeah, there's a kind of thing that could happen in secret and all of a sudden things are different in a way that no one understands. And you can also make this argument that if you look at all the issues that we have in this world that so many of them are almost unfixable without this. Yeah, again, that's what I said. It's like the other side, I said, I think in my blog post, the only thing scarier than the development of strong artificial intelligence is not developing it because we need problems for which we need intelligence is our only asset ultimately. I mean, it's giving us everything good. Right. And why should we accept our limited bio-biological intelligence when we can come up with something infinitely more intelligent and just like it's in a progress in this area seems almost intrinsic good. I mean, just because we want to be able to, whatever you want, clean the ocean, you want to be able to solve problems and you want to be able to anticipate the negative consequences of your doing good things and mitigate those. And intelligence is just the thing you use to do that. Let's end here. Yeah. Freak everybody out. Sam Harris, oh, blog. What is your blog? SamHarris.org. Samharras.org. Samharras.org. Oh, thank you. Thank you. Oh, thank you. Sam Harris on Twitter. Sam Harris org. Oh, thank you. Yeah. Thanks, man. Yeah, appreciate it. Always a good time. That's a fun. Yeah. All right. Much love my friends. We will be back on Friday with Rich Roll until then. See you soon. Bye bye.