Joe Roman Feynman. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night, all day. Well, so the guy that did your bar, flying guillotine, is the same guy that did the mothership. Oh wow. Richard Weiss. Yeah, Richard, the same designer, and architect who did your bar. I have a flying guillotine t-shirt that I wear tough sometimes. I was trying to fight it this morning. I couldn't fucking find it. I wore my eyes yesterday. I went to the automobile, Jarrathhausen, did a screening of the film. And I said, would it be appropriate to wear my stand now? Yeah. And I went to Jarrathhausen, and the guy there, he was like, I thought he wanted to wear his. But because he told us that. I was standing out. But he couldn't find the one. I got it somewhere. I've got it somewhere in my house. And I was scrambling this morning, looking for it, looking for that t-shirt couldn't find it. Well, we got to see you some more. Definitely, definitely. So it's great to see you again, man. That got you, man. That got you just, I got questions for you. I was thinking, well, well, remember you had the place in Wootland Hills? Yes. That was what? Eight years now? We've been out here for six years. So about six years ago. Yeah, you were there eight years ago, I think. And I just remember you having the hypabolic hyperbaric chamber? Yeah, the hyperbaric chamber. Do you still, are you still in the night? Was that what it was? Was it the sensory deprivation tank? Oh, the one one you float. Yeah. Is that because we had that at the studio? We didn't have a hyperbaric at the studio. So I do have a hyperbaric. Yeah, that now, yeah. Not here. I have it at my house. Yeah, I just was always impressed at just your consciousness on things that are unique. And as time goes on, sometimes, as we evolve, whether we evolve and physically, mentally, spiritually, economically, sometimes we leave certain things behind. Right. And I said, I want to, if Joe, keep moving his cheek in the same direction. So that's my question to you. Well, sometimes it gets caught up in momentum. And you got to step back and just realign yourself. That's definitely a factor. Like sometimes I'm too busy. And I get too caught up in momentum of things. And you kind of like lose, like, why am I doing this? Like, what is the process? Like, what is the reason for doing all this? But vacation always fixes that. Like, you take a few days off, you go. Okay. Now enjoy it. Enjoy it. Yeah. And I feel the same, to be honest, I've been running around for like, I don't know, for like eight days straight. And I like to kind of make sure I exercise, do my tie to cheat or something or stretch my body. But I was telling my wife last night, like, yeah, I haven't worked out since we've been moving. But I've been drinking every night. I'm like, I got to, so today this morning, before I came here, I got up a little bit earlier. And I went and stretched and got all that out. And that's what made me expressed the kind of my head. It was like, I wonder, like, as we grow and we become more and more involved and we get in, whatever it is, and like, that's given us how we get in these blessings, but how far we get away from the blessings that kind of made us solid. You know what I mean? Yeah. I try not to get as far. I try to stay as close as possible to like, centering my body. Like, if I don't work out, like, just a couple of days in a row, I start feeling weird. Right. Just two days. Right. Two days are to start feeling like, crack, crack, crack, crack, crack. You feel antsy? You feel irritated? Just I don't think, I'm thinking clear. I don't feel relaxed. I think I'm the same. Maybe for me, it's three and a half days. What drives me nuts is like, how many people out there, that's their whole life? There's no exercise in their life. Like, my God, you're doing yourself such a disservice. Yeah. You're not, you're not, you're mind, not just your body, but your mind needs that. You need to blow out some steam and run the machine and stretch it out and relax it afterwards and recenter yourself. And if you don't do that, you're going to be anxious. There's so many people are dealing with like constant, crippling anxiety all the time. And how many of those people don't exercise? Right. I think that in Shaolin philosophy, we, you know, that's Qi Gong, right? And that's the Qi travels through your blood. So you got to always continue to have the blood moving. Because the blood is the supply you have, but the oxygen, you know, gets it in and oxidates it and it just keeps it flowing. And when you do stretching or you do exercises or you build up your respiration, it actually energizes the blood, which energizes every party of body. It's right. That Qi travels through every vessel and every meridian of your body. And it actually does enhance you and, and re-vigorate you. 100%. Yeah. Fires up your endorphins, fires up your endocrine system, and everything just feels better. And it calms you down. I feel like human beings are almost like batteries. Like your storing energy all the time. But if you've got too much energy, it's leaking out of the battery. And you're, you're not, you're not purging some of it. You got to, you got to, your body has like human requirements for movement. Right. And if you don't, if you don't use those requirements, if you don't meet those requirements, you're just going to feel like shit. And I think that's a big part of what's wrong with society today. There's just way too many people that aren't doing that. And they're just tense. And they're, they're tense, anxious feeling and the mental health problems that come with that. It just spills over into everything else. Right. I got, I got to agree with you. And I know that people that like my seafood she had being who, people I think we saw like six times a day because he has to train. He has individual clients. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. But I think seafood was maybe 10 years, 10 years old, 10 years older than me, looked 10 years younger than me. Right. Of course. And I mean, because he's just constantly moving at she and exercising. He's, he still could kiss his toes in his 60s. Wow. Babies could do that. Right. Right. He still could kiss his toes like a baby. But he says something to me that I took just he too, for myself. I said, see for what? Like, why do you work out so much? Right. He gave me two assays says one, it feels good. It makes me feel so good. But then the other ass that he gave me was that because in Shaolin, when you get up in the morning, you have to exercise run up a mountain, run back down the mountain, do chores and all that before you eat. And it said, you don't do that. You don't eat. And so I was like, well, that sounds like something from the Bible, with it says that man should work to the sweat of his brow. You know what I mean? And I took that philosophy. So I don't normally eat in the morning. I would normally get up. I mean, I think coffee now. So I've been doing a coffee about 10 years, I think. But I will have some coffee, some water, and bam, bam, bam. I'll get into my exercise. I'll do it. When I'm home. I think that's the best way to start today. Yeah, I do the same. I don't work out. I don't eat rather before I work out. Right. I always work out first. Right. Then the water is fresher. The food tastes better. Yeah. You earned it too. Exactly. It's just a good way to start today too. You already did the hard part. The most difficult part of your day is done. And then everything else. And also, that difficult thing makes the mental difficulty of the rest of the day work smoother. Yeah. Remember that old commotion, the army commotion? Which one? It was like, we do. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah. So she's like, we do. Well, six AM when most people do all day. Yeah. It's like, back when you first, you know, when I saw now, as young as I don't know the fuck they talking about. But as a man, I'm like, you know what? That's wisdom. Get up in the morning and get to see you going. Have a beautiful day. There's something to getting up early where you force yourself to work. You force yourself to rise. The comfort of your bed calls. You go, fuck you. You get up and get shit done. And you're like, I already won. I won today. But I've got a victory. I've got a victory over my inner bitch. You know, I got out there. I did something. And then I'm laughing. No, but you say it's holding the bed fuck you. Yeah. Let's see how to say it. Yeah. I want to get up almost angry. Fuck you. No, you're not going to call me in there. You're octopus tentacles. That's what you mean to your depths. The depths of warmth and comfort. No, fuck you. Get up. Get up, get going. That's why I like to get in the cold first thing. That's my morning routine. It's cold plunge before I work out. That's the heat. Yeah. I can't do that. Now that is, that's kind of extreme for me. No, come on. I fuck up with the cold like that. You can use to it. I'm telling you. You can use to it. It becomes like the normal thing. How long you stay in there? Three minutes. Wow. It sucks. But every time I do it, I almost don't do it. Every time I do it, I almost like, don't do this. I don't want to do this. Fuck this. Right. And then I get in like, oh, we're doing it. We're doing it. And then I take my phone and I set a little kickstand on the back of my phone. So I put the timer on there and I look at it. And it's all I got to, it's out of minute. So I'm like, all right, we're good. We're past the minute. I want you to get past the minute. The minute mark is the tough part. Once you're past the minute, it's pretty easy to get to three minutes. You just relax. I only did one ice bath. And it was, they had bought this Tibetan llama to New York. And it was me. I forgot the brother name. It was doing this TV show thing. And they were trying to find out. They were like, they were scanning our brains and see what would happen if we got in the cold bath before meditating, then meditated, and then get back in. So it was some science. And I said, yeah, I'll do it. I don't know why I agree to it, but I did it. But I got in that motherfucker, and when I got in there, I was like, this is not the shit. I like this. And the host, he got into. Now I don't know if that was his first time or not. But he was younger than me, skinny than me, you know what I mean? And when I couldn't take it no more, about one minute and whatever, it was past the minute mark. I got the fuck out, but he was still in there. And I was like, I can't add it. I'm like, fuck it, beat me. He's yo, I got back in. Nice, you know what I mean? And I got some footage of that. I think I stayed in, I don't think it was three minutes, but I think I really impressed myself. Because I'm super anti-cold. You know what I mean? I run hot, I stay hot. I'm the hot part of the, again, you know, my wife is cold. She's just put her hand on me, and I'm the heater. So cold is like something that I don't like it. Right. I don't enjoy it. But there's a little mind game that goes on. And the mind game is almost immediately like, oh, fuck this. Let's just get out of here. Let's get out of here. You gotta ignore that and just concentrate on breathing. So what I do is I breathe through a count of 10. So I do this one, two, three, and I just concentrate on the numbers. And then by the time I get to 10, it's basically like a minute. And I'm relaxed. And then I just settle in there. It's just concentrate on breathing. And don't think about that part of either once I get out. Right. So, I'm gonna try a cold shower. It's really good. Cold shower in New York is great if you like in the winter. Because that's real cold. Right. That's real cold. I used to take cold showers and my friend Bob Caffarella. He used to do this at our Tuck-Wendow School. He would take cold showers after training. And I was like, that guy's in fucking animal. And I tried it a couple of times, but I was a bitch. I did it like 15 seconds. And I jumped out. But he would just stay there. And they're freezing cold, winter cold water. And just wash himself. And I was like, this guy's an animal, man. I think my brother, Cong Lee, I'm a St. Cong Lee. And yes. Cong Lee, the fighter? Yeah. Yeah. I remember we did a movie years ago in China. But he was the cold plunger, the crew. Yeah. He's a head of the curve on all that shit. Yeah. It's just the mental thing is where it really where it benefits you. And not just while you're in it, like doing it because you don't want to do it. But when you get out, you feel so good. Your brain just has flooded with all these endorphins. He feels so good. And it lasts for hours and hours. I'm going to be visited that. I think there's numbers on the dopamine increase. But I forget what they are off the top of my head. But there's a giant increase in dopamine that lasts like two to three hours after you're getting out of the cold lunch. Wow. I didn't know that. I didn't know that. But I know you are a long time martial arts student. And I think anybody that does martial arts for a long time realizes that it is as much for your mind as it is for anything else. It's not just a workout. It's a workout. But it's also like there's something about going through the motions of martial arts and training in martial arts. It's so, it requires so much concentration. And it requires so much of your focus that the rest of the world fades away. And the impact of it is relaxed. It's mental, physical, and spiritual. Yeah. It's emotional. It's will. There's an esoteric thing. Seven planes are energies or fast, things of consciousness. I don't know if you ever came across these type of terms. But sometimes we get stuck on just the three dimensions. I mean, just three planes. And you don't get to the emotional. You don't get to the will part of it. You don't get to the realization, the control. If you could get to realization, then you can control what's going on because you realize what it is. It's almost like you can now have the foresight of what it is. And then if you could get to that type of plane of energy, then the possibilities become infinite because you realize that you have a free will. But then you realize that the will can be controlled. You also realize that with a strong will, you can control others as well. Because some people are walking around with weak wills. That's how you start a coat. LAUGHTER Oh, bye. By having a strong as well. And you can make. Yeah, hold it. Maybe I have a film. It's shit, right? I'm called once Boondah Chocolate. And I watched half of it. I had a problem. There was a problem with the early screener. I was mirroring it on my television. And it kept breaking up. It kept fucking up where the sound would cut in and cut out. And I did it a couple of times. And then the screener ran out because I guess you don't want to watch it a few times. So then I had to contact your people. And then they gave me another one. But then they gave me one on Vimeo. And I watched that in the gym today. So I watched the first half of the movie. And I watched the second half and all that. Well, good. Take your time. It's a crazy one. It's a fun watch. It's a lot of ways. But you did it with Tarantino. Yes. Yes. And it seems like it's got a kind of flavor to it. But I bought it up just to say that there's a character who actually takes ice plunges. Yes. And the mad guy. Yeah, the villain. So he's talking about coats and things. And the way there's a scene where we would reintroduce them, you could tell that everybody else there are bending to his will. He shows him how to do this. And you do this and you do that. And then there's the fucking, I guess, the weak will guy. And he's like, and that's why Jimmy's the fucking king, man. I love that that. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. That's the point I'm making is that so will can control. You know what I mean? Yeah. But if you realize yourself and have that self-realization, self-actualization, you gain control over yourself. I mean, in control, you're playing as an energy. So you're talking about martial arts. And martial arts help you achieve that goal. Yeah. My instructor used to say that martial arts are vehicle for developing your human potential. That it's so difficult that in learning how to get, I don't like the term mastery, because I don't think you have really master martial arts. But in learning martial arts, the difficulty that's involved in that it expands your potential and everything that you do. All right, great. And for me, I actually always tell people on a physical level, I don't know if I'm good or not, to be honest. And it took up some hunger and Shaolin, of course, a little bit of Wing Chun hearing there. But I don't claim to be like a martial art fighter. But I will claim to be a martial artist because of the mind, because the way I think, because the way it allowed me to think, you know, it's like I have a party, 20 books on Tai Chi, and I read them. And so I understand that the application of it, like there's a meditation called the eight pieces of brocade. You ever come across that one? No. So what's the word brocade? Yeah, brocade, meaning blockage. Oh, OK. So it's eight ways to unblock yourself. Like the unblock your chi. One of the first ones, of course, you sit in lotus, you just take your thumbs and you bang on the back of your basically your medulla glata. I give it to you, because it touched this real quick, if you don't mind. Back in here? Yeah, right here. OK. You see, I'll now that you see how loud that is. Yeah. Right. So you cover, so you cover your ears and you bang on those drums, first thing in the morning. And it exactly, and it opens up some of your chakras. So that feels weird. Because it's loud. It's loud as it could be, right? A point being made by studying all these different books is like the physical part, of course, is exciting. But to me, the mental part is even became more exciting. The more that I can apply. So therefore, I can apply it to my music. I can apply it to business. I can apply it to how to be a better father in all those things. Versus me just punching and trying to break a brick. You know what I'm right, right? Yeah, there's, I mean, that's Tai Chi, right? It's all mental. The Tai Chi is a martial arts sorta. I mean, I guess like you learn how to move your body better. That could kind of help you apply it in a self-defense situation. But it's much more of a mental martial art. And I used to, when I looked in San Francisco, I used to watch people in the park. You just, old Chinese people would go out there and practice Tai Chi. I was like, what are they doing? I was a kid. I was, you know, I was eight. I was dumb. But I was like, was the purpose of doing this all day? Right. And then once you do it a few times, you're like, oh, this is not easy to do. And then in doing that, it cleans your mind of everything else that's going on. Because all you're concentrating on is these movements. It's very difficult. They're not stupid. Like they've been doing this for thousands of years for a reason. Because it helps them. What a crazy thing about Tai Chi, give you a little information about it that you may or may not know. But the idea with Tai Chi is that if you masturbate or if you have that control over it, you should be able to move 1,000 pounds which has four ounces of energy. So the idea of them pushing constantly means it's something that ever came to them. That's, they pushed out of sight. What I'm thinking about it, right? Because just four ounces of energy can devote. It's almost like tripping the giant. I think it's great on paper. What? I'm an actual giant. I don't care how much Tai Chi you know, a dude is like a 300 pound all American wrestler. It comes charging out. You're not going to use four ounces of energy and divert him. Well, I'm going to argue that. Right. One of the chances you use is just step to the side. Yeah, everybody says that. It doesn't work. It doesn't work. It doesn't work. They grab you. You're not getting up. But then another, well, I'll fight is a fight. That's a difference between a martial law and a fight. But it's also just the reality of physics. I mean, it's one thing if you're doing that to an unskilled person, but to a skilled person, really you need to know the skill that they're applying. Like, you know what I mean? Like, that's the difference between someone who is practicing something that is great in theory. But I mean, it's not just in theory. Like physically and mentally, it's great for you. But it's just, it's not the right application in terms of actual hand-to-hand combat. Yeah. I mean, a fight is a fight. I don't care. I mean, in my opinion, a fight is a fight. I don't care. Which I don't care if you're the best box in the world that not motherfuckers are like one of our greatest fighters, my Tyson, who wasn't just that he was a fighter. He was a fighter. Of course he had a skill set and he was a well trained. But in the peak of his fights, I don't care how much somebody else trained. When he got in the ring, the fight, they weren't better fighters. They could have been better boxes, better athletes, better whatever. So I think a fight, and this is my opinion, it's an instinct. It's a, you know, like when Mike bit his ear, right? That's a fight. That's not the deal with. Well, boxing, I think that was frustration, you know. Unfortunately, you know, that was a van der was beating him up. Yeah. Professionally, skillfully, and boxing. But then Mike went to fighting. Yeah. And fighting. Like an eminently, you can't bite him. You can't bite in no sport, right? Yeah. You ain't supposed to hit the nuts. Right? You ain't supposed to hit the nuts. Right? You ain't supposed to. I know, which is crazy. Because in a fight, the nuts are one of the best spots to hit. Exactly. And the eyes, you need to pose the polka eyes. Well, every other Eddie had an idea for a comedy sketch called the other Eddie. And an idea for a comedy sketch called Ultimate Sac Fighting, where it's just dudes are just the nuts of the only target. Yeah. It's amazing how vulnerable we really are. All balls just sitting on the outside like that. Yeah. You poke in the eye. You poke in the eye in an MMA fight. The referee stops the time. And you get a point deducted. Right. But it's a very good technique in an actual fight. Yeah. Well, that's what I meant by saying. So you go train and train and train. When you, when it's life against life or life of death, it's a whole nother chamber of a fight and for survival. You know what I mean? There's some horrible videos of no rules fights. They have these no rules fights in Russia and a bunch of other places. But they do them outside in a field. And these guys fight in this wrestler gets this guy down and just shoves his thumbs and his eyeballs. And he gets on top of them. And he just grabs his face and shoves. And the guy is just screaming. It's trying to move his head away. And he taps his blood all over his eyeballs. The party over. The party over. Yeah. You realize like how devastating that is. Like the pain and the, just the. And you know, so crazy. The person who did it, like the, maybe the guy who got the chance to do it. It's not easy. And it's time if you agree with this, you could disagree. But it's not easy to do that either. No. I don't mean not easy that you can't do it. It's not easy for your spirit to do it. Right. It's not me. It's evil. Yeah. And so, so that's a whole nother chamber. That's like, yo, will you do it? Will you blind a man? Yeah. Will you do it? And it's like, maybe you won't. And, but if he will and you won't. Right. Yeah. Yeah. That's it. That's what I, that's what my seafood says that about here. Cause you don't have to train nobody out of fight. It's I can't teach nobody how to fight. You know, I'm not going to teach you how to build your body, how to build your she how to build some strength, but a fight. It's it's it's different. It's no rules. It's right. And death is like, and your will go back to the will we talked about, your willpower has better be strong to survive. I love with Bruce Lee said, he practiced the art of not fighting. I mean, so I told that to my son. I was like, yo, well, listen, if you go, one, bro, what? Yeah. Yeah, I mean, be about it. And motherfucker chase you, you know, you got it, you got to go to, you got to think on something. But if you could just, yo, that's like, man, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, I see you later, bro. Yeah, I mean, I know there's too many people that get into fights for no reason. And then you want to change in the rest of your life. You got a scar that's going to be with you forever or you accidentally kill somebody. It's stupid. It's a stupid thing to do. And there's so many men that feel like they just have to prove themselves, which is what a gem is for. Go to the gym, go to the gym, workout with exactly with other fighters, train, get beat up, realize where you're at. Get a realistic sense of your actual ability and then improve upon them. Yeah, don't go get in street fights, please God, don't do it. Don't do it. And for me, I put all my aggression and all my energy into my art. You know, you think about some of my early songs, you know, wait in a motherfucker, walk his ball. Yeah. That was like, I used to have a, I had like a problem of, uh, I don't know if it was anger management, maybe. Uh, but I, but I would just like, like, I don't know. Like I needed to hear the sound of breaking glass. I used to scream like jizzos, like, yeah, let's do like, cause I was, and I realized that I had so much, uh, anger in me that, you know, I couldn't really get it out. I was kind of hocus in a way like, like, bad Bruce Banner or some shit, right? But then through music, it started to come out and it started to come out. And by the time I got to, um, um, Wu tank forever, a lot of my anger was in the song. If you want beef, then bring in the ruckus and like all that stage and all that energy. So it really helped me. And then I realized going to bring it up to the day to my, to my new film. I'm watching it and I'm just like, okay, once again, I took all of my, I'm just like, I took all the anger and I put it into the art. I mean, there's actually a character in the, in the film, uh, name is named as unique. There's, uh, did you catch that when you sort of piece? Unique is the, is the name of old dirty bastard. It's the original name was A-Sawn unique. So that was my way of, uh, of giving homage to him by naming the, the lead character of my new film, unique. And, and, and, and he says in the film, he says, uh, you got a problem with anger and humanity. Right? He says, he says, he's on working on that. And, um, and what I, what I love about the art of it is that the problem that he had with anger management was his reaction. Like a lot of us, we just react too much. We react before we think, right? Um, because they say America thinks seven times before he reacts. our fashion, America move, but we go on that first impulse. But this, this character, he keeps, uh, he holds the anger until one morning. He's, uh, he's at a veteran home, right? And he's sitting there and he's having breakfast and he has this can. Right? Yeah. You see, he's seen this thing, right? And he's like, he digs the spoon in there and it's like, fucking, there's nothing in it. Like it's, it's not even it's like once more than chocolate in it. And he gets what angry and he banks it. Boom! Fuck left once more than chocolate in the can. But then it took a old man that was settled to tell him once more than chocolate, change a whole glass of milk. It's saying he's the whole glass of milk. And then you notice that kind of, then he calmed down. He started reading to the kids. Yeah. So, and that was kind of me taking some of my personality, some of you, some of old doe these personalities, some of the personalities that I see in my community and putting into this character, this, this thing like yo, sometimes yo, calm down. listen to the wisdom of your elders. Right? Have you ever, have you ever in your life, I'm gonna ask you, have you ever like come across some old person whether it's a homeless guy, a guy, your own cool somebody that you can't. Um, in your life, I might ask you, have you ever like come across some old person, whether it's a homeless guy, a divot of the guy, your own cool somebody, that you kind of didn't look up to in no way, just kind of neighbors, but then they say something to you that's profound and changed your life? Oh, man. I try to find an example. I mean, I've definitely gotten a lot of advice from old timers, but definitely people, especially people that have done a lot of things, you know, people that have accomplished things and made mistakes and recovered from their mistakes. Uh, yeah. I mean, I asked because I was maybe 11 and it was a dope scene that was dating my aunt. And he was at the table and shit. And he was like nine and he was just, he was kind of in a chamber, bro. You know, kids, we look at that guy and said, and he says, says something about like, you know, I don't care. And you got to get knowledge, man, you got to get knowledge, man. God says, wait, man, you got to get knowledge. I started reading since that day, bro. Really? Seriously. I the dope fiend. Yeah. Then you started to read. Yeah. He said, because he said you got to get what happened was he had knowledge of self, I guess, back before the drugs hit him. And now he's like there, and he was like, he was just said, you got to get knowledge. The gods are right. The gods are right. And so what was he on? What was the drug of choice? He was on fucking he shot that shit up. Heroin. Yeah. Yeah. That's the old days back when they shoot it. Yeah. Everybody's on pills. Right. Yeah. I never, I don't know about that. I don't know about it either, but I mean, I don't know about it personally, but that's it's essentially what oxycodone is. All those pain pills that you see, all these people dying by opioids. Yeah. Opioards. Yeah. The number one problem. I mean, I think the deaths in America, it's upwards of 70,000 a year. I know it's crazy. That's crazy. Yeah. Just from overdosing on pills. Yeah. And most of it happened because of the Sackler family, the what the Sackler family, this one family that convinced people that taking these incredibly potent opioids, did you ever see see that Netflix, um, docuseries painkiller? I didn't see it. It's really good. It's all about the Sackler family. It's Peter Berg made it. Same guy. I mean, you know, Peter, no, Peter, he's great. Great. Yeah. Lone Survivor made it a bunch of excellent movies. He's great. He made this documentary on documenting how what's on documentary, docudroma series of recreation, showing how this one family, um, they wanted to figure out a way where they could sell opioids to everyone. And the way they did it was like giving people pain management tools, giving people medication that you could be on forever. And they, they made it and they pushed it through these different doctors and they had all these hot ladies who were representatives of the pharmaceutical drug companies that come to the doctor and they were the, the reps that come and sell it. Yeah. I mean, really. And they all financially incentivized to sell it and they tried to pretend that it wasn't addictive and they lied about that. And they got who knows how many thousands and thousands and thousands of people ruling their lives because of it. And like I said, 70,000 die every year just in America, just from opioids. That's crazy. From overdoses. I mean, and how many more would there be of that if it wasn't for Narcan? That's that. Well, that's the, that's the counter. Yeah, that's the stuff that the EMTs give you. If they find you overdosing to give you Narcan, it kills it and brings you back to life. And that one family, you know, no one's kind of jail, no one's got a jail. They, I mean, I don't even know how much they've been fined. But if it wasn't for what they did, and again, well documented in that Netflix series, it's, it's horrific, man. It's really, it's really terrifying because it's not just the people that died, the people that are addicted. It's all the family members that were affected by them, all the children of those people and what happened with their lives, all the spouses and the brothers and sisters of those people and what happened with their lives. That's crazy. Maybe then you were saying that my, my, my, the imagery in my head was that scene in American gangsta when it was like Thanksgiving. And, and they showed Frank Lucas at the table with his whole family that had a nice spread of food. And then they, the camera went and showed all the families that was hooked on the blue magic drug. They had like, lady dying over here to kid, the kid looking at her mother dead or so with the difference, I guess, that's the image that came with my head when you said that, but that guess the difference is in that particular case, somebody goes to jail and pays the price for the crime. But in this particular case, you're saying nobody, nobody went to jail. They did it legally. Somehow or another, they pimped it out and it sold it to everybody legally. I mean, it's, it's sick. Did the biggest drug dealers that have ever existed? Fuck all these street drug dealers. I mean, these guys killed 70,000 people a year, for who knows how many years. And it was probably more than that before they figured out in our can. And part of it is also because people get addicted to it and then they get stuff from the cartel that has fentanyl in it. And that's why they're dying. But there's a bunch of people that just died from straight up overdose of opioids too. It's terrifying. And it's over to count. Yeah. And yeah, no, it's on over to counter. You have to get prescribed, but doctors are happy to prescribe it for you. I got my nose fixed. I had a deviated septum and they cleaned it out and that I was leaving the doctor's office and he gave me two prescriptions for opioids. And I said, but I don't, I'm not in pain. He goes, but you probably will be. And I go, but is it going to be worse than this right now? Like we're just out of the operation. My nose was, I have like, this, these things stuffed up your nose to keep your nostrils open. And I was like, are you sure it's going to be worse than this? And he gave me two prescriptions. And I went home and I was like, I don't need these. Like I didn't film, but I'm like, this is not, but this guy was giving me two different opioids to take. You would have been, you had, you would have went back. I probably would have been hooked. Yeah. I mean, I know a lot of people that got hooked, man. I'm under no illusion that I'm stronger than those people that I would have figured out a way to not get hooked. Right. So many people that I know got hooked. So you're saying like, let me just go back on this because I actually don't take nothing. Oh, like, yeah, I don't, I mean, I do pump it as my inhaler. Yeah. When I get it, because I had that, you had that my whole life, other than that, I don't really take no time or nothing. Well, fuck all that stuff. But you're saying though, at the end of the day, just taking the one is back at you, the doctor basically slink gave you some free shit. Yeah. They kind of have you as a customer because when crack came out, I think he's financially incentivized. I think they're financially incentivized to prescribe you this matter. Because he didn't say, if you're in pain, contact me and I'll fill you up prescription. Because it's just my nose. Right. It's just the nose. It's not that big a deal. Like I slept fine. It was nothing. That's crazy. And I try to tell him. I'm like, I don't understand why you're giving me. We had a conversation. I go, is it going to be worse than it is right now? Like right now, I'm not in any pain. He goes, I could probably get worse. Like how much worse? Because right now, I don't feel anything. It's like nothing. It's like mildly uncomfortable because I have these tubes stuffed up my nose. But this is not, this is require heroin. This is crazy. I'm not laughing. We don't have laughing. But it is kind of financially incentivized. Let me go back to them film. No, because in the film, there's a article that I hear will opens up in the paper. It's not the same subject. But it's a medical thing. And it's just like this particular county is leading in this particular process. Because it's money in it. It is money sadly. Yeah. You know, I mean, and that's a movie. But sadly, if there's money involved, people can become insidious. People can become like, yeah, you could get stronger. You could get stronger. I'm sold, you know, I've got 20 prescriptions this week. And they're not cheap. How much is the prescription when you fill in? Is that like 40 bucks or 100 bucks? I don't know. It's not cheap. But more importantly, the doctor gets incentivized. When I made some dark shit, I was reading about this doctor that was an oncologist. So he's dealing with cancer patients. And he was giving chemotherapy to people that didn't have cancer. Because it would get him more money. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Yeah. It's one of the most profitable medications, unfortunately, for physicians. Well, not unfortunate. Look, if it saves your life, that's wonderful. But the reality is this one doctor that I'm discussing, this one doctor decided that he was going to get paid more by just giving chemotherapy to people that didn't have cancer. So he diagnosed a bunch of people with cancer. They didn't have it. So they said, oh, unfortunately, you have cancer. The good news is we get you on chemotherapy right away. We think we can kick it. And they were regular people with nothing wrong with them. And these, this fucking guy gave him you how much the chemo course. It's very expensive. It's my dirty, the 60 grand. Yeah, I'm not surprised. And the doctors profit off of that. It's one of the most profitable medications that doctors prescribe. Unfortunately, I'm like most doctors would never fucking imagine doing that in a million years. But this one doctor, like his, his, his process was, hey, this is how I get paid. You know, I'm dealing with all this overhead. I'm dealing with all this liability insurance. I'm dealing with medical school bills. I'm dealing with all this. Fuck this. I'm just going to start prescribing a little bit of chemotherapy here and there to people that don't actually have cancer. And I don't know how he got caught. I don't know what happened. But I think it was just, they got on. There was some red flag, yeah, they got them. He's in jail. There was some red flag where they noticed like why are so many people getting cancer with this one doctor? Like, why is his number so high? It doesn't, it's not representative of the new one. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's crazy. But that's what, that's what's hard to imagine is that money would incentivize someone to tell a person like how many people just commit suicide? Because they think they're dying of cancer. And they go, fuck, I'm not on, I don't want to do this. I don't want to suffer. I'm just going to fucking go out of my own terms. You know, well, how many people, how many people's lives did that ruin? Well, I don't, well, as a first of all, that was trouble. I had to kind of emotionally rebound from that because it's just, you kind of maybe think like, you know, we don't have the answer to shit, you know what I mean? And things happen in life. And then sometimes you just like, you know, but I do have instinct. And I always, you know, I just felt that something wasn't, I don't know, I don't even go there. But you said that money, while would that, why would he do it for the money? It's like, yo, everything that's for the money. Well, my fuckers is doing, you know, cash rules, everything around me. Well, you know, I mean, the money, yeah, and people will suck on that. You know, I mean, the goal, hopefully, because we live in the capitalist society, but the goal should be, the cash doesn't rule you money shouldn't rule you. We need it. You know, I mean, you know, food clothing and shelter, you're going to need that. There ain't nothing given here. But, but it doesn't surprise me, you know, that that's the motivation for insidious behavior. You know, I was, I'm going to go back a little history here. It's, we were going on another project where we tap into, uh, it's kind of fantasy. I just write off my imagination. But, but I had the, the, this family, uh, they are, they are, they are ancestors off from Congo. And then the Congo, they chase their ancestors to be back to the Leopold days. And you think about the Leopold days, millions of Africans were mined, chopped off their arms and shit. Or because the gag was they wanted them to work and to get the rubber from the rubber tree. So the rubber at one point became the main gold of the world, right? And King Leopold went over to Congo and you get tarsing it out of this shit. All right. That's the, that's the, the fictional story, but he goes over. And I think they said, at minimal, two million people, but I think it's five million that were just mind or killed just for the economic profit of what those rubber trees was offering to, uh, Western cities right now with cobalt. I had this guy said Darth Cara on the podcast. Uh, he wrote a book. Jamie, do you remember what the name of that book was? His, uh, book on cobalt mining in the Congo. So cobalt is a critical mineral that's used in cell phone batteries. In many electronics. And, uh, that is cobalt red, the blood of the Congo powers in our lives. It's very disturbing conversation. And he had, he snuck in, uh, cameras and got some footage of these people doing what, you know, you think that this stuff is mined in some sort of industrial process. Look at this. This is how these people are mining. And you've got women who are, uh, have babies on their backs. And all this cobalt that they're knocking out of the ground is completely toxic. Some of them just have like a bandana over their mouth that they're using to protect themselves from. But look how deep that is with human beings that are just pulling cobalt. They live on dirt floors. They, they live at the lowest level poverty imaginable. They don't have clean water. They don't have good food. And they are pulling out a mineral that's essential to the most technologically sophisticated aspect of our society, which is our connectivity through the internet through cell phones. And this is that they, which is kind of crazy. If you think of like the most technologically sophisticated aspect of our society, if you follow it all the way down to the very bottom of the food chain, you've got slave labor. And that's a giant percentage of the cobalt that's in our cell phones and our electronics is coming out of this place. You know, so I've never seen that before, but a lot of them are run by China. Yeah. And it's, it's very scary, man. I never seen it. But, but I wrote a lyric that touches upon it. I never, I never seen those images before. He's got videos. See if you can find the video, the videos dark. I think my lyrics that, uh, what's she if I could remember my lyrics was a song I wrote called The Fated of the World is in your hand was me and DJ scratch. And, uh, what I, I knew that, I knew that. Coldboat or I knew that they was getting the mineral from Congo. Um, but I didn't know it like that. It was something like, you know, as an artist, you know, fucking antenna, right? You get shit. But I said some, uh, I said, I'm trying to remember the lyrics. I said, it was like, uh, um, and could you pull up the lyrics to, to release the song there's the world as well. How did you do this? Yeah, put up video real quick, but please look at this. How crazy is this? By the way, all this seen almost biblical toil, the prizes, cobalt. And here's the thing, all this shit is super toxic. So all these people are breathing in this insanely toxic dust, and they're knocking out of the ground with hammers and carrying it off and bags. Look at this shit. Yeah. This is, this is, this looks biblical. Right. And imagine how fucking heavy these bags are and they're doing this all day long. Look at these guys struggling to pick those bags up and they're carrying this shit all day long. And they're just knocking into the ground, trying to pull out this cobalt. And the thing is like, this is what we need to power our phones, which is so crazy. If you think about all these people that are virtue signaling about how wonderful unethical and moral they are, they're doing it on a phone that is literally powered by slave labor. That's crazy. It's crazy. Yeah. And it's crazy that this is going on in 2026. And most people aren't even aware of it. Well, this is, well, you're back. Like I just said, the project I'm working on now, we just talk about it. We take, we're tracing it back to the wubble tree, but yeah, it's still going on still going on. And that's just cobalt. There's other stuff that they're mining there too. It's very similar. There's other other what they call conflict minerals. Pull up, pull up my logic for the fate of the world. It's one of this point out with us, what I said to if you got that on genius or something. Here it is. It says a thousand years of darkness. The world got struck with sorrow. How will we let name a need a better tomorrow? Go to the second or the second most, let me see. Let me see. Wait. Oh, no, wrong song. That's a message. I got too many songs. It's called, uh, you forgot the name of your own song. This is hilarious. Yeah, you got two many songs. What's the other one on that one? Open that, not that one. Go to the other, the other, what you call it? The other, go to the album title. Yeah, hit the, the album Saturday afternoon. You're going to edit somebody's right. No, you know, edit. Okay, well, we're going to, we're going to bear with us. Saturday afternoon. Go to the, uh, oh, it's called the, uh, the great fisherman. Right. Let me see the titles of the songs. Fish and fisherman. Yeah, put out one. Put those legs. So what is genius? Genius? Is it shows all the lyrics? Yeah. That's what it is. And then it actually has a song underneath it. Oh, that's cool. I don't even know that existed. People can annotate and tell you what people were meant by what they said. Oh, really? On genius. Yeah. Oh, cool. Right there. There. They go, look, the great fisherman official man, I'm trying to make a remedy for the elixir of sin. A premonition. We need the vine intervention. This whole world, the whole world is a stage. So it's time for intermission. In the middle of the Congo jungle, there's a combo of concentrated elements that make the world's phones glow. But they got a small zone for their phones, though, because they don't even got these steps in out there. But we used to communicate just banging on the bone goal. That's when the village was more motherly and more brotherly. But then the dust came through and killed the law for the rubber tree. Chingly a pole city was built from a sea of gold in the reserve. The steel trading on a silky road. Yeah. Those are some bars. I respect. But that's not not doing that to show off another part. But it's real. Yeah. But you just gave me, but you gave me like the four, you gave me the connotation and the annotation of the lyric. I didn't even see none of us seen that before. I just heard that they got to get it from there. And I knew the history of King Leopold. But I did not know that. This is still still. This is crazy. Yeah. It's still going on. And it'll continue going on as long as no light is shown on it. And this is what's the Darth car was trying to do with his book and the tour that he was doing and doing podcasts and trying to let me mean he risked his life, man. I mean they questioned him and he got very lucky that he got out of there with that footage. Because they want to make sure that nobody knows about this shit. They don't want any outrage. They want the mining to keep going as planned. I mean, it's stark. It's dark. Because it's a multi multi billion dollar industry that's powered by my abject power. Probably trillion. Yeah. It's like, yeah. It's like, you're saying like, it's it's in all our phones. That means not just our phones, but I think it's in a lot of electronics. I think it's it might have been. Is cobalt in electric cars? I think they're trying to make new formulations of batteries without cobalt. So there's a Jamie, what is that? I know a lot of the Chinese cell phones are using a different battery technology instead of lithium ion. They have something else that's more dense. That's like, yeah, cobalt's a critical component and lithium. All the batteries. Right. That's crazy. Yeah. Lithium ion batteries. What is like, Opo, there's a bunch of these new Chinese companies that have cell phones that have much more battery, like instead of like, like a Samsung Galaxy S26 Ultra has a 5,000 milliamp battery in it. I think these Opo phones have 7,000 plus, but it's I think it's carbon silicon based batteries. I wonder if they have cobalt in them. They've, you know, as technology for batteries changes in advances, they need different kinds of components in them. But I mean, then you got to find out where are they getting that shit from? Is that another like conflict mineral that they have people digging out of the ground with sticks? Well, the other thing to think about, you know, just the, let's say it is worth trillions of dollars. Like when do the people who, you know, like, that's what my property, bro? You don't say it's my, you're calling them my credit for it. I should get paid off of that. Right. I should be, I mean, you know how it works. China comes in. It's a lot of these are Chinese run. China comes in. They pay off the people that are in power in these areas. And those people will get wealthy. And then all the people that are with the workers, they all get like pennies. As small a wage as you could possibly pay them to keep them alive. Because people live on dirt floors. It's crazy. No food. It's horrible. It's, it's really dark, man, because it's with powers electronics, which is nuts because that's the most sophisticated aspect of our society in terms of technology. What a government it owes places and not to get here. Like I'm like, you know, I'm an artist, I'm a spiritual man. But they should be like, yeah, hold on, bro. Like in Alaska, right? There's a pipeline that goes to Alaska, you know, I'm in the pipeline. Sure. But the citizens of Alaska get so they get a royalty for that. Yes. Like the, like if I'm in Congo and I got this cold boat as well as trillions and I got all these people, give them a little more royalty. 100%. If that was America, that would probably the only way to do it. But obviously you couldn't pay people the way you pay people in the Congo, in America. Anyway, we have laws. But this is also why they want illegal immigration. That's part of the reason why they like illegal immigration is because you don't have paperwork. You don't have to pay people what they're supposed to pay. Do you pull that back up again, Jamie, please? About the silicon carbide batteries. So it seems like one of the reasons for utilizing this new technology is because it's not using as much coal ball. So advanced lithium ion technology using silicon to replace traditional graphite a nodes offering roughly 2040% higher energy density and faster charging, especially in smartphones. Is it anything? I thought it did. Yeah. So it has cold-boated in as well. But that's maybe enables more sustainable cobalt reduced designs. So you have less cobalt and it's more energy density. So these Chinese phones are, yeah, here it is, honor magic five pro. A lot of these one plus 13, a lot of these Chinese made Android phones are using much more advanced battery technology. So they're trying to ease up on it a little bit basically. I don't know. The question is like, well, where you get everything else? Where's all the shit that's in your phone and how you mining that if you're hiding how you mine cobalt, how you mining all the other stuff because they're all conflict minerals. And a lot of these minerals, unfortunately, are mined out of the third world. They find them in these places where people are really poor and the people that live there, they don't benefit from it. Their lives don't get any better. In fact, they get worse because they get poisoned. The thing that, but hey, go to hell, let me ask some wisdom to that. The people got a little lost at the end, not poor. Right? Because if that is valuable when you're standing on it, then you're standing on value. You know, that's why they keep them poor because they can't order them. But think about the Holycard for a moment. Right? Let me go here. Okay. Those spiritual here, right? So in the Holy Quran, it mentions that, you know, if the most most known as war to do what they were going to do, that they would have many wells. Right? Because, you know, they live in the desert basically, right? And it says they're going to have abundant of wells. It's not an abundant of water wells in the Middle East. Right? And these are people that are living nomadic, economically, not really at the level of the rest of the world. But it's a prophecy telling them that they're going to have wells. But what kind of wells are they in the path of oil? Oil wells. Right? And so now all of a sudden, they become the most richest, small region in the world. Right? So the promises were filled. Right? But the guy is that the people got a little lost sometimes where you stand, where you stand on your land. You know what the value of it as the Bible would say, oh, work to the sweat of your brow to dig and plow and make your land valuable. But now if you, if so, if I'm just saying that the people where they're going to get, whatever they're going to get, bro, okay, don't care if you're going to get some berries and an Amazon. If the berries work money, then the dude who got all the berries got a real lives of your bro. Right? Let's make a deal. But it's, but it seemed like that ain't happening. No. No, it's not happening. And the reason why it's not happening is because you have enormous corporations to come in from other countries, they get contracts and they pay off the people that are the leaders of these countries or the people that are the leaders of the military. And then those people keep these people oppressed. Right. And that's what, I mean, it's the people that are running these countries that are making sure that these people don't get paid what they deserve so that they can keep them working there for slave wages. So they keep their profits as high as possible. They also keep the options as low as possible. People don't have any options. Right. If you're living in the Congo and you're, you're near with these cobalt mines or what are your other options? Right. You know, I'm going to set out burning boy. Burner boys are good dude. He he had told me some, he gave me some insight about Nigeria and, and, and, and like he was saying to me like how Wu Tang and we were young, you know, we had this laying street pharmaceuticals. Right. But out there, oil is like a street pharmaceutical like do this was was was slinging petrol and slinging oil. And I was like, in Nigeria. Yeah. Wow. And like that's crazy. Right. It's crazy. But the guy I'm saying is that still, you know, of course the government controls all that. But, but sometimes the people who got to just snap, you know, just, you know, I don't know, staying on your land, you know, and, and, and realize the value of where you stand, you know, every man has a value. Right. We all walk with a living value. Every life with questions. Every life that's born changes the world. Soon as somebody is born today, this ain't the same world. It was yesterday. Right. Soon as somebody we turn it to the essence, it's not the same world. But so we got to kind of, but the people, I'm going back to the people, not to the military or to the government. The people got to realize that you're all on, bro, is you, you're the value because without them, right, until they do get 10 million robots to do that shit, which I don't, I'm not opposed to that. Right. Since 10 million robots to dig it up, bro. And, and, and still though, if it's on my land, break me off, right. But people got to snap into that. Well, these, these places are all guarded by the military. So, yeah, what's all people with guns, you can't leave, you're doing their bidding, you'll get shot. They kill people. They bury you. No one notices, no one cares. The value of human life is extremely low. Yeah, it's, it's, You're doing their bidding. You get shot. They kill people. They're buried. You know, notice is no one cares. The value of human life is extremely low. Yeah, it's it's it's satanic. What is dark? Well, let's jump back on my film because in my film, the value of life. Yeah, is once again, um, we're talking about the world, but yet I got it related back because in our film, the value of life seems low as well. Yeah, I love for the person living uh, more for the valuable for the person that kills them. Right. Yeah, without giving too much of the film away, um, what happens in the film actually happens in real life. I mean, that that is it's based I mean, you say it's based on real life, but it there's been real life cases where people, they've harvested people's organs for profit. Yeah. And that's a thing. I mean, that's a big problem with people in China. You know, people go to China for for organs like there's a tourism to get organs replaced like say, you need a new kidney or you need to live or whatever. We got it. Yeah, they have it. And what they'll do is they'll take their fucking prisoners and they oh, look, a, a, b blood type perfect, whack. And then now you got some dudes heart business. Yeah, there's a crazy. There's another element that um, um, this is where's the right him live on Joe Logan podcast. I got a new film coming out May 1st. It's called Once Booney chocolate, uh, written in the director body of Rizza, starring Sean McMoor, Paris, Jackson, Blair on the word rockman, Dunbar, the name of few is produced by Quentin Tarantino and my wife, Tylani, Diggs. Hey, baby. I did a, uh, a fishy lady or drop because that sounded like we're on the radio. Yeah, they did a, ladies and gentlemen, this is the Rizza coming in at five after the hour. And um, but I love how art can touch upon things, even if it's unintentional, right? Um, but I mean by unintentional is that, you know, as an artist, I just let the shit flow like I did like, you showed all that, uh, current gold cobalt. I never seen it. But yeah, it's in your lyrics. Yeah, but that's how my love exists. And even you're telling me this Chinese stuff here. I don't know about that. I, I do know some things that happened with some articles, but I wasn't, I'm not, uh, in debt in depth with all the NDEPHCH. Yeah, I don't have in depth knowledge of it. But I, but I strive as an artist, Joe is to, actually, to at least show the surface so that, you know, I don't know how deep the pool is, but I will show the surface to my art. Um, and I think in this film, which is a, it's an action film, though, right? So, Joe only seen the first half of it. So he doesn't know about the eventualmatic ass kicking. And I'm not going to spoil it. I believe it. There's already plenty of ass kicking already. Right. Exactly. See some. Okay. But it gets fucking, uh, you're going to have a good time. I'm sure you want to have a good time. But still, once again, the art of it, um, it has a, I'm realizing as I'm watching with different audiences, like when I watched it in a New York, I had my fuckers yelling at the screen. Fuck that. They was on some shit. But I watched it in LA. The audience was like, it was like a sense of nervousness. It was in the world. When I watched in a Chicago, it was standing ovation. You know, I mean, I watched it in San Francisco and the Q&A was very intellectual. So I'm, I'm realizing that, okay, this is touching. Then when I watched it, there's other place to go with Dave actually, I watched it with Dave Sorel. He said that, uh, you got bars in this motherfucker. What's mean by bars? He said, well, the guy says, uh, the girl says, um, supposed to go, this, this come, you haven't seen this seen that, but Paris Jackson is telling him that everybody in this town goes to church on Sunday, except for Jimmy and his gang of degenerates. They party all night Saturday and they sleep all day Sunday. She said, and I guess they're not afraid to go to hell. And then the hero says, but while I come from, they say, heaven is what you make it and hell is what you got to go through to get it. And she was like, that sounds like that's a fucking bar. Yo, so last time I was here, it was Donner or Wallers was here. Right? So check it out, bro. I was showing the film today, right? And we're going to do a Q&A. I'm in, I went to Yellow Spring, Ohio, but it was Donner there. Bro. He was there. Yo. And then he got up and he asked the question and he started, uh, he, he interrupted. He talked about them today. We was here and he, and he could, you were Spiderman to do a podcast. I mean, when you said, yo, I'm sure the podcast, what you might even help them, right? And then he said, I said, yo, yeah, if you need something, hit me. So he hit me up. So yo, let me get a, open a dean track. And so I got like a bunch of beats. That's on my little dumb drive. I sent them like five of them. Right? And he chose one. Yeah, he told me about this. Yeah. So there he choose one. And that because it's the name, and it's, it was a nice fucking, but that same five tracks, uh, my manager is sending it to other people to his sit. So it, I did give it to Donner. I'll give it to him. Gratus, but he comes up in the middle of my Q&A with Dave about my film. And he starts talking about the beat. And he says, Vizza is the Indian giver. He said, he said, I said, I was playing. He said, I had it on my podcast for almost two years. And then one day, it said, flag license, uh, whatever they do and shit. Uh, when you can't see the music, you know, fucking shit. And I was like, um, I said, oh, yeah, bro, yeah, the, the, the people from the millions, they had got, um, those five tracks as well. And, and, and they chose it and they put it and they put it, and they paid us a lot of money. And I, I go on back to the money of it all, but, uh, so I told, I said, that's who was another beat. He said, nah, son, that was the one. Oh, no. That was the one. I said, bro, they chose it. My manager made the deal. Oh, no. It's off the table. Oh, no. So you got changes opening. Yeah. So I, oh, I give some more to complain about. Yeah. Oh, no. It's almost worth giving them the beat. So you just have to complain. Yeah. I owe you done. And then I'm going to hook you up with something. I actually go cook you up something nice. All right. I can't wait for this phone call. Son, you know, he did it. Me son. He took it back. He said, that's it. If one of the audience, I could deny it and said, I was like, yeah, they, they, you know, that's hilarious. That's hilarious. Um, anyway, um, but they love the film too. Like, like the audience and, and, uh, um, I'm going to say that, because I love, I love in my peers react to something. Is this your first feature length films? The fourth fourth. Yeah. I know you've done other stuff, but this, did you have you written and done other than like this? I know you're doing it this way. This is my second one, writing. So I wrote my first film, Man of the IFS, right? Which was a quarantined, you know, present as well. And then there was a, you know, Kung Fu movie. So then I didn't want to get stuck. And like, oh, that's all he does. So my second film, I didn't write, uh, was written by the cold and she, um, she, it was called Love Beast Rhymes. Uh, and that was like a movie about poetry and a female lead. And it was actually, um, John, J. D. Watt, John David Washington was his first feature film. He's well. Um, and then my third film was called Cutthroat City, which I didn't write, um, just once again, a high gun as a director. And, and that film I had shot me more as the lead actor. And I kind of like fell in love with his talent. So that's why he was in Cutthroat City. He's in a Wu Tang series. He plays Requan. And now he's the star. My new film. So he's kind, of got this. Uh, I had to say, but we kind of got this, uh, there's Denzel Spike Lee energy. There's Kool of Michael B energy. I really like this guy. But on this particular film, yes, I decided to write it and direct it. Um, and I'm back to the basic, like Quentin T. Little Presented my first film. And now it's my fourth film. And he's back in the building. And one of my favorite songs from that first soundtrack is bad as man of life. Oh, that you would black piece and then do that song. That song killed it. Shout out to, um, set out to Dan and Patrick. Yeah. Yeah. I love those two guys. They're cool as fuck. And that song kills it. That song kills it. That's such a good song. A bunch of dudes use that song. Let's walk out, walk out for the UFC. I, I, I seen it on the fucking car commotion one day. Did you guys listen to the lyrics? All right. I guess all you need is that hook. Right. Yeah. On this on this, uh, how we don't know time? We good? Yeah. We're planning on this on this on this particular film. Uh, I got a guy named, you know, Jason Isbell. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. So Jason Isbell did a song in the film. Uh, it's called the comic book life. And um, it was, you know, it's my first collaboration with him as well. Um, and there was a pleasure. Uh, Larry's go, Jesus Christ walked Jesus, Jesus Christ may have walked on water and Superman flies through the sky. The immigrant cross the border. He's looking for a better life trying to find it. He's reminded that dreams are born to die. His reality kills his fantasy. It's not a comic book life. You know, man. And I saw it goes on. Um, um, and so I try to, when I do films, it try to make like a unique musical collaboration. Of course, that was me and the black keys back then. And on this, on this, uh, on this film, we got like music from Jason Isbell. We got clearances from the Isley brothers who check this out, bro. I'm going to play three days ago heading to Atlanta to show the film. Guess who's sitting in first class and the seat right there. Well, nicely. I never met him before. I'm like the big fan of love is music. I got two of this songs in my movie. And I'm like, I'm going to show and I look over, I'm like, my wife's like, and I was like, I got a chance to get up and thank them for, you know, for his work and for even allowing his music to be in my film because, um, that's that special. Oh, that's cool. Are you a one iced leaf, eh? Not really. You're not a iced leaf, bro. This, bro. Listen, bro. You got to, let me, I got to put you on some. Please. Because if, you know, I'm quite sure your love life is good. All right. Quite sure you got a good love life, bro. But if you ever get into any love life trouble, okay, put on a Isley brothers, it will smooth and tell me what to get. I'm going to say to sensual sensual. Yeah, put that one on and, um, and, uh, yeah, I'm going to give you that one because when that way that comes on, bro, your shoulders are going to start moving Okay. All right. Coming with two glasses of wine. Yeah. You're going to be good. Yeah. I'll check it out. Whose, uh, um, whose a favorite musician? Oh, boy. I don't think I have a favorite musician. I don't even have a favorite genre. You know, I like all kind of, I mean, if you look at my Spotify green room playlist, it's all over the place. It goes from Nina Simone to Bill Whithers to Wu Tang to Leonard Skinner to Led Zeppelin. It's all over the place to Gary Clark, Junior to, it's everywhere. I move around. You name it some dope set. I like to move around. I like all kinds of shit. I listen to Dwight Yoke, I'm gonna, I'll follow it up with, um, you know, cool G rap. I like, uh, one of my favorite albums ever is when, um, brand new heavies. Do you ever listen to brand new heavies when they got heavy rhyme experience? I don't know if I know that particular brand new heavies got together with like cool G rap. They got together with a bunch of different rappers, um, who else is in there? God, it's like, there's a ton of different people that they did these tracks with. So they have like the brand new heavies playing the music and like, like heavy rhyme experiences is the name of the track. Gangsters and the main source. Yeah. Where is this? Well 92, I think. 92. Yeah. Right. Right. Cause I've never got a first album. Oh my God. You got to listen to some of this shit. Yeah. Because by now 92 was, do I have something in 1992? I'm on my own date now. I don't listen to nobody. I'm just Wu Tang now. Okay. No, it was one of the most trying to make it. So I'm like, yeah. Oh, I missed it. Oh, yeah. I actually missed a lot of things doing my career. But I realized like I'm going backwards. Like there was a point in my life where I couldn't stand R&B really made me nauseous. On certain years, like like like like like, like if I'm driving an R B zone, I felt no, I was so fucking hip hop. Can you so concentrated? Yeah. It was weird. Like I said, it makes sense though. Yeah. It makes sense. But yeah, because you were on the grind. You were really trying to make it happen. Now, you give me now, play R&B, make my wife, we be dancing on a motherfucking house. I mean, there was a point in time where I was only into 90s hip hop. Like 90s hip hop was my shit. Cause like that was when I was young and I was on the road a lot. And that was like my getting fired up music was like 90s hip hop. But then I started expanding and then I got into like a lot of like old classic rock and roll. And I just think it's all dependent upon your mood. But there's so much different shit that you could listen to. Right. But this you got to listen to some of this heavy rhyme experience. Yeah, I'm going to put that on my eyes right there. Playing that cool G rap death threat. This is like one of my all so in the green room, we'll have to cut this out of the podcast, unfortunately, because we don't want to get dinged. But out of in the green room playlist, this is like one of my first beginning of the night when the comedy show starts and when the green room getting fired up, pouring a couple of drinks, everybody's getting fired up. Someone's rolling a blunt. This is one of my favorite songs to start the green, green room playlist. Hit me with it. This is cool G rap and the brand new heavies. Okay. It's great. And the gang star hectic. That's another one of my favorites. You're also cool about it for me. So I never heard it. But it immediately like put me right back in a stateless and projects like right back in that time of me. Like my cool G rap is love that dude. So put me right there. Thank you. You're clocking one of my all time favorite dogs. Right. Talk like sex. I mean, so many ill street blues, ill street blues amazing. And cool G rap, I just think in mainstream just doesn't get the respect he deserves from like the influence that he had in the 90s. Yeah, I think that I think the the artists we get to on. But yeah, you write the mainstream people. There's so many people I bring up cool giraffe and they're like, who? Right. And they're like, Oh, sit down. Sit down. And the place. And yeah, and I didn't never he told me this year is later that the G stood for genius. And these are these are fucking genius. Even though we got the jizz of the genius and I cool cool G rap is a genius. I was blessed to I was blessed to do a couple of tracks with them. And my catalog. We actually we actually got a couple that we did together in a couple of I just produce with like him and the specter, Dank and and things that I nature. So that's one of the greatest blessings of of the art is that I'm sure you do the same as you know, whether you're doing comedy, whether you're doing your physicality that you have people that you admired and then all the sudden you're there, you're peers. You're collaborating. Yeah, you're doing with them. Yeah, I don't know. It's very exciting. Just being able to hang out with them, we did a we went to dinner with the Quentin Tarantino Roger Avery and then they came to the comedy show and then we're all hanging out in the green room. Right. And everybody's like, this is the fucking coolest night of all times. Chilling hanging out with Quentin Tarantino and Roger Avery with the mothership green room. I think it's hard to beat man. Everybody the next day we were like, didn't last night really happen? That was so fun. When I was speaking of Quentin when I had a cut that was, you know, worthy to show him. A buddy jabbing in my buddy, I was all there. So jabbing kind of owns the old Desi on as studio. Oh, wow. He's the guy that started wearing cameras. So and he has this amazing screening room. And so they said, yo, you can screen it here for Quentin. I said, all right, cool. So we finally got the day to do it. And I go there and his plus one is, it's venture. Oh, wow. Exactly. So I'm just like, oh, crazy. Yeah. So now like, okay, whoa, okay. And it was, and I played the film to them. And it's once there was another great night, some great, uh, what have we sipping on? We were sipping on some great scotch. Yeah, we had some great scotch. I don't smoke weed like that no more. So, you know, I do just still smoke weed. What happened when you stopped? I just, I don't function good in public or weed. So it does. Well done. Okay, people think they do exactly what I don't want to see that photo. I don't want to be like, got no more. It's like, if I'm home, also to be honest with you, if I smoke weed bro, I start doing Kung Fu, bro. Really? Yeah. I'm either going to sit quiet and like be a total or your star. Yeah. My fuck is like, yo, this is, yeah, exactly. I'm starting to do it. Like that. I mean, with a fucking pseudo on a social phone. You know, so yeah, I kind of, uh, 2015 was when I, when I stopped really completely. Maybe, I mean, not, yes, for a completely, but then I said I would only smoke with two or three people in the world. One of them is Quentin Tainting, you know, because we watch our Kung Fu movies. We're not going over that. I smoke. Have some weed. I know that. I mean, you know, no photos is happening. Right. Right. Right. Right. The, the Zonky. Risa. Uh, my other brother, I smoke with him. I won't say his name because I don't know people know he smoke. I think I don't buy no see smoke, but I won't say his fucking name. Is it? Um, and the Bonnie C him wants a year twice a year. You know what I mean? Um, and that's really it. And even like I have a smoke to blunt with method man in over 12 years. Wow. And that's my, that's my, that was my, he's the king of smoke. But anyway, but that was like, but I just, like I said, I just don't like how, uh, it just doesn't fit my, my, my, my today's personality. So I'm a sipper now. Mm hmm. I just sip on some, some, not no syrup. I know what you mean. Okay. Yeah. Little Scotch. Really scars. Little to keep. I love to see the mezcal. Mm hmm. You know, because nothing wrong with those things, I think they're all tools. And I think one of the things about tools is you can misuse them. And I think there's a lot of people that just live in the cloud and they just get high all the time. And then they just feel like their life is out of control. And then pure abstinence becomes the only solution. But it's really you just started abusing the tool. I think marijuana is an excellent tool for creativity. And the way I like it the most is writing. I think it's, it's the greatest thing ever for writing. There's something that happens with just not a lot, just a little bit of weed, just all sudden, big ideas start sparking off in your head. Then I go, I don't think that these ideas would exist without this stuff. That's one of the things that Carl Sagan said. Mm hmm. Jamie, was that famous Carl Sagan quote on cannabis, but Carl Sagan, who's obviously like one of the most famous astronomers of all time, he had and wrote that great movie contact, the great book contact. He had this quote about cannabis that I always like to say to people that want to say it's for dummies. It's like, no man, there's something to it. You could look like a dummy if you abuse it just like you look like an idiot if you get so drunk that you can't walk. Exactly. It's the same thing, but a little bit just a, just a little bit sometimes just fires up the illegality of Kansas outrageous and a pet a bit, the full utilization of a drug which helps produce the serenity and inside sensitivity and fellowship. So desperately needed in this increasingly mad and dangerous world. That was one quote, but there was another quote that he had about ideas that are available through cannabis that aren't available without it. Mm hmm. That his perception and obviously here's, here's a guy that, I mean, what better way to utilize weed than to smoke a little and stare at the fucking vastness of the cosmos and try to, well, open up your mind to that's exactly what I mean for me. Right? So, so if I, so it's only two things going to happen for me. I'm a smoke. No one just be like, even if I'll be in here finding fucking constantly. You said, I mean, yeah, more. Kung Fu. That sounds like two good things. I'm not knocking them, but it's definitely a, my schedule. It does. Yeah, it does. That's a thing. That's like what is life? Is life about schedule? Is life about enjoying moments? And I think there's, there's something to be said for enjoying moments and there's certain things that will help enhance moments. And I think that's where cannabis comes in, in the play. I think the problem with it is the problem with anything that human beings abuse, whether it's soda, chocolate, whatever, alcohol, food, people abuse things, they go too far with it. You don't use it correctly. And I think it's also part of the problem with it being illegal. One of the things about alcohol being legal is we understand what it doses. If I give you a shot of tequila and we both clink glasses and we do a shot, we understand the dose that is one shot of tequila. It's not confusing. Whereas we all know we, you know, you get a hold of some snoop suite or some people are just, they're, they're dealing with botanists that are on another planet. I mean, let me say what they watch news we one day. Well, when I was smoking, I did an interview with him. And that's when he had that GSC. He had the G. Yes, some network that he had. And we were talking about my movie and then I was going. Everything was fine. Like, you know, he's, he's rolling it, you know, he's talking, then he lit that motherfucker up and passed that shit. Well, I had that shit hit it back, hit it again. I'm going to fuck out. I was gone. Yeah, that's Joe ideas. We too. Joe ideas. You're that same kind of weed. I've given it to some people. I'm like careful. That's Joe ideas. We know and they get scared. Like, oh, geez, you had to go on one. Make a pillow get a pillow ready because that's it. It's going to fucking, and he could do it all day. Like him and his friends, him and Methodman out of from my, and I give Burner Boy and that category as well. Those are the three most people that I've seen very, we tolerant. Like, like, like, like they could be on the third one. And then you hit it. And you're like, what the fuck, yo, how the fuck, how the fuck would y'all go on like that? They go all day long. Yeah. When Snoop was in here, he just kept rolling blunts. And I was like, how are you still awake? How do you, how do you function? But they're so accustomed to it. They're tolerances so high and that feeling of just being in the cloud all the time. They're fine with it. Did you find that other quote? There's multiple quotes that came to get an essay. So it was something about ideas being available that aren't that was the big quote. Yeah, it didn't say, understand himself. It doesn't say that that's okay. I feel no worries. I should have found I should have had it ready. But the point is it's like, it's a tool and you could use any tool correctly or you could use it and abuse it incorrectly. So what's your frequency? I smoke and I smoke once a day, once a week. I just wish it was legal. If it was legal, then it is legal many places. Yeah, but it's not federally legal. It's just got changed to schedule three. So schedule three is the same as Tylenol with Coding. So what does that mean? That means that you have to get a prescription for it? So it doesn't carry the same the crazy thing is it's completely legal in California and it's generating tax revenue. It's completely legal in Colorado, generating tax revenue. And then people always want to point to the negative aspects of it. But like you could have negative aspects with everything else that's legal too. Think about how many people die from obesity every year. Obesity related diseases. Let's put that into perplexity. Put that into our AI sponsor. What is how many people die because of obesity related diseases every year? So you're saying so should we regulate food? Should we regulate the amount of food that people are able to consume? Should we stop people? Should we make cake and ring dings and ho-ho-shoo make that shit illegal? No. You have to have some personal responsibility and some self control and an understanding of like what the ramifications are. What is the what are the dangers of overeating or eating the wrong kinds of food? That's the same with cannabis, the same with alcohol. If you think that alcohol should be illegal, well you're going to people are going to drink it and then you're just going to empower organized crime. But they did during the prohibition. Okay. How about this? World Health Organization reports at at least 2.8 million people die each year as a result of being overweight or obese. That's fucking crazy. That's crazy. Globally, it's three to five million people a year. Right. So what is the 2.8? That's here. I don't know. You know here is US. Okay. US is here. So what we do ask. I missed you. It's 280,000 to 325,000 per year. They knocked out opioids, knocked it out of the park. So we're all worried about opioids and no one's worried about pizza. But that doesn't mean that pizza should be illegal. Yeah. That's the thing. Especially New York Peace of Broad. That's the best piece of Connecticut. New Haven. You just have to have an understanding of what to do and not to do. Don't eat pizza 24 hours a day every day. You'll die. Don't eat the pound of salt. You eat a pound of salt. You'll be dead. Wasn't it a documentary with a guy? I would not talk to him. Super size me. Yeah. That was the E&M every day. He was eating McDonald's. Yeah. All day every day for every meal. And that was like 30 days before like the Green people start knocking at the door. Yeah, he wasn't doing well. He had all sorts of liver problems. Didn't McDonald's just release some subscription where you get like, it's like $52 a month and you could eat as much as you want. Well, I think they just did that today. What's that like Jerry? What's that face? I know. It doesn't make any sense. It's $52. I think they just did that today. I saw it on my Google news alert this morning. Did that make sense? No. It doesn't make sense unless they're limiting the amount of meals that you can have in a day. But if you have a subscription, say if you have a McDonald's subscription and it's $52 a month and they and that's all you eat, you could live off of $52 a month. Well, not according to that documentary. No, that's two months. You out of here. Well, what if you only eat their salads and you only ate their beef patties without any bread? So it'll probably be better off. You better off? Probably be okay. But even their beef probably has like fillers in it and shit. I'm still I'm still living a vegan lifestyle. Still? Yeah. Yeah. What do you get mostly for your protein? Mostly beans. I probably do cook the sum a little bit too much soy I think. I do eat tofu. Shout out to our friend CK. Hey, in the building. Oh yeah. Yeah. He bought in. Yeah. I think he's a good child. That would be some rules. Yes. He bought us lunch. We will eat after we finish this phenomenal Chinese restaurant here in Austin, phenomenal. You know what he got that that I realized? Well, he has those siswan peppers. Oh, yeah. That's it. It's correct. They kick. Yeah. They kick. They make my bald head sweats. Yeah. That's a dripping. Yeah. I've been down to my eyebrows. Exactly. I'm sorry. What were we looking up again, Jamie? I think Donald's on my bed. Oh, yeah. You find it up. Is it? My bald head sweats. Yes, that's a dripping. Yeah, I've been down to my eyebrows. Exactly. Sorry. What were you looking up again Jamie? McDonald's unlimited. Oh, yeah, you find it up is it fake? Well, I'm just the only places that it pops up are a Some one Instagram post. It was my Google news. I People are reporting it, but it seems to be only based off of a photo which is most likely A I oh Yeah, 54 bucks a month this photo is going around, but there's no links to make McDonald's and saying it There's no like Interesting thing. Oh, cuz so it's bullshit It's bullshit because I was thinking like how could they afford now? Well, also I would say they do do test stuff and it is claiming It's a pilot program being tested somewhere so Actually, they're trying something out somewhere, but I don't think it's interesting Reporting of it unlimited meals is a weird if you're gonna limit it You can't say unlimited because if you don't if you if it's unlimited then you could just feed your whole family for $54 a month right you go you go that take one hey, you go back Yeah, well, you could just say unlimited. I like to eat seven big max Give me seven big max seven orders of fries Seven sodas and then you're feeding everybody for 54 dollars a month. That's crazy. Doesn't it down to own chipotle? I Don't know do they don't you all chipotle? I'm bringing a chipotle because I got chipotle I did a campaign with them and they gave me a card Life long card. I could eat that chipotle for free for the rest of my life really and that's part of the campaign No, this was like the gift for you. Yeah, I didn't even know that that was a thing and and and I could and I could have like ten people With 24 hour notice and I think is I could do a catered Advent at least once a month Wow for the rest of my life. That's pretty good deal. That is a real thing Really? That's like a celebrity gold card thing. They all Nice Different ways like Travis Barker has one here interest did I got one It Travis is a he's a vegan to yeah, I'm a vegan to eating the just the bean burritos and stuff But it's so free toes. They got some shit. Cool. So Frito. What is that? Hopefully there's no chicken in there. I'll think it's like There's like a vegan vegan vegan meat so most of your animal pro or most of your protein is from what? Being chicks I love to check cheese. Mention's crazy for lentils. Oh my wife a dog p p protein is really good People have proteins really it was good ham protein is I think it's one of the few plant-based proteins that contains all the amino acids It's very bio available to Punken seeds pumpkin seeds really yeah, look up pumpkin seeds. Well pumpkin seeds probably have the most best protein Really I pumpkin seeds. I keep it good to I keep them what called the roasted. Yeah So every time I get in the whip Punken seeds what does it say about the oh and reduce from risk of cancer and improve bowel and prostate health Pumpkin seeds well, that's the rich and protein fiber unsaturated fats and must have minerals Puppete does are a great healthy snacking option. All right. Yeah, pumpkin seeds are delicious. Yeah, so you get those you get some chickpeas You know weird that people when they make like they're fucking Jack and lanterns. They scoop that shit out and throw it away. Yeah, go into me. It's like the most healthy is part of the pumpkin That's weird It's weird will we throw away like we're just so used to like waste? Yeah, so used to like having an abundance of food that we're not concentrating on this part of the plant that has the most protein Right in the plant probably the most nutritious part of the pumpkin. Wow You know my buddy was here yesterday. He You know throw away too much of that Too much of that meat for that Texas barbecue you guys. God. That mother fucker. Oh, hey, no, no fucker Yo, you It was a 15-minute weight line around the corner 200 people. Where were you at? Which place? It was I don't know the name of it Terry blacks. I don't know cuz I just drove at my man I was okay It said you know he couldn't come out to Texas and I get some Texas barbecue, you know I'm a big when I'm gonna do it. I mean I have some good beans My corona and it's just a bunch of different stuff that you can get there potato solid. Yeah Yeah, yeah, well potato salad. I got all that's right. It's got my eggs and milk and eggs Yeah, you've been out you've been a vegan for a lot of this is the 90s, right? Yeah Well, no, I started vegetarian In the 90s and by the time I got the 2000 I started you don't fuck with eggs at all No, I got rid of the eggs. No, yeah, I don't know the eggs We got me off the fucking eggs bro. I think my personality got me off the eggs What's that? Oh, you know, it's like like I'm like what's the word I could be sconeful. Is that the word like when you like like Like I don't know like I like I'm like I got like I like I feel it's on good type of shit You know, you never watch for the exam. Yeah, like there's a couple. Yeah, like you don't want piss in his arms juices So eggs like what like one day is just it's just just the slime or the egg He says just cook it Yeah, but it didn't got that little little white shit in it. Oh Just say it's good for you And if you have your own chickens like I have my own chickens eggs are karma-free protein They're like pets that give you free protein because they're the they're laying an egg that will never be a chicken because it's not fertilized exactly so it's just free protein and They lay them every day basically or close to it and you feed them and they Run around the backyard and they pick bugs and grass. What do you feed them? Chicken food, you know you buy chicken feed and we also feed them some table scraps and vegetables and Different things but they're carnivores man, which is really wild like you see them eat a mouse. It's crazy. What they tear mice You never see a chicken eat a mouse and then we see the chicken chickens are straight up dinosaurs There's some great videos of chickens around a cat and a cat's playing with a mouse and the chicken just runs up on the Cat and steals the mouse from them and tears it apart. I see that. Yeah, I fed a chicken that I well One chicken stole the mouse, but so this is what happened so In my house in California we used to have a wrought iron fence and we replaced it with a glass fence Unfortunately hawks couldn't tell that it was a glass fence and we lost a few hawks They slammed into it headfirst and got KO'd and some of them done. We lost like two hawks died It was really sad, but one of them survived and my family My wife and my daughters took the hawk and put it in like a large cardboard box It couldn't fly and they had to feed it over the weekend because the rescue shelter Couldn't take it over the weekend. We had to bring it on Monday and so they go well What a hawks how do you feed it? We went to the store and the pet store and the pet food store Had these things called pinkies and what they are is like a little baby mice And so you put these little baby mice in with the hawk and the hawk ain't most of them But one of them lived one of them the hawk didn't need it. I had enough had enough. Yeah, pinkies It ate enough so my daughters are like, won't it keep that one alive? I'm like, it's not gonna live it doesn't have the milk it doesn't have its mother It hasn't been weaned it's going to die and I said, let me just feed it to the chickens I didn't even know if they're gonna eat it. I don't know what's gonna happen I put that little mouse down on the cage and that chicken just ran up and snatch it and they all stole it away So watch this cat his cats fucking with this mouse the cats you think cats are ruthless Yeah, he's playing with this motherfucker. He's playing with it He wants to watch it hop away and then the chicken gets annoyed after a while and the chickens like give me that chip bitch and when the chicken runs up on the mouse I watch this instantaneously soon as the chicken realizes this look got it. He gave me that shit I just starts tearing apart Chickens aren't into playing with things at all. They just not that's right. This is dinner Yeah, just shaking it and maimed it with it. We're all chasing each other around the chicken coop with This one chicken had the mouse in its mouth and they were all trying to steal it from her mouth Oh, they wanted it more than anything. That's crazy. They don't act like that with chicken food at all. Right. Right. They want some they want to Me. Well. Yeah, or you dried worms or that's one of them like worm meal You buy these like boxes of dried and you shake it and they come running and you'll like leave that out for them They love that So okay, so now your chickens you got your own how many I have 15 15 Wow, yeah, so you get in what two day how many a bunch of eggs like probably at least 10 eggs every day Wow, and so because they don't always lay across the boys But it's free protein and it's healthy for you You know exactly where it came from there's no hormones no pesticides no pesticides no nothing Let me let me interrupt our podcast for a moment. Okay. This is the riser. I'm sitting here with Joe Rogan I have a new film coming out many folks It's called one spoon of chocolate Ston sha big more in Paris Jackson produced by Quentin Tarantino in theaters everywhere May first and that's only a couple days from now Today is the 27th. So it's this Friday. This Friday. There it is one spoon of chocolate Done because once one spoon of chocolate can do what change a whole glass of milk change the whole glass of milk Um, anyway eggs. It's good for you. They're really good for you healthy and Comifrey and all you about anything suffering. Right now. No, no thing guys only thing that I don't complain about as a vegan And I don't cook with it or use it, but if somebody slipped on my shit Mm-hmm. I'm not gonna flip out. Yeah, you shouldn't because it's just milk that comes out of a cow It doesn't you know, especially if you get it from an organic farm. There's no big deal, right? So that's not that's so that's the only thing that you know, I don't you know I don't I use all that plant based butter and they got this thing called well now country crock got Plant based avocado oil butter. Really? Yeah. How the fuck do they make that? That's the problem with all that stuff. That's like Fake meat and fake this is that it's really processed. You know I think if you want to eat vegetables and vegetarian diet like the way to do is the way the Indians do it It was like Indian food from India. Oh, there's a lot of amazing Indian vegetarian food. I stay in the Indian restaurant Oh, so good so spicy and so delicious and they've been cooking Just vegetarian dishes for yeah, probably thousands a year. Please you write out. Oh, that's true It opens up the gates. Bam. I'm a lama. Let's go. Go. Go. Don't have a flight. Yeah If you do get a seat in the back. Yeah, yeah, it's uh, but it's there was a place that I used to live near near my old house in California that was in an Indian neighborhood and there was this Indian restaurant It was like a you know like a cafeteria style where you just go and I don't even know what the fuck the names These things really had photos of whatever it was It was all in Indian right now. I would just point it. It was all everyone who ate there was Indian right It was very few regular Mean no white people no way African Americans was with it. Wait. I feel like I might have fucking been in the valley in the valley Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's not a restaurant. No. It's like a store You know you've been in that place and you bought some fucking spice for y'all Yeah, yeah, I wish I remember the name of the place because the spices were awesome too It had it was a great place and in the back they had this like cafeteria style It was fun. It was all Indian people. Yeah phenomenal phenomenal restaurant I'm the kind of guy that I do that too. I like I go to the Asian market instead. I'm gonna fuck I go. I know that I'm getting a bunch of oh, that's it Damn Jamies of Wizard nice. Where's that joint? No, no, no, the park. That's exactly it. That's the spot. That's not far from that is Oh, that's real close to where my old studio was to and I was on my still got the same office It's all right over there. Yo bro. You're old studio. Yeah, you know what happened to it right? No, bro That whole shit. They tore that shit down. They did it's now the LA Rams training facility Remember that AMC yeah bro Really tore it down bro. They building some mother shit. Wow That's crazy that is crazy because back that's what a fan said. Oh, I could I could see Joe's office from my window Oh, his studio from my window back in those back in those days and shit Wow, but now Oh, that is the LA Rams Training facility so I watched the Rams train this shit. I'm gonna window. That's crazy. Yeah That neighborhood is very interesting. There's a lot of cool stuff. There's a phenomenal Mexican spot down there What is it called the big burrito? That's what's called right? I think that's it. There's this Phenomenal Mexican joint and you go in there. It's all like Mexican soap operas playing everybody speaks Spanish No, no one there to speak in English and the food is sensational That's it. El Big burrito. El Big burrito that place fucking rules I when I lived there I didn't tell people about it because I didn't want to blow up the spot Wanted to be able to go in there. I Would never bring it up on the podcast and they've reached out to me Thanking me because we brought it up a few times, but that place fucking rules You want to get like a legit burrito legit case of the legit tacos like language tacos like couta and don't eat meat But if you did and even their burrito their bean burritos are fucking phenomenal It's just like real legit spicy Mexican food Well to me it's all about the sauce if if you got good salsa You know, I mean all that place is so good. That's I mean There's those places that you find in LA the real hard to find in Texas Texas you get a lot of Tex-Mex You know whereas in LA you get straight Mexican Let's talk about that for a moment because I actually thought about that because New York you I mean now it's okay, but New York we For years, bro We didn't have good Mexican food. They do now Yeah, because now it's been more some more brothers come came in and is that there's some of this on pocket communities But trust me in New York bro For you. I didn't I thought I was eating Mexican food. That's why I went to California Yeah, and I was like, okay, that's how Diego has some of the absolute best Mexican Diego in the world but but I find Texas and New Mexico Like I find this part of the country as well having Having a lot of good flavors, but I'm interested How do you like if you were to say from your travels The best Mexican for is it California? Is it the Midwest? What would you say? Well, there's really good Mexican food in Texas, but you got a street secret out Whereas there's a lot of Tex-Mex here, which is also really good But you could tell it's not straight Mexican You know what I mean? It's like a fusion and in California, you don't have any of that and California is just Mexican and there's so many great Mexican restaurants San Diego was filled with but LA's filled with them too But it spots like that like the big burrito where you go to a place like that You walk in you're like, oh my god, I'm home Because it's like the smells and then you see the Spanish soap operas playing This is legit. Yeah, I was driving down the street Last night and said and um, I just found this really funny Right so I'm driving down the street. I mean, I'm not driving post. I don't drive but the car mark. You don't drive at all I don't drive I've been really since 2012 I've been driven a how come I just I just Like no one happened, but I'm I wasn't China You don't drive in China. Well I gotta be honest like we was on the film there and every time every morning that they were I would go to work It all almost like every day it almost happened Like it almost like that's that most car accident. Yeah every day. Yeah That's so sad so and even even even like when my brother Russell crow like we'll get to set on the morning I love that dude and yeah, I hear say the same thing like your Bobby like Shoo, I'd be here bro We made it Right but so so then when I came home I just stopped driving bro. He just didn't want to be a part of it anymore I haven't drove since since then have you ever fuck with any of those waymoes You ever gotten and no for those things you no no no no But I do have a test a little drive me. Have you did it? Yeah. I've had to drive me all the way home Yeah, it's crazy. Yeah. How do you feel though? I don't uncomfortable. I don't like it I like driving I do I enjoy driving but with my Tesla I'll put an address like say if I want to go to a restaurant or something like that and go do do and it'll drive me It'll stop at stop signs and stop lights. It'll change lanes if there's anything in the way It hits the blinkers to change lanes it turns it does everything right I mean it literally can drive you from point A to You're fucking a Jamie you ever use it. I just found out through the update that like I'm not I haven't been using full Self-driving I've been using whatever was right before that. Oh to me. I thought was the exact same it drives itself to What's the difference? I don't know looks like it said that you're like take me it gave me an option to turn it on I thought I was what hold on the way of my doing that Because it still drives itself. I don't remember because I turn I got my it's a part of a subscription, right? Isn't that's when I got was like wait? I thought I had it. Yeah. What whatever it has been doing Whatever it is. I definitely have it What you made part of a subscription you mean yeah automatic I think so I think you pay more for it I'm not sure. I don't want to talk out of turn I also didn't understand it either, but yeah, I think so I think you pay for it because I think it's more complex It's using a bunch of different Picking things up. I don't know what but I do know it works if I press it I saw a way more on a way here to you and It was right beside us. I looked in there And I was like yo bro, why have a steering wheel with the old school fucking uh With a gear changer. Yeah If nobody go on dry this well case it breaks and then if if somehow there maybe there's an override We could just drive it. Yeah, but still that's the grandma thing. Well the shifter It's like this is we in the future It shouldn't be no steering wheel like that my Cadillac has that my Cadillac shifts on the Call my thumb that's for the what an ex-blade. Yeah, yeah putting drive No, I'm pretty sure okay, I mean I have a bunch of cars I don't pretty sorry. I don't even know we're gonna put a studio in at the racetrack and circuit of the Americas I'm gonna take you around the racetrack. I'm gonna put you in the car. You're gonna drive around the racetrack Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's the tip not the new one. Yes. It's 23 No 2026 Escalade of the Escalade gear shit, yeah, but it doesn't that's not how it works I'm 90% sure that it is right there on the column. See it. Yeah, that's how it is. That's what mine looks like Okay, see that little they put it back up. Yeah, they put it back up there It was now that clears all the room on your console right? Right, yeah, that's where mine is I Love that when I'm so anyway, I'm coming well, I'm gonna escalate yesterday I don't know what a guess it was that but I got the window down getting some this beautiful Austin air and Chalk drives up beside me Plan this Spanish song he's blasting this shit It should sound cool like a motherfucker, right? I'm like, yeah, what is this shit, so I says am it Let's say that I says am it and then I Get the song right? And then I start planning my car and the truck he's going on but then we you know, he's still driving slow Then I can see the car Beside me they sure zam did I was like wait a minute that that's that doesn't happen. I mean that's what we need again. Yeah, like where Like somebody's a plant some fucking music. You never heard the song before You like it. Yes, you got it. Yeah, and so I love shazam. I got two Spanish songs now. I'm like in my Am I joint that It's part of my my new playlist. So they just got from listening to people's cars. It's driving by that. Oh, that's this I don't yeah, that's a new thing, right? Because we don't have radio as much anymore. There's not a lot of people listening to the radio a lot of times You're getting new songs like often times like I'll be a dinner someplace. No be playing music. How I go What is this right and I'll put my phone up in the air and try to catch it, you know That's dope that that's one of the greatest things about technology to me because Is is that ability to know? Hmm, you know, like you could know now if you want to know Yeah, you know how to wait to know you know, like everything we if it's every time you get a door here That we not too sure about we could hit hit hit that button exactly give us a reference now I know what sometimes we leave a podcast and I'm like maybe we should have looked that one up because it turns out That's true Well, I have I have beaten Google a few times now you won you beat Google I mean what Google's a little deceptive I think but if you use AI like we use perplexity It searches for the whole internet. It doesn't just you know use whatever Google the problem with Google not it's not not that it's a problem, but it's these are curated searches so like like say like here's a perfect example Say if you want to find a Mexican restaurant, right and you use Google What Google's gonna do is some people are paying so that their restaurant gets at the top of the search list That's a little bit of a problem because that might not be the best restaurant That might just be a restaurant that paid Google whereas if you go to like perplexity and say in terms of like restaurant Recritics what is the favorite Authentic it authentic Mexican restaurant in Austin and it'll tell you Right, it'll say these people believe that this is it and there's no curation yet Right, I mean what like my wife is actually we're talking about this today Like one day they're gonna fuck that up too and people gonna pay To get back to it, but right now they haven't done that so right now you could find spots like cool spots that haven't you know sponsored exactly and let's check this this do a test real quick. Okay, okay So there's 196 million 140,000 square miles on the planet, right? Whoa there's 63,360 inches right and The amount because it's 5,280 feet in a mile so I'm gonna start over there's 196 million 940,000 square miles in the country and the planet on the planet okay, okay for one mile there's 5,280 feet Okay, and of course there's 12 inches in the feet so you multiply that by 12 you'll get 63,360 inches I want perplexity To tell me how many square inches on the planet Boy that number's got to be bananas that I guarantee we're gonna look at a long Fucking number lot of zeros. That's a good question That is a good question done done Does he even have an answer? It's probably confused. It's all I want to fuck you talking about perplexity There you go, okay Eight times 10 to the 17 square inches on earth surface What is that look like in a raw number? ask it what it looks like in a raw number 17 zeros 10 to the 17th That's what that is 17 zeros. So basically it's up it's up the 63 360 and they squared it uh-huh and that's how they got to there Wow But it didn't give us no fucking A direct answer right well it did but it did it with 10 to the 17 okay So let's do this now well type that out type that number out and divided by 4 Okay, let's see type it out. I'm gonna see what this looks like This must look bananas Whoa And now divided before you do that keys ask it. How would you say that? I figured out. It's not a trillion. It's not a quadrillion. Like what is that? Quinceillian is it a quintillion? Billion right yeah So it's a quadrillion wait no How it is saying just just to ask it. How would you say that please? How would you say that? 800 quadrillion square inches wow Now when you were kid you'd think that was a fake word. Yeah, bro. I want a contrillion money Would you believe that the earth weighs the atmosphere weighs 15 quintillion tons? This is just the atmosphere Yeah, just the atmosphere because the planet the gases the planet Earth weighs six six trillion Kanye said the wildest shit on my podcast once he goes how much does the earth cost? Right and at the time I was like what and then I thought about I was like oh shit like property is Valuable you can own property right like everybody kind of everything is owned like how much is the earth? That's a big that's a Well you could get the number there too because well if you count the minerals right oh yeah And then there's an oil in the ocean the ocean and the fish yeah right and then all the animals Wow, yeah, and then and then it casts a appreciate day by day Why don't I put that into perplexity if you were gonna sell the earth? How much would it be worth? Oh Including everything on it That's a mind-fucking-half Economists usually estimate the world's real estate all land plus the buildings on it a few hundred trillion us dollars Not counting oceans polar ice or unknown space. That sounds like a bargain. Yeah a few hundred trillion. That's it Not okay. Let's say let's ask what is the worth of the earth? All its property all its minerals animals and Objects that's a crazy question. That's a crazy question. Yeah. It's a good one though. Yeah everything on earth every watch every diamond ring every hat with one dollar every piece of art Well, I mean the question I typed in was property in lands right? What is the value of animals of everything on earth? Every like what you say to top every electronic value of everything on earth including including animals minerals property and objects oh Boy, I wonder how it's gonna figure this out. I bet it will It's gonna look off of this kind of freak out. It's gonna blow grass. It's not figuring it out Yeah, there's no precise number. Oh, it's somewhere in the quadrillions to sex trillions of U.S. dollars depending on what you count and how you value it as plausible attempts to add it up right There's no single agreed upon price tag for everything on earth But this is the answer to Kanye's question, but you know what don't now Look hold on me. Let's learn something there. It's a quadriatic to what sex billions now acts How much of the planet of way? Definitely we had we've passed it before I could show you atmosphere was 12 quintillion pounds. Yeah in total. Yeah, I say 13th I was atmosphere was 12 quintillion pounds Yeah, in total. Yeah, I said 13 so I was oh But acts how much does the planet Earth weigh? Whoa How much does the entire Earth weigh? Let's guess No, no, no, don't do the atmosphere. We just trying to get the value. I want to see I want to say it be gives you I mean that mr. Should already be included. I think I think it won't So basically what is that word? What is that in a word ask that what that is that 13? Yeah, tell them put it to put that put it in pounds Not kilograms because that's not even seven. That's eight. What does that mean? Right, but what does that ask it to say that? Can you say that? Yeah, what does it mean? Well, how do you say it? Septillion 13 septillion pounds No No It doesn't Something a couple of years ago. You know, I believe it's wrong. Well, why? Because when you take the square mouse There's a conference right and you multiply the there's a formula to get that weight right it doesn't come out to that What does it come out to six six million six followed by 21 zeros? This is more This was three more zeros on top of that. Yeah, but it sounds good but if you take the formula of Of of of of a sphere of the mass Like this this number is closer But does it take into account the density of the inner earth? Because I think that's probably where a lot of the weight is coming from right the density of the inner earth is an immense Yeah, I mean all Press any time Give it a It could be hollow if it's hollow. Okay. Hold on. It's like we got to take a lot of a sponsor break This is the result live on the Joe Rogan podcast Joe Rogan experience. I have a new movie coming out Miffer May froze it's called one spoon the chocolate starting to make more Paris Jackson Blair on the wood it follows a ex-military convict Who comes home and trying to find a better life for himself ends up in this more town where everything goes fucking bananas In theaters everywhere May first when is it gonna be available on streaming? I don't know Soon, right? How do you usually do that? Well to be honest? I'm like Like iron fist was what year was that out? That was 2011 2012 and there was a different atmosphere back there Pre-COVID COVID changed a lot of like movie going out. Yeah, yeah I want the movie going it's bugging us to come back. Oh, yeah, I do too Yeah, I mean there's something about going to see a great movie with a bunch of people. That's a real experience. Yeah, I think I I'm so I mean my my art my career is based on Sneaking it to a fucking movie theater and watching three conformals. Yeah So I'm a big of the cinema. I think what we did so the so so this so this particular film is actually coming through my own distribution company called 36 cinema and I think we did a deal with the theaters that they could have at least 30 days a Lot of people were doing 17 days in the theaters or 21 days And cinema is suffering because of that because why we were coated at theater if I got it at home You know, I mean and I and the home is of course a great place to watch a movie But when you make in a movie, right? You're making it for the theater. We haven't TV is made for home, but cinema is made for cinema like we haven't What can I say like the sound the color the framing like I use anamorphic lenses It doesn't mean Anamorphic like the lenses are the fifties when you fucking get this whole fucking scope You know what I mean and so yeah, you go watching on your phone What is the difference it was an anamorphic lens and a regular lens a regular lens will be the way it weighs it bends the light in No, a reality so so like you could have like a 16.9 Okay, see that's so that's most lenses are spherical now. That's that right which is cool Right, we look at anamorphic It's way it's it's the way it controls the light way the subject is happening And so it kind of gives you more of a cinematic feel well you focus it's certainly like a little more blurry in the background Yep Okay, and it kind of it could it's way it's compressed in that light differently and So you with this lens do you do everything on film or is it digital? I actually shot this on digital So yeah, so I mean I'm in a digital age so I did shoot digital but I did We did make 35 millimeter prints of the movie So if you so if you're in California and you will go to the theater called the Vista of you'll be into the Vista No What is that I think it's in Los feelers or something like that. Okay? I'm bad at my Hollywood neighbors. I'm like I'm still a New Yorker But um the Vista theater will show the film on 35 millimeter for like two weeks to be there starting You want to see it? Yeah, you want to see in 35 millimeter with all that? Oh the Vista I love the sky. It's a me. You just the best. Hey, there's his trigger finger He's a girl, but he's psychic. He knows what you're talking about before you exactly like the vids student duh Yeah Um So that's the best so that so what is the difference like the way it looks to you when you see it on 35 millimeter versus digital? Well, it's I think the 35 millimeter kind of it makes the colors look a little more richer and darker Like kind of how how how the 70s films look even up to the 80s The digital one that could I watch my film on both formats Digital was more brighter and actually more familiar now. It's right where we're accustomed to it. It's custom to it but when we I played it 30 that on April 22nd I had a fact I'm gonna talk about that a little bit if you know mine But on April 22nd we had our premiere in California 135 millimeter and it was my first time seeing it on 35 millimeter. I mean so and it felt It felt very nostalgic. I felt like I was back it felt like a movie Only mmm. I mean like not like not like a movie and a TV show or movie. It felt only like a movie The only a movie is sprigging. It's the flickering When you when you you know when you're doing 35 millimeter you need You know a real camera right and so the light is going from this camera for this one Then they got to switch the wheel for this for this and it's like it's a certain thing that's happening And it's certain pacing a certain granular thing that's happening that for me from my film It felt almost like a honor to watch it like that. Oh, that's cool. Um, I want to give make a make a So check this out well, so we talked about this last on I said, but April 22nd, right? that was the day that I was acquitted from a crime and Started my life over. I was facing eight years April 22nd that's back in 1992 Okay, as you can see a year later. I'm a platinum producer But before that I was heading to hell April 22nd seven dippitously is the day that my film premieres on 35 millimeter and The at the best of the other and Hollywood. Why? But you seen the opener of the film as well So when my character gets out of jail He marks on the calendar the day he gets out April 22nd Hmm, especially well, this is a special film Especially for my life. I'm saying for me. It's like cool and it's and it was my buddy's shovel From system of a down birthday. We we actually celebrate April 22nd every year because it wasn't my birthday But it was the birth of the reserve because before that I was known as Prince Joaquin But after that Equating and my mother telling me, you know, you got a second chance. I was like Exit Prince Joaquin and said it was a nice. That's amazing. Yeah So when you were talking about um the streaming thing so do you Is that something that's negotiated beforehand like it'll be in the theaters for X amount of time or do you Once it's in the theater, do you then like depending on how well it does in the theater? Is that how you negotiate a streaming deal or how doesn't work? No works. No, it's no it's usually negotiated ahead of time Okay, and The or the streamer is kind of dictate what's gonna happen So since we had this on our own company we had a chance to make the rules ourselves So I didn't make a streaming deal But I made the theatrical deal first and I gave the theaters 30 days first And so now my streamer he would go at my streaming distribution Which is our Samuel Goodwin They were they would go and I hope I pronounced that right bro. I could fuck a word up sometime Yo, I think that's the right word. Okay. Okay Without Pete. I'm the wrong guy to ask though. Yeah, I could fuck a word up. But anyway um so it it so yeah here's some listed Streamers, but we wanted a 30 day Cinema experience if and in the future. I'm gonna try for 45 days, bro Remember when we was kids, bro Star Wars was in the theater three times before you had a chance to see it come home. Yeah, and what do you do? You went back to the theater. Yeah, because the lights the sound vibe of what you're creating I make it for the theater. I gotta be honest with you. I make film for the theater When my other film came out during the pandemic cut the whole city Since there was a pandemic, you know Even though my contract said it should be in theaters The pandemic of it kind of made it a force majority Maybe not in theaters, but my producer Michael Mendoose and he who knows good guy He um he said I Class of your body make notes and then make this if no streaming bro Okay, I shot my city on the more fic lenses. I got all the sound like I made it for the theaters He was like yeah, but the theaters in a problem. No, it's going to the theaters I was like well, I don't know then hold it, but at least I can't hold it bro Like you know, it's business, but he's still nobody still say okay. I'm a pitch. You want 200 screens And you could go and get you know, any did it you know, I mean so All my films has always go to the cinema first and if I have my way every film I make will always start at a cinema Have you ever tried using those what is it? What's the Apple one Jamie the those Apple AR goggles? Pro Apple yeah, I heard watching movies on those is phenomenal. Yes. Okay But you have to also design it for that too. Oh really? Yeah, I mean they get the full experience because come on you go like this And some there's been some artists who have been able to create stuff for that. It's almost like a I mean, I won't say it's like the sphere you have you been to the sphere. Yes, but only for a fight No, did you have see there. It was amazing No, I love it there, but Darnion Oscar had dead a movie made directly for this sphere in fact There's another movie They're doing they're doing another movie right now that they they show me a clip of That's going to be made in the sphere and it's actually very sports space So it's crazy and of course the Wizard of Oz. I heard that's nuts. Yeah, I seen that there. You saw the Wizard of Oz Heard there's all sorts of crazy new effects and they added a bunch of stuff to the movie. It's amazing. Yeah, it's amazing and it's fucking What is fear is amazing anyway? It's an incredible experience The new thing AMC has just shown recently and announced called ScreenX 270 degrees it's gonna surround the the audience in some way Well that that's how you get people to go back to the movie theater. Yeah, give them something like this where they're like what? It's kind of like recut so it might be a fun way to go back and maybe see a movie you really like Oh, yeah, the avatar in that Alien they got the matrix like that now Awesome. That's kind of the fear thing. Oh This just sort of is announced. It's only in two plate two cities right now. There's a place I know there's a place in Dallas where they show UFC fights and that's awesome. That's awesome. Yeah, that's what the matrix thing That's nuts. I love that he got the answers. Yeah Is it genius but with the the place in Dallas the cosum place like you're seated here and the screen is like 60 feet tall and it's right in front of you so and you're watching the fights is if The matrix well, so this is the matrix. Yeah, they worked with the film company to sort of like remake it and add extra stuff. Oh Wow There's also a new screen. I just saw I think it's gonna be in Clearwater, Florida It's gonna it's gonna be gonna be the world's biggest screen See if you can show the fight thing. Yeah, shall we fight scenes? like People were watching the fights there. I was like, okay, that might actually be better than being there live Like look how crazy the size of the screen is right Like what are you watching like you're sitting right there? I mean that fight is gigantic It's huge because the thing about going to see the fights live Look at how big that is all the way. Yeah, go show that again like look at that look how nuts that is right That is nuts. You don't get to see these camera angles at home Awesome not like that. Yeah, not like that. I love this because this is giving me hope Well like everything you just showed me is giving me hope for cinema, you know, right? This is like and this is like cheaper than buying tickets And this is better than any ticket you could ever buy for the fights like better than anything better than my seat And I was sitting cage side how much how much I take it like this will cause. That's a good question Click on that one may 9th How much is that cost? $40 100 bucks if you want to say prior to close yet 20 bucks to get inside Okay, general missions 20 bucks. What is the front row? Where's the screen displays right there? What are those like right there? What says two? Well like How much 167 that's a that's a barks about how much it would cost if you actually went to see the fight Nice, and it's probably a better experience plus you get commentary you get to hear everything And you're right there and then it's not just like being at home Which is great because there's a bunch of people you're experiencing with so it adds to the exact and the energy That's the knock I was in the state of division pro is you're it's still to right now Your by yourself by so kind of for me on the Sun's like single guy in my apartment with a dog perfect I can watch it. Yeah, I don't buy it Catch up to me later. Hey, could you watch it with a chick where you hold hands? I don't know that vision pro which is our sweet time. I'll do three two one go That's funny. Hey, yo, that's me and my wife on the plane Oh, you do that? Even on the way here bro, will we watch we watch oh Sebastian was I said so Sebastian last name is he's a Thank you. Oh comedian. Yeah, we watch some These fl Larry is playing off. Oh, very funny. It's so Yeah, so we do that every time though, but we watch them on a way so I don't want she want to watch me laughing and she ain't laughing yet so we hit the button for saying And Guys crazy. Yeah, he's funny. Yeah, that's the thing. They should have like simultaneous viewing option Are you gonna watch with someone else? Would you like to view it simultaneously and then have a sync up with each other one plane does that one plane does that? That Quattas oh Quattas is up well they got those 16 hour flights they're gonna make things interesting Yeah, they got it's actually it says watch with a friend. Oh Yeah, that's smart. Yeah, it's interesting like what is the next level past AR with those goggles? It's gonna be an immersive experience where you're actually we had the people from perplexity We were here earlier today and we were talking about how people With AI and all this stuff there good they're gonna want more human experiences like going to see a live concert or seeing You know a sporting event live. I'm like, yeah Until it's completely immersive and then it's like you're playing a video game But you're in world of Warcraft where you're in battlefield Earth or whatever whatever game you're playing I think yeah, I think for that format entertainment a video game. Yes, but I still think Because even You know, it's more senses. Well, it ain't just the site and sound. It's the smell Yeah, but what if they can recreate that like what if they get the technology where you can create a Movie but the person who is watching the movie is standing on the street like in the opening scene where those girls picked that dude up and that Sob convertible. Yeah, like what if you're standing you feel the street and you watch the dude Get in the car right, but you say it at home by yourself. Yeah Well, you'll be terrifying. Yeah, of course, but you'll be in it. Yeah, you'll be in it I think that's coming man. I think that's coming well if that comes reach out to me and I'll write a script The makes sure that we fucking hit you with it right right you're gonna have to like capitalize on all the different Things that can take place. What do you think about that? That's do you remember the sob fucking 900? Oh, yeah, right? I find mine out one of those it was a cool call Interesting looking there is futuristic. They're different than any other car That's why in the film. I was like there was like well, what kind of call you on? I was like Give me a sob. It's like why I said well, I'll still make them. I don't think so I think they might have no I don't think they definitely don't make Hold on I don't know that's a good question. I know they make Volvo still. Yeah, I was in a boat. I don't know if they still make So thank ripton 2011 But on the punchline for me was that this sob or and I would I'll give you one spoiler on the film As you know as you finish the second half of it There's no time So I've even moved the time from the film so you don't know what year you're in and that's why you'll see The sob and then you'll see when they when they play in their video game and shit They play in all right with yeah, I fucking AR goggles and a glove that don't exist right I caught that too When y'all seeing a movie I grew is that real? Yeah, I did I did I I'll go you brought that up I want that to happen. I want to see one day I could play a basketball game like this right right right that if you go right that would be yeah They're getting real close to stuff like that. They're getting real close to stuff like that we have an AR game out there that you It's a zombie game and you put the headphones on the the headset on and You run around and you have an actual gun and you're shooting zombies. Yeah, and you point it at it And it's like they're getting really close I've shown you something I discovered this shouts this guy. I think he's doing this all on his own I found him and tweeted at him one day, but he didn't answer Daniel Habib is his name He's got the code to call true 3d. He's done this with two movies so far And I think you have to be in the theater to experience it, but it's kind of exactly what we're talking about He converted a movie. I think insidious a scary movie. Oh, that's a scary thing You're yeah, he's not showing you what he's being smart. He's also developing it still and he also did it with inner stellar just recently Wow, I almost flew to New York just like I go see it because I was very curious and This is cool awesome. Yeah, looks cool. He adapted it to the vision for just in meta quest headsets I believe and you probably have to be at the theater because I think that's where the sound's coming from you probably As the user watching it you get to decide how In depth this becomes because if you want to see the people next to you can sort of like go like level two and still steer neighbor Before and be like fully in the room and you can't see anybody else you can maybe touch them because you know they're there I like how some people are jumping into some people that are like dead on the inside Because these are jump scares he has that built in so you know when a jump scare is coming or you don't know when jump scares coming Oh Interest be super scared or you can You know and not be scared that you know someone's gonna come from behind you. Why would you? Ass up. I'm maybe it's on this seems like it could fucking give you a heart attack Maybe it's people with weak heart. It's like let me know. Let me know when I would get it free and also Dolby I saw you seen that I saw Dolby made this thing these glasses have you seen these Dolby glasses? No that that The you could hear shit, bro Like like surround sound with glasses on Dolby. Yeah, I mean I open up. You feel in a secret. What is it doing different? Like what do you mean you can hear things like watch see and hear yeah and so it's around sound Glasses yeah, and so the glasses is it projecting it into your inner ear like how's it doing? Is it does it plug into your ear? No, it doesn't even plug into yeah, yeah So it's one of those things that sits above the ear Yeah outside like pressing against your skull. Yeah, they kind of have headphones like that, right? I've seen that yeah, I've seen some headphones that give you 12.1 They're like earbuds and they don't go in your ear. They're like sit on the skull Yes, if you can find those Dolby those Dolby glasses. I don't know if I went to Dolby Some months ago in the is this a spoiler alert? I said you can edit you can edit this shit We could if we can't if you're not supposed to know Has to be right Dolby cinema oh, it's 3d there 3d glasses. I don't know. No, no, well listen I put them on ball you get his shit Mmm So did you put them on the watch a movie like what did you put them on the watch? Yeah? I put them on like they had a whole demo room out that I was looking at something And it sounded like I was in the room with It's not like I was in the movie theater, but I took the glasses off. Oh look This is what it is so it's showing you everything in 3d Oh And this and the sound is is is is is is is is connect this that's 2021 So this is five years old already Again, I don't this might not so this is a vision, but it what about this Adobe app most amos is the sound plus Dolby vision a studio 12 yep 12.61. What's it with it with it? Is that? That's that's that's 2024 Wow. Oh Okay That's that's the best for you. Okay. That's what you're home. That's that's having your system But they got some shit with it in the glasses Anyway, well, we're we're in an interesting time when it comes to technology and all this yeah and entertainment You are VR stuff and yeah and where it's going? I'm happy about it. Are you yeah? It's interesting I mean, I know a lot of people are freaked out about AI. There's a lot of that a lot of people freaked out about AI music A lot of people freaked out about AI replacing actors and their ability to generate images and video I I believe AI to be a tool I'm from the hip-hop Generation right so we sample in mm-hmm of record and therefore it's a digital replication of the record It's not the record right especially we sample in at 16 bit or 12 bit or some bit. That's not even Where the the computer or the AI or the chip has to fill in the pieces This is why you get that sound you hear from hip-hop. So so always embraced and braced it the technology I also know that it's nothing like the real thing You know I put on a You know even if I even if I put on a piece of vinyl and put that needle on it and play it because in my house I have it I got all type of setups right But when we really want to have a good time we just put on the fucking vinyl And it sounds so much Better different or it's got depth to it. It's a crackles. It's something else So it's nothing like the real thing but And in the in between time in the meantime. Listen joy You know like you say if you could if I could make you feel like you Hawaii and you don't have to leave your house Right cool, but if you could go to Hawaii Right, right, right. Yeah. Go to Hawaii No, I was trying to tell the AI industry or AI community that we got to change the A It shouldn't be considered artificial digital intelligence Well keep the A because you can't get done it but but don't change the A could be Assisted accumulated Depending on the situation find the find the A word That makes it Describe what you're doing it like for instance. It's right now. It's a system. Right. This is an it's an assist. It's assisting Intelligence Right artificial sounds cheap. Yeah, it's all the people You don't want all the fish with nothing if you if you came to your girl and you propose to over some artificial diamonds Right, it ain't working. Okay, girls don't even like real diamonds that are man-made Weird that is they have a hard time selling real diamonds that are made in a laboratory I don't know. Yeah. Is that a real diamond. It's real diamond. I mean, that's me. Luckily. Yeah. It's real diamond Yeah, it's not created by the earth over time It's created in a laboratory. So let's tell it but if you look at it It's a real I mean, it's not like a fake Ferrari. It's a fucking diamond You know what I mean? Like it doesn't have to do things like if you if you go to China and you buy a fake iPhone Who knows what the fuck's in there? Right. How kinds of you probably won't work with Apple won't work with the I tuned store the Apple store But a diamond is just a fucking rock They can take that carbon and compress it and make an artificial diamond and ladies like yeah, and I want it Yeah, I want a real one. I'm gonna stick with the ladies on that one Weird, we always always say with the ladies on it because I think the value of the diamond is the time that it took to become existence Unfortunately, that's not diamonds are harvested in a similar way as cobalt Although now you put it. Yeah. That's why they set up they call them blood diamonds right. Yeah, so if you get a diamond from a lab No, it's not blood. It's just a machine. It's compressing carbon. Yeah, it looks beautiful And I would if I look I could expect them not a chicken I don't only diamonds, but if I did I'd want the lab diamond I'm like give me that dope shit that some scientists figured out how to make basically you'll go vegan on a diamonds Yeah, how big can they make them? How big can they make a lab grown diamond? And how do they even tell? Like how do you tell whether or not a diamonds a lab diamond? Like is there a way that they can test them? Or is it just like providence like you know based on like a coming from Debeers or wherever but it was their way to but if there's a way they they could test them, but That's you if there's the way they could test them didn't it's not real time Yeah, right and less there's a way maybe they're perfect in a way that doesn't exist in the diamond world I don't know. I'm guessing completely guessing look at the size of that fucking rock 75 carries 70 Okay, so that's a fake I'm not a fake diamond a real diamond made in a lab that's 75 carrots How much is that bitch cost? 42 carrot diamond for $88,000 is that real? Is that much of cost? That's how much of cost? That's nothing that buying it from this website Brilliant brilliant earth.com Jamie just give them your credit card. Don't worry about it. That's real you could tell Yeah from this website. Oh, brilliant. Brilliant earth.com. Jamie, just give them your credit card. Don't worry about it. Let's reel. You could tell. Yeah, that might not be real. That one might not be real. But let's find out like what is a reputable site and how much is a reputable lab grown diamond? How much? How much does that cost? largest faceted lab grown $375,000. Do you know how much money that would cost if that was an actual diamond from the earth? Yeah, it'd probably be $100 million. Exactly. That's crazy. Well, that's that's how much would that cost? Find out how much that would cost if it was a real, I mean, is there even a real diamond that exists this big? But $375,000. What? We were going to wait the biggest one weighed 3,100 carrots. Whoa. When it was found in 1905. That's a real one. Yeah. Whoa. That was cut on the smaller ones. Look at that. Holy. That's the same. It's a long time. The girls like, I went that one. Kimmy, yeah. What? Oh, it's acts. Acts. My man. Proplexity. How old is that diamond? Oh, my God. It has to be millions, millions of years old. Let's see what is it. What does it say here? Does it say the age of it? That's nuts. 1.18 billion years old when it reached the surface. Oh, my gosh. So now you're going to have to locate that. You can if you think. So like if you buy a lab grown diamond versus a diamond that came from the earth, how can they tell the difference? Find that out. Can you discern, put this in a perplexity? How do you discern between a lab grown diamond and a diamond that came from the earth? Whether or not, how do you discern, maybe a girl smell it to get up on a tumbly? I don't smell blood. Yeah. Me can't tell, but women can. They're hair in the back of their neck sticks out. I don't like it. It seems fake. It says you can't. You can't. It says you can't. It's a real, I mean, a specialized scanner, which almost means it's in. Hold on. I mean, let me let me read that to the audience. It says, appearances the same lab grown in natural diamonds are the same sparkle hardness and basic obstacle properties. So they look identical in jewelry naked. I test don't work. Standard home tricks, fog test, scratch test, only distinguish diamond from non diamond, not lab versus natural. Standard diamond testers don't help thermal electric testers will say diamond for both lab grown and natural stones because their physical properties are essentially the same. In other words, you cannot reliably discern the origin of your on your own just by looking at it or using a simple tester, a jeweler. How do they do it? Let's say it was his hair. They literally seems like they write the word lab grown that you can see under a microscope or something. Oh, that was on a scribe. Why would you describe it? Because you're an asshole. I don't know. Okay. Closes that your thesis. If you make better, if you if you're like the best out of your the Rolex of making lab grown diamonds people can't copy yours. Maybe. Well, no, no, heck, what's something that's interesting? It says, uh, lab grown, uh, HP, H T and CBD diamonds can show characteristic of metallic inclusions and geometric patterns or growth striations that differ from most natural diamonds. But this is subtle and not always present. But there's a chance to dance, right? Yeah, as a chance natural diamonds tend to have more irregular geologic looking inclusions. Um, fluorescence patterns under UV differences in how the stone fluoresces under short wave and long wave UV light can hint at lab grown versus natural, but interpretation requires training in comparison. Okay, that's hints. That's interesting. But it says hints, not guarantees and many stones look ambiguous without proper instruments. Okay. So she got to be she got a complaint at the end of the day. Right? You got to bring it to a university. Yeah, that's best. Yeah, because she has to be, she's this satisfying. She has to, has to really has to complain. Interesting though that it's the same thing, but some women want it to be from the earth and not from a lab, even though it's the same thing. It's like if they could make you a banana and it tasted like a banana at all, vitamins of a banana, it looked like a banana, but it wasn't growing on a banana tree. It just came out of a banana lab. Would you be upset if somebody gave you the fake banana if it's exactly the same? That's the good question. Weird. Well, well bananas aren't there's no status attached to a banana. But yeah, what about GMO? Are we anti-GMO? Yeah, but is it genetically modified if it's just a replica of a banana? I mean, banana is probably a bad thing because you're putting it in your body. Right. But if it's something that is a complete like, like, you know, here's a good one. Okay, faux fur versus a real fur. Right. Why would you why would you complain if I came home with a faux meek? Because some women want the actual animal to die. So they could wear it. I want something to suffer in the snow and a trap around its neck. I don't know. It's weird. What movie was that? The revenue revenue. Yeah. That was going on. It's crazy. And not all. Yeah. It was it was good because it also let us understand, you know, just I love the idea that there was a business sadly and motherfuckers going looking for animals to kill. Going back and make a jacket. Yeah, still is. Still is. You know, there's a company in China that makes Rolex's exact to a real Rolex, but it's not a real Rolex. They because because of 3D printing now because they can scan every individual part that a role. So the buy a Rolex and then recreate exactly to the same type of steel that they use, the same courts for the whatever the fuck is the face, the band. But what is a term I'm looking for? The lens, something lens. What is it called? No, no, no, the glass part that's in the front. God, I could have a face. No, I forget what it's called. How it's one of those brainfarts when my brain is like just not remembering what it means. The crystal. That's it. Just a crystal. Jesus. But they take it and they recreate everything with the exact same materials, but it's like 500 bucks as opposed to 11,000. Right. But it is exact. Like you bring it to a watch person and it will take them hours to figure out whether or not this is an actual Rolex or not. They have to use microscopes. They have to get up in there and look at the finish and the way the hands are made. So what you were getting better and better and better. Would you wear it? Yeah, I would wear it. I mean, I wouldn't because I have a real one. But if I didn't have a real one, I would wear it. But that's see that now, you know, as a fake one, the heavyweight champion of the world, oh, well, there was a game where's a fake Rolex? It's hilarious. You know what? That's that's that's my big question. Like, like I was just talking about, you know, the AI or talking about whatever it is. I think anything is good until the real thing shows up. You know, I think when the real thing shows up, it's going to be real. And it's something about the real thing. Whatever that is, whatever that thing is, that's just like, it ain't going to never not be real. Right. You know, something about like a real Rolex, it comes from the company Rolex. It's been making watches for a hundred years and it's they figured out the technology, they figured out how to, you know, because these watch like a Rolex is an automatic watch. So it's it's moving on like this is an Omega and this this watch is automatic too. So this is moving on it's working on my movement. So my movement winds it. So every time I move my arm, it winds it up in the second hand. And it's incredibly precise accurate within like a couple seconds a day. Right. And somebody had to figure that out. Right. And they figured it out a long, fucking time ago, this guy's figured out how to make the perfect amount of spring tension, these little tiny gears that move around in there. And how long, how long, how long does it last? How long would it stay charged for? Yeah. Like, like, I don't have too much. I do got a couple of Rolexes, but I don't know. I do see on the slide. Oh, wow. But they'll last for decades and decades. Right. I mean, you could buy, there's a place called Bob's Watches online. You could buy like a 1967 Rolex. Okay. And it still works perfectly. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, they last forever and sometimes they need service and all that means is like they need to clean them out and maybe they replace a spring or some shit. But then it's back to work. I see one in. Well, for the one that's making in China, you know, I mean, that's, you know, in the guys super clones. Yeah, the super cloneers and you can't afford a real one and you want to be cool with a phone. On a budget, follow on a budget. We're not knocking that. But I saw one that my wife wanted. She didn't get it. I told her to get it, but she, she thought she'll get it somewhere else. And plus who, right? They had, you have you ever seen the orange Rolex? No, exactly. Well, they had it on display for sale. And she never seen it either. I'm not into watches, but she's kind of getting there into it. So, and we was kind of moving fast instead and she was like, you know, she saw it and she wanted it. I said, well, go ahead and get it. I wait. So no, I get it somewhere else. You can't get it nowhere else. You only could get it from that one location in Brussels. Also, Rolex makes it specifically just for them. Well, there's some companies that customize watches that you could buy where they take a regular Rolex and they customize it. And the problem with that is even though it's expensive, it's not worth as much to some people because they've altered it. Right. This is not altered though. Oh, it comes only from Rolex when they only sell it. Oh, wow. You know, I mean, it's a big, it's a big, you might, see if you can find out. People love exclusivity. Hall of time in Brussels, Rolex Explorer 2, the primary model featuring a single bright orange 24 hour hand often found to authorize dealers like Hall of time in Brussels. Wow. Interesting. I got to take all the way back to Brussels to get it. Oh, it's so pretty though. How about you get by online? I think you buy it online. You probably have to pay a premium. Look at that. 11,000. You can buy it online. 210,000. That's what I get right there. 210. Maybe I won't be going back to Brussels. It's just crazy how much cheaper those super clones are. They're looking exactly the same. I bet you out that his pocket as a super clone, the Gonsley, he's going to make those now. See, we can find a super clone sites from China because what they're doing is just taking advantage of the fact that like everybody wants these data symbols. And that's what a lot of it is. You know, it's like, it's the here it is. What is this company called superluxuryreps.com. Let's go with the scroll up a little bit, please, right there, the Daytona. That's the classic black dial Daytona. That's like, oh, look at that blue one right there to the right. The one. Yeah, look at that. Click on that. 1600 bucks. Yeah, boy, that would be so much more money. Look how pretty that is. That looks perfect. So everyone would ever know. So for 1600 bucks, no one is ever going to fucking know. It's a pretty good chance that's a picture of a real one too. Good boy. Damn, Jamie's taking levels ahead. I like that. That's true. They might be fucking with you. When you get it home, it ain't like it was in the picture. The wap is not the size. It is when it comes to good though. Okay. So luxury superluxury reps. Let's put this into a search super luxury reps reviews. See how good the watch is from the luxury. Super clone Datejust 36 millimeter floral dial 1000 bucks. Oh, trust pilot. That's a good guy. That's crazy. They just stuck that on there. Come on, this isn't China. What's up? Yes. This is in China video proof. Okay. Show me video proof. Oh, how about, okay, go to Rashard Millet because those watches are like a million bucks. Oh, video proof. Show me the video proof. Also, they're getting very close to it. Oh, yeah, I guess maybe they're trying to show the microscope. Yeah, so you're seeing all the action and all the movement. So Rashard Millet watch, click on those, please. Because that's like a million dollar watch. Those watches are insanely expensive. From here. How much does it cost? 1400. So 1400 bucks or a million and a half a million. You don't have this learn from watching that thing though? The other one you had with the moving gears. If you mind me of the quantum computer. Oh, okay. Yeah. Something my brand is bugged out, those things are weird. But I saw the science of a quantum computer there. Right. So let's stop moving. Yeah. Because it takes all those gears. It takes that. Well, the quantum computers are so crazy because all that shit is all cooling. And the actual computer is like the size of a, like a trisk it. Right. You kind of, you think about the human heart, right? It's, it's, it's doing a lot of fucking work. Oh, yeah. You know, I mean, it's doing, and it's just not really a pump. Definitely saying now. Yeah. It's like a cycle. It's like yeah, vortex vortex. Yeah. But it's, I used to think it was a pump. But it makes sense. Right. The quantum computer, the brain, all these things is almost like our biology is teaching it. Science is now catching up to the science of our biology and now finding a way to mechanically emulate our biology. So what super luxeoreps.com is they sell, perplexity says they sell super clone luxury watches emphasizing that the pieces mirror the design, weight and performance of genuine models. They present themselves as a premium alternative to cheap replicas, focusing on workmanship, durability. And we just did an ad for these people. We just, we basically just gave them an ad. I guarantee you some fake figures are going to go there. You're not thinking you're buying the real thing here and you shouldn't. Right. No. But the thing is, it's like it mirrors the performance. It looks exactly the same. That's my point is like why does a Rolex cost that much money then? If they can make it for 1400 bucks, why is it like how much does a Daytona cost? If you bought it retail, like what is a Rolex? Let's take a guess. I got to imagine it's 15,000. I got to imagine it's at least 10 times more. Like what is a Rolex Daytona cost? So you're saying that the material is all the same. But yeah, this, but they're stealing the idea. Yes, they're stealing everything. They're stealing the design. So you're paying a 15,000. You're paying for this idea, the design and everything. Not just the material. So 30 grand. So it's more than 10. Look at that. Yeah. So that black one, the black based one is exactly like the one that they had there. Yeah. Why that's pretty. But you can sell that though. The thing is, that comes with paperwork and you can sell it probably even more than 30 afterwards. That's the difference. That's the difference. Right. Yeah. It can appreciate. Yeah. These ended as serial numbers and paperwork and all that. It's an actual investment. I want to take a moment to once again, this is the the result on the job. I'm going to explain this. Like, I do this. Yes, please. Okay. Thanks. This is the result on the job. We're going to experience that. We're new film coming out. May 1st in theaters is called once. Buonichocolate Quentin Tarantino presents the results once. Buonichocolate in theaters everywhere. May 1st. It follows the story of a ex military convict trying to find a better way in life, ends up in this more town and shit calls bananas. Chaos ensues, dun dun dun. Action pack, phone shattering and available and streaming and maybe a month or so. Yeah, maybe a month or so. Maybe 45 days. Go see it in the movie. This. And you know what? Go to the theaters, y'all. You know, I come because tell me if you agree with this. I don't care where you get popcorn from anywhere else. So I like, I like Disney land. I like their muslin parks, but no popcorn touches movie theater popcorn. They know what they're doing. They got something going on there. But whatever that butter is, what is that shit? That stuff when you go to the machine, you press the button. Oh, I don't know what that is. I think it's vegan. It can't be good for you. It can't be good. It's hand. Yeah. Well, at the animal draft house that he was real, but all these real butter, yeah, animal draft house. Uh, so you ever been to Sinopolis? Yes. Yes. Sinopolis is awesome. Oh, they have everything there. Is that a great night? Yeah, man. Beautiful seats. Like laying back. They have waiters and waitresses. Did you want to wife like going to see more? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Was it wish your favorite theater? I love Sinopolis. That's the best favorite. Yeah. That's the, that's the place. Because the seats are the best. They recline. They're perfect. Yeah. They're, they know what they're doing. Plus it costs a little bit more to go there. So like no one's on their phone making noises. People aren't talking. You know what I mean? I agree. So crazy thing I will say though, Sinopolis is my favorite theater as well for dating out of my wife. But I strongly believe festival my experience that it was the animal draft house that pioneered that whole concept of food. Yeah, bro. Yeah. I'm coming out here. I don't know. It might have been 2004 or something. Like it was just one animal draft house, I think God's had it on on six street or six street. Is that my building now? That's the mothership. Yeah. I bought that place. That's the ritz. Bro, that's my, that's my school. Well, yeah, that's the ritz. That's why I, I used to come out to the QT. I mean, that's my, that's my film college. Yeah. I've seen so many movies there. I've, I've, I've, I've seen my six movies in one day. Tarantino screen death proof there. Yeah. Yeah. They had so many movies out of that place. That place was everything, man. It used to be a rock and roll club. It was a, at one point time was a pool hall. Right. It's been a bunch of different things. You own my college now. Yeah. It's a dope spot too. It's, it's a perfect place. And it's, we still have the original marquee because it's all the historical side. Right. Right. So it's a building from 1927. You got five pickles in there because we don't sell food. No, no food. No food. No food. No. We're comedy club. This food next door is a pizza joint on one size of Mexican joint. And the other side of just playing food. You don't want to be eaten while you're laughing. We have one thing. We sell jokes. Nice. Jokes and drinks. That's it. I got, I got a, I got a pop in and, uh, and who, who's a, who's a, who's a, who's a next guest or, oh, we always, I mean, I do shows there every Tuesday and Wednesday and every weekend we have national headliners that are there. I don't even know who's there this weekend. Who's there this weekend, John. But it's, um, you know, it's set up with two rooms just like the Alamo was. There was two theaters there. So we have two rooms. We have a small room that seats like 110 people. Nice. And in the big room, it's like 250 people. Nice. Nice. It's set up perfect. We had it all like the ceilings lowered and everything tightened up and set out the ship. Comedy mothership. Rich, Rich Voss. Rich Voss. Oh boy. My boy, Rich. He's awesome. Uh, the Rizzo. I'm glad we did it this time without Donnell. It's all right. Donnell, I love you to death, but it was better without you. Better without you than I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Indian gave you. Yeah. I got some coming to you kid. Uh, a spoonful chocolate out everywhere. Everywhere may first. All movie theaters. See it in the movie theater first. That's definitely where you want to see it. You want to have that experience with a bunch of other people. And thank you, brother. It was always good to see it and Wu tank forever. Wu tank forever. Black and more Hall of Fame. Bong bong. Here we come. Here we go. All right. Bye, buddy.