In Carol, I have wanted to meet you. I'm grateful you're here. Yeah, thank you. Thanks man. Um, So I just want to understand one story. I want to know what we know about the biggest mass shooting in the American history in Las Vegas 2017 I spent a full year looking into it got nowhere Other than increasingly skeptical of the story we were told, but I really don't there's a lot. I don't know so will you Lay out what we do know. Yeah Um, I mean first the most important thing to highlight is that I bet that a lot of people when you started that sentence don't know what the most deadly mass shooting in American history is because I think that most Americans have forgotten about the Las Vegas shooting because it just got poofed right out of the news after like a week and they just never brought it up again basically And then there was actually this information poured in to try to stop journalist and investigators and regular citizens from uncovering basic truths from getting basic disclosure Can you be specific? What does that mean? Disinformation poured in a book? Well, well, I think we'll get great in the story And but before we start the story it's important to give myself context in that I wasn't there and I wasn't researching at the time and so the actual work of what we do know was done by a bunch of citizen journalists a bunch of really incredible researchers at the time which I'm gonna try to kind of shout out as we go through it because I didn't do any of the original Research I came in long after the fact and did my research and found all of their work and We have a talent for synthesizing so I mean that's what I try to do is I'm good at I'm good at getting eyes on stories and A lot of the best researchers and journalists are just good at the information itself Yes, that's a journalist exactly right and we kind of need these different people in these different lanes to sort of help each other out and work together in order to get the story done but then also get it out to as many people as possible and this one is so important as I think we'll talk through here Not just in that it's the most deadly mass shooting in American history, but in that it has very direct political and geopolitical implications for what's happening today on the world stage Depending what theory you subscribe to about what really happened but The basics of what happened is we're told that Stephen Patak this disgruntled 60 something real estate guy x x gun guy Thought he was a hotshot but was failing at life and he Was slipping in his mental health he had a gambling problem and you know all these little explanations They kind of give after the fact and he wound up going to Las Vegas um And there's so many places here where I'm gonna have to sort of say first They told us this and then they told us this and then they told us this and first they said he checked into the hotel the day before the shooting But it was later revised because it was obvious that he had checked in Like five or six days before the shooting on the 25th of September And he checks in and over a series of days. He Lugs up. I think 22 bags of weapons and ammunition to his hotel room sweet 32 135 he had two suites 32 135 and 32 136 that we're joining and He rents it alone with no one else on the room that we later learned that that wasn't true and He stocks it with all these weapons which were mostly all AR platforms with bump stocks very important that you know They were bump stocks because that's evil and makes no sense um, and then there's this country music concert on October 1st Down outside of the Mandalay Bay across the street in this big parking lot with thousands of attendees and We'll kind of circle back to this endlessly I think as we unpack what really happened and what people really discovered about it but um There's some stuff with the security guard that gets an alert about the doors or about you know What's going on in the room and he winds up up there and gets shot at through the doors and initially we were told that that happened After the shooting then it was revised to before Then it was during the shooting So there's some security guard stuff in the hallway But what the public found like experienced was there at this chase in all dean concert and at 10 o 5 in the evening a couple of Distinct pops Ring out over the concert that we have on foot on footage We have footage of all sorts of shit around this story and you can hear the pops individual like pop pop pop pop pop kind of things and then about a minute later at 10 o 6 Automatic gunfire just starts Cracking in the night and people start to run they start to scatter Uh Jason all deans still doesn't realize what's going on because the concert is super loud and he's got his monitors going and all this stuff Even though most of the eyewitnesses that were there claimed that the first shot sounded like they were coming from the stage They sounded like they were very close is what witnesses described. They sound like they're coming out them like from right there at the stage Um By the second volley which came a little less than a minute later Jason all dean realizes that he gets pulled off stage and everyone's scattering and then over the course of about nine Nine to ten minutes 12 volleys of automatic gunfire Uh ring out in the night and are captured on body cams they're captured on cell phone videos They're captured on you know various recordings and you can hear them all across the Las Vegas strip And then the official story is that Steven paddock Barricated in his room up on the 32nd floor of the Mandalay Bay Who he's knocked out a window so he can shoot through the window He's actually knocked out a window in both of these suites And he's running back and forth between them and shooting his bolt action rifle and then shooting his bump stock ARs and spraying this concert with with bullets and he Allegedly shot more than a thousand rounds from that room Um used multiple ARs even though one would have done the trick and Then Allegedly he just got bored or sick of it and just committed suicide With no cops at the door with no reason to stop With no real explanation for why he stopped he just stopped shot himself in the head with revolver and that was the end of the shooting And no other shooting took place no other gunman were there No other things happened that night at all. That's the official narrative. Just this one guy with no motive No manifesto No explanation of why Just did that and then checked out in the meantime The concerts tripping out There's all sorts of other things that are definitively happening all across the Las Vegas strip in the air at the airport at the other casinos, which we'll get to but um The police response to the alleged lone gunman is They This security guard that had come up and had gotten shot at he had discovered that the door to that floor from the stairwell was Bulted shut And so he had gone down gone up the elevator and then At that point had gotten shot at through the door Um, we found out that there was cameras kind of set up outside the room. So someone had visibility outside the room But so the cops get up into the stairwell right by this guy's room and they are Within a minute or two of the shooting ending. They're like outside the stairwell door That's barricaded and they're just waiting there and they wind up waiting there allegedly for SWAT teams to show up so they can bust through that door and then Over an hour after the shooting has ended and he's allegedly shot himself Finally the SWAT has the SWAT which we'll get to has busted through this stairwell door and they're on the floor and then they Reach his hotel room door um And we have one body camera this that is very suspicious and he's dead there on the floor and they secure the room and it's all over but immediately The public was completely not with that explanation because everyone that had been there had experienced something completely different than that and everything that was coming out from they'll from the lvmpd um Las Vegas Metro police department they Had changed their stories had been strange during the night Uh, things that had obviously happened things that were recorded on body cams things that Had been witnessed all across the Las Vegas strip where completely absent from what they were telling people had happened and Every single person that was there had heard the gunfire that was clearly not The firing of AR platforms. It was clearly some sort of and I'm not the weapons expert on this But there's lots of them there was a country music concert and the consensus was that it sounded like Beltside machine guns of some sort and when you watch the video footage which is available online and we'll talk about some cool resources online The video footage very clearly can be heard that this is something else but you can also hear that there's multiple guns being fired at once And you can hear that some of these Machine guns are in different locations while they're simultaneously firing just from the way they sound you can hear Lots of different stuff going on just in those 12 volleys of automatic gunfire But just to sort of tease Out the audience on how many things we're gonna have to talk about to get to the bottom of this We have For example at midnight More than like an hour and a half after the skies allegedly shot himself in the head We have at least nine different police body cams that are public on the internet right now that you can go watch Where all nine of them at 11 59? I think it is all of them in different locations around the strip record like Seven to five volleys of automatic gunfire somewhere down by the Bellagio and I say seven to five because some of their body cams capture the later five and some of them capture an earlier two as well and in between there you can hear the Police dispatch saying we got reports of shots of Bellagio shots of Bellagio and then all throughout the night There's all sorts of body cam footage Talking about we've got a suspect of tropical. We got a gun gunment at Tropicana We've got someone at Bellagio. We got someone in the Mirage There's basically something is happening at various times throughout the night Generally in a northward pattern at almost every casino on the strip Um some of them are far more corroborated than others like the Bellagio There is dozens and dozens and dozens of 9 1 calls. There's body cam footage with stuff like I just described So there's stuff happening in the casinos that clearly Doesn't line up with one lone gunman in one window that's been dead for an hour two hours by the time these reports are coming in Then there's stuff that happens at the airport And there's lots of stuff that happens at the airport But the simple tease of that is that we actually have the audio from the control tower air traffic control Saying um I think it's about an hour. What would it be? It's not an hour It's at 1035 so paddock Allegedly kills himself Somewhere around 1016 to 1018 at 1035 air traffic control says we have an actor shooter on the runway On the runway on the runway and we have a really on the airport run on the airport run on the caron at the main Yeah, wow though they renamed it, but yeah at McARan Airport The Harry Reid which is right there next to the concert. It's like you know two Yeah, that's an entire airport. It's a huge airport huge airport and At the time there is a police helicopter circling over top looking at trying to figure out what's going on at the airport Because something big happened at the airport But the footage that we eventually that journalist got released feels very doctored Because it's it's pointing at one weird angle and it spiraling around So you only get very small glimpses of what's on the runway But you do see several groups of people walking around on the runway and it's in infrared And there's a couple of these groups of people that look like they're wearing Black things they have black things which in infrared is steel is You know no heat so guns body armor those sorts of things would show up in black So there's visual of stuff happening on the runway There's air traffic control saying we have an actor shooter on the runway And then one minute later someone comes onto that radio call and says I want you to kill the lights on this runway and that runway Kill the lights. Yeah turn off the lights and they turn off the lights at the airport for a certain amount of time We don't know and that's recorded. How long it's recorded. It's on audio. Why? Christmas is here. That means you're eating a lot We are it's enough time to get on the scale because the meals keep coming and so does the wake game But what if there was a way to eat like you want to eat without getting really fat over Christmas week This is an ongoing concern in my house a snack that tastes excellent and is healthy Well it exists. It's called a Mosset chips It's part of a growing movement to revive real food that kind of your grandparents eat Before snacks were designed in labs. How do they do it? Well, we'll tell you because it's very simple Mosset chips are made from three ingredients only three organic corn Sea salt and a hundred percent grass fed beef tallow. That's it This is not some weird franken cocktail like most big chip brands Mosset chips taste delicious and you feel way better after you're not bloated You don't feel mindless. It doesn't take you out of the game for hours And if you want to pick a flavor we recommend the lime My producer is literally eating a bag right off camera right now ready to give it a try Mosset chips dot com slash Tucker use the code Tucker for 25% off your first order Or just click the link in the video description or scan the QR code and if you don't want to order online You could also buy Mosset chips at your local sprouts supermarket Stop by and pick up a bag. They're awesome If you thought you had a man with a gun Somewhere at night. Why would you turn off the lights? Well the only reason that I would think of the most obvious reason that I would think of is because You also are doing things there that will benefit you to have the darkness to get away or to Finish what you're doing or something And we're gonna come back to all that because There's what we were told happened and then there's what we have evidence did happen and then there's theories of How could you possibly explain all of that in a rational way that would actually Fit it all together because right now the public has this experience with Charlie Kirk's assassination unfortunately Where when a crime is committed? Obviously The actual explanation will explain all the facts Some of them might be weird coincidences Some of them might just be crazy circumstances But the actual explanation of what really did happen Really does explain every single fact about a situation right? Like that's just the nature of reality. You know what I mean? Yeah When you know the real explanation everything fits And it can be bizarre it can be anomalous sometimes But it has to be that real explanation will suddenly click into place And then in other words the facts have to drive the explanation rather than the explanation driving that thing and go And so when it comes to Vegas There's actually after citizens journalists media pushed so hard they sued They went through years of fighting to get the most basic stuff released like autopsies Body cam footage audios Basic reports about you know police reports and such about what had happened things that very much should have been public and forthcoming That weren't And they had to sue the lvmpd they had to sue the coroner personally in order to get the autopsy of Stephen Patick released I think he eventually wound up paying like $32,000 or something like that And so after all that stuff got released we actually have Quite a bit like a huge body of evidence. It would take the average person months to acquaint themselves with all of this stuff Which is why I gave that disclaimer at the start that I wasn't there and I wasn't one of the researchers at the start And I had to try to like become acquainted with the story after the fact which is a monumental task And so I'm leaning on the shoulders of all these people that did all this incredible work to try to uncover this and then to theorize about what really happened And there's still a certain amount you'll never gonna get back when you look backwards at these kinds of things because so much gets covered up That's right so much requires you have been there or to talk to the witnesses correct whatever it is and Surprise a number of the witnesses that were most vocal about the fact that there was more than one shooter actually died Strange deaths in the weeks following like people that were taking to Twitter or Facebook And being very vocal about their testimony that no, I guarantee it was more than one shooter I know it was more than one shooter multiple different people that were doing that died in things like car crashes or of like Weird medical condition actually. Yeah, so I don't know the number of exactly how many Because those are harder to trace down and confirm But I know for a fact like for example, there was a couple that died in a car wreck That had been there and had survived and then had been I think it was the husband that had been pretty vocal online about how there was more than one shooter and they're they're both in a car wreck and they die There's another woman that Had been extremely vocal and had one of the most sort of viral multiple shooter testimonies that I think that she died of a health thing one of them one of them died of like a random like kind of robbery shooting kind of thing and those ones are those things are harder and harder to confirm because There's not as much reporting about a single random person's death or sort of like a nobody so to speak and by then The apparent cover-up was in very much full swing, but it's pretty well confirmed that at least a fair at least a handful of Survivors that were vocal about the story being wrong happened to die and maybe that's just all coincidences, but um There's no coincidental explanation for the number of things that don't fit that narrative that night and so now we've kind of covered the official narrative Long gunman No explanation and that is their official explanation is that there was no why they never figured out why and That it ended by You know 10 16 or 10 18 and that was it and nothing else is true so After the fact I'm come to the story trying to learn about it and I spend a number of days digging through various people's documentaries and various people's YouTube channels and various people's reporting about it Sifting through kind of all the old material and I wind up I stumble across this website called vegas shooting map.com And I don't know who made vegas shooting map.com, but whoever they are there a hero Because what they did is they made a website using Google's map tools to build a archived map that is Actually overlaid over Google Maps that has little pins for every single piece of original documented not literally every piece But hundreds and hundreds of 911 calls Actually sourced click it and then you're at the 911 call listening to the audio Time stamped out for when the first volume is when the second volume is when the third volume is or it's a reported shooting at Tropicannon you can listen to the the audio of this 911 call and it's so it's like this invaluable resource of calls and autopsies The death reports Police body cam. We don't know cell phone videos. I don't know who made it. That is an enormous tax believable well this country's 250th birthday is right around the corner and our friends at black rifle coffee are celebrating the right way with bold Roast made by veterans who love this country and live its values every day of the year black rifle makes coffee People get up early and work until late We drink it late by the way best at night It tastes great especially after their atomic llama formula during this time of year cinnamon and brown sugar It's awesome for winter Well, you're hosting family out in the woods Filling stockings for Christmas. This is the coffee that stands for something real essential and American 2025 black rifle supported groups like full to bond our team red white and blue And organizations that serve veterans and their families and in 2026 are going even bigger We support them. We know them We've taken a lot of unfair criticism, but they are great and sincere guys We can vouch for that visit black rifle coffee dot com slash Tucker use the code Tucker for 30% off your purchase Or your first coffee club order or grab grab black rifle at Walmart Your local grocery store. It's everywhere because it's awesome black rifle coffee veteran founded American roasted This is America's coffee. Yeah, the amount of effort that went into making it might have been multiple people And I've asked around a little bit and I've never gotten an answer as to who made it You say the name of the site again in case people Vegas shooting map.com figures shooting map now whenever I typed v e g into my web browser It suggests Vegas shooting map because I've been there so many times um And so for me when I stumbled across that That's a goldmine because Any story that's been covered up any story that you suspect foul play in the reporting or in the meat in the mainstream kind of narrative The first thing you have to do is hone in on what are the documented primary source facts that we can read and understand and see and hear and So then I just started sifting through and I started watching body camps and I started listening to 911 calls And I started re-peasing it together for myself because I found there's a number of really great reporters that I'll credit throughout here Like John Colin and Jason Goodman and Mindy Robinson and and yourself you did some on it too Alex Jones did some on it. I got nothing But it didn't smell right. Well, you at least spoke up You at least were someone that was in that mainstream media space that was not buying it because it was just It's dank and so there's all these people that have made media that synthesizes it and made media that speculates and takes it much much further Especially into the Saudi angle that we'll talk about But for me I was like I need to start with understanding the information and see if I can arrive at a similar factual understanding of like when I look at the original evidence without these narratives on it do I arrive at a similar Conclusion and immediately it's it only takes you like five clicks on random pieces of evidence on that map to realize that it's clearly not Alumni in the Mandalay Bay because how would I have this massive cluster of 911 calls coming from the Bellagio which is like I Don't know like half a mile to a mile up the strip. It's like a giant block and a half if you've ever been to Vegas It's Vegas is a crazy place of gigantic monolithic buildings of sin that It stretches on and on and on and the Bellagio is way up on the northern end of the strip and the mandly Bay is the southernmost building And most of these calls come in an hour and more after Patica is allegedly killed himself and we're talking like people that Work there we're talking security guards. We're talking victims people alleging that they've seen the shooter describing the shooter and it happens in multiple waves And then a lot of them are clustered around for example those nine body cams that capture audio of multiple bursts of automatic fire While we're getting 911 calls from the Bellagio saying that there's active shooters at the Bellagio while the police dispatcher is saying we've got a shooter at the Bellagio so When you dig into this primary source evidence you very quickly realize that This is not just Patica. It's not a lone gunman And so once I familiarize myself with that then I expanded out to like okay So then what did the people that did all this work? What did they conclude? What was their understanding of this evidence and where did they take a possible explanation and that's where it gets really interesting and we don't know for sure but uh But I think there's actually a pretty a pretty solid lead um And whatever it is it's still at play in the modern the modern information space because Anytime you have one of these shootings or you know false flag events or anything that gets covered up on the scale right? If you buy the mainstream narrative All bets are off, you know, there's no facts there. There's no understanding of reality there if you buy the mainstream narrative about 9-11 You have no level of understanding of even how many buildings fell or why they felt like let alone Who could have you know brought these towers down the way they came down? Who could have you know guarded these hijackers the way that they were guarded all the way there funded it etc but um Once you Realize that the mainstream narrative on one of these events is for sure not the whole story Then you actually open up to a whole world of uh Almost any explanation is possible right? It's if it's a shooting and you don't even know who perpetrated it You don't even know how many shooters there were you don't even really know what guns were used And there's no forthcoming information of the authorities Well, then journalists have a monumental task ahead of them right to A uncover the evidence and B try to fit any possible Motive and perpetrator to the crime and I think that's the most interesting question in the last Vegas one in my mind Is who has the motive to do such a horrible thing? right because Um What depends what the goal was Exactly like why are we doing this because if it's low and gunman paddock I mean, hey, he can't do the things that we actually have evidence happened But like even if it's just a low and gunman Why are you shooting down into a crowd of people even even a craze shooter has a motive and you can trace that through their life But when you realize that well, no, that's not all that happened I mean, there was spraying of bullets down into this crowd But then there were shootings happening at all these other Hotels at least at some of them even if some of these reports are fake they can't all be fake And then there's things happening at the airport that are that are strange that there's some shooting happening at the airport So it's like are we is this a gang war between like the Italian mob and the Jewish mob is this a Is this a CIA operation that went wrong? Is it like a Jason born movie that then they're covering up the tracks of like Jason born's like killing spree is this like a Mossad like Operation and any of those things would need to fit the facts, right? and You can kind of try to like In lieu of enough facts you can always try to fit, you know The right you can try to fit a perpetrator to the facts and sort of invent explanations that will work But when the crime for me what kind of kept sticking in my mind Is how heinous The crime against these festival goers was that just did not seem to match The other stuff that was happening that night that was that because we don't have random women Like shot in the face in the tropicana and in New York, New York and in the Bellagio at least We don't know of that if that happened. It was all covered up There was shooting reported in all those places all these other hotels all down the strip at the airport and everything And there are victims that are dead in other places mostly there's like over near the airport and kind of in a few hotels Kind of in the direction of the airport Coupled down by the tropicana who are dead. Yeah, it's and you have to sort through it really Sift through it really carefully because some of them it could have I think Were were confirmed to be festival goers that were hit and injured and escaping and then died of their injuries further out and so They can be represented as having died like you know over there when technically they were shot at the festival But not all of them and even at the festival There's most of the deaths happened right in the middle of the festival grounds but there's a cluster of About six bodies that died at the far North eastern side of the festival grounds So the opposite side of the Mandalay Bay where the shooter allegedly was and they were across a barrier They're on the other side of a barrier that obscured line of sight So they were not visible to the Mandalay Bay And there's a cluster of four of them along a fence line there and then two in a parking lot like right next door That died right there that very much looked like they were shot right there not that they escaped that would that be for it He was shooting two two three primarily, but also three oh eight. Yeah, and multiple calipers in the room would that be Out of range for the gun. Hey, I'm not the gun guy, but it certainly is there's there's no world where that's the shots that were taken Some of the some of the rifles he allegedly shot with didn't even have scopes on them He had he had rifles that did have scopes But he also had rifles that didn't have scopes then he had rifles that had bump stocks and he had some rifles that didn't have bump stocks and They alleged the official story is that he switched back and forth between different rifles and some of them He reloaded and some of them he didn't and some of them had scopes and some of them didn't and he fired some of the ones that didn't have scopes at This massive range down into this crowd Um, and we have a video from a police body cam right after the shooting walking through this crowd with all these tragedy around them And he's talking to someone whether it's a medic or I'm not sure exactly what he's talking to But they're commenting back and forth in a conversation about how many direct like center headshots there are how many people like seem to have been executed and The people in the crowd almost all of them believe that there were shooters on the ground that there was shooters coming into the into the event venue from the entrances and shooting into the crowd from the ground and then Journalist picked up on this and started researching it and I believe John colon did a lot of work on getting the autopsy data Actually released and then analyzing and realizing that a bunch of these people were shot at parallel to ground trajectories Meaning that the shooter would have to be on the ground because if you're up in a hotel balcony like in a hotel window at the Or third or second floor the bullets will hit the ground they'll be coming down and there are a lot of people that were shot at that angle And we'll talk about helicopters in a second but there are like in a hotel window at the third or second floor, the bullets will hit the ground, they'll be coming down. And there are a lot of people that were shot at that angle, and we'll talk about helicopters in a second, but there are a number of people that were shot parallel to the ground. And it's like, were they all bullets that ricocheted off the ground and then like, you know, then went off and hit someone at a near parallel to ground angle, I doubt it. Then there were autopsies found where people were shot directly down from above, like straight down through them. And so as researchers started to pull on these various threats through the top of the head, like from the air above them. And it didn't take until those autopsies came out. It was the very first day that people were already alleging that they believed there was helicopter shooting at them. And there's helicopters in the videos. You can see the helicopters in the videos. And the witnesses talk about helicopters having been there in the air. And a lot of them say that they suspect the helicopters were shooting, that they felt like the helicopters were shooting at them. But then when you read the official story, the police reports, no mention helicopters at all. None of that at all. It's just the lone gunman. And then when you look at the flight radar data from that night, there are a lot of suspicious helicopters that take off and land from and at the two helicopter operators in the airport there, Sundance and I'm blank on the one that Maverick, Sundance and Maverick. But there's also helicopters, John Cullen. Do you know who John Cullen is? John Cullen. Yeah, we're going to reference John Cullen's work a lot tonight. Because he's this like deeply autistic type of researcher that just has a YouTube channel that very few people have ever heard of. But he's the sheriff with like the glasses. And he's like a very funny guy. But he just like went after the story for years and years. And he's the type of detail oriented person that just that would get the baseline. Like I'll watch every Sunday's flight patterns for six weeks. So I get the baseline and then I'll track every single flight that went out this night so that I can understand what's in the air. And then I'll look at every single footage and oriented on the map and get the, get the lay with the time. And then I'll know that like, I know if I'm seeing a flight that's on the flight patterns or if it's this thing in the air that we're seeing in this footage is not documented. And, and he went through all this work extensively to very thoroughly prove that there are many birds in the air that night that are not on the flight radar at all. And they seem to have flashing coming from them. They, they very much seem to be involved in what's going on. And so there's a lot of videos that are on that map I was referring to that as you watch some of the more body cam and some of them are cell phone videos. And you can see these helicopters flying around behind the Mandalay Bay and back around and around behind the Mandalay Bay and back around. And you can see little flashes coming peppering kind of the night sky from between the two hotels that are there, clearly out in the sky, um, as though there was gunfire coming from an airborne craft of some sort. And so that got a lot of people thinking of who would that be and how would that happen and how would you get helicopters into one of the most busy metropolitan air spaces in the world. That's like, this is an extremely surveilled place. Um, I mean, not to mention the surveillance that we should have of all these shooters in all of these hotels, right? Well, some Americans have become cut off from the things that once kept this grounded are land, the skills that tied our families to nature. Those years get his next spot. And tremendous who made a new six part series, American game Tales from the wild. We follow the sports when we're keeping these ancient traditions alive. We follow a form in it, maybe seal into the mountains of Texas, Donald Trump, junior across the ridges of Lenai. That's what we call from going from zero to hero and wander with me with the quiet woods of Maine. I have just three dog commands. And then as I direct the dogs, find the bird. Find the bird. And then Denver. Obviously, I don't use as much as I'd like to. We cast for steelhead on the to shoot server in Oregon. Oh, the first one I've gone a while. Track mule deer in the Utah High Country. Spearfish in the waters off Montauk chasing striped bass and wolf in tune of sea on the other side. It's called the American game Tales from the Wild Outdoor Series. Watch your Tucker Carlson dot com. Realosh Vegas like the world for CCTV doesn't have. And so none of that ever came out. None of it ever came out. So we have. So here's the thing, which you know more about than me. MGM owns like, you know, 80% of the strip or whatever. I'm exaggerating, I think, but it's MGM owns a huge number of these casinos that are not named MGM. And there is footage of this occurring in one instance, but there's testimony that happened left and right of a hotel employee that was working that night that was told that was basically forced to sign an NDA that says, you're not allowed to talk about what happened last night. Nothing happened last night. Your lips are sealed. And it very much was a blanket gag order on all employees of these hotels. None of the hotels gave out any footage. They all just locked everything down. Um, and they even fought the police on the story to make the story become something that would not make them look bad. And an example of that is the security guy that I was saying got shot at that we're going to come back to. Yes. I remember this. Yeah. Hey, excuse campus. Jose campus. Yes. Jose campus. Jose campus. So he, the first version of his story was that he came up, the doors bolted. He went down. He came up the elevator. And then it was after the shooting had ended, he gets shot at through this door. Um, and then escapes. Then that didn't really like square for whatever reason in the police change of the story to like, Oh, no, actually, that was three minutes before the shooting started that he got shot at through the door. So that must have been wise. Steven paddock went crazy all at once is because he realized he was running out of time. Yes. Yes. And they're like, that's, well, that's our narrative. That's going to work. But then MGM was like, well, F you, because that makes us look like idiots. Right. Because then what are we talking? What are we doing here? Like then we would have had advanced notice. And if our security guy got shot at three minutes before the shooting started, we didn't do any response. So like that's not going to work. And so MGM actually got mad at the police and the police changed their story again to be no actually his, uh, Jose Campos got shot at about 40 seconds after the shooting started during the shooting volleys is when they, that's the third and final version of the official story of Jose Campos. And Jose Campos put out a statement that was something like, I do not contest that statement. That was like his official statement very much canned and then just like, poof, he was gone. Obviously we didn't even wind up in Mexico. Yeah. There was a thing where he was going to test. It was card a Mexico. Yeah. So I think it was that he was going to do a bunch of news stories. And he was kind of like lined up for a bunch of news hits. And then he just like, actually he went to Mexico. Who knows? But then he got brought back and did Ellen. That's what it was, right? Yeah. And he got brought back to do Ellen. Ellen was sponsored by the casinos. Because he had all the slot machines. He also went deep. Right. So he did one Ellen interview where Ellen fed him all of his lines and then he disappeared and not became the narrative for him. Has he ever emerged to tell his story? Not that I know of. And to be fair, I haven't done enough digging into his story yet. There's, I mean, to be fair, I still, I feel like I could spend another year digging into this. And I still would only be approaching the kind of expertise that some of these other guys have about it. Because they did devote years and years and years to this. Um, and there's just so much to learn and to look at because it's such a crazy event with so many pieces of evidence. And, and Campos is this one really interesting one that exposes a lot of elements of what was going on here in that you had the hotel, the hotels interests in the reputation, their money, whatever was going on. You have the way that hotel employees were a part of this thing, but then had to, you know, represent after the thing, you have the police narrative involved in his story and you have a really important detail. And it just in that like, a, let's think it through. If the sounds that we all hear in those videos, this like, is happening inside of that hotel room. And you can hear it all across the Las Vegas strip. It's like, these are deafening sounds. Obviously. If Jose is in the hallway right outside of that door, you damn well, better believe he remembers if that was happening when he got shot at it. Someone's open opens up with automatic weapons. It, it resonates. Yeah, it's not like Campos doesn't remember. Thought it were firewares. It's not like he changed his story because he didn't know if there was this cacophony of automatic gunfire happening across the door. Obviously that is a shifting narrative to meet various needs of whatever the narrative builders need. But the, the, the nature of him getting shot through that door is interesting. Once you start to put away the mainstream narrative and just look at all the information as it is and try to figure out what the hell was this and what went on here. And we'll have to kind of rewind at the beginning to unpack that because there are a lot of facts that we haven't even talked about yet that become very important. But try to figure out what happened with him and why he got shot through the door at that moment and maybe even when he did get shot through the door. That's interesting because it involves the fact that there was cameras rigged up outside the door facing into the hallway to surveil the hallway for whatever, to protect whatever was happening inside the room. They weren't recording video, but they were live. You know what I mean? So, so whoever was watching their feeds could see the other side, could see the hallway. And so as a security guard approaches this door whenever he approached it, um, I mean, based upon the fact that the first testimony was that it was not when gunfire was happening actively. I would assume that he approached the door when there was no automatic gunfire happening actively. Um, but I don't know. But whoever's in the room doing whatever they're doing, and it was guaranteed, it was definitely more than one person. And we can talk about the door locks in a minute. They see a security guard on these cameras and their responses to shoot around a fire through the doorway at him to get him to go away. Um, or to kill him, you know, whatever. And that's really weird. That's really interesting because obviously it implies that whatever's happening in the room, you need him to not come in. You need him to not. Yeah. Obviously there's something happening in the room that needs to be finished before the heat comes. But like we have pretty strong evidence at this point that paddock was dead by then, paddock was not a part of this. And whatever was happening in the room is like, what was happening in the room? What were you doing that needed to be finished before the heat came to that room? Because they had taken the time to put this tiny little L bracket, this little metal L bracket on the stairwell door so people couldn't come up the stairs onto the floor right next to the room. But it was like a little Home Depot thing. It was not the kind of thing you need the SWAT team to bust down. Um, and they'd rigged up these cameras. And so then it's like, like, okay, your brain, if you don't take the narrative, the mainstream narrative at all, it's like, what is this? Is this like a heist? Is this like a casinoized or something? Um, which is not what I think it was. But it's just if you start to ask like, what could that be that's happening in that room? Is this like oceans 11 and they need to like protect part of their heist or something until they get away with the jewels? It's like, maybe that starts to explain a piece of this. But that's what I mean by like, when you look at the original evidence and you try to square it with like an explanation that fits it all. It starts to get pretty fascinating and pretty weird. And in order to do that, we have to rewind past campus back to the start because we know for a fact that Patik wasn't alone in that room. And we know for almost complete certain facts that he was dead before any of this even happened. Any of the shooting. Yeah. Before any of the shooting happened. And just to kind of we do and our whistle on that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And we don't know it for fact fact fact fact, but the actual official photo of of Patik dead in the room, like overhead looking down at him with a blood stay. Yes. There's very clearly two blood stains. It's very clearly a dry blood stain that's been like dried into the carpet that is one color and then a fresh like glistening red blood stain that is much smaller and fresher and redder over top of it. And there's blood on his chest in that photo for some reason. Although if you commit suicide, shoot yourself in the head. There's no reason why you would have a giant singular blood stain on your chest. No. And so really quickly, while we're in this room here at that moment, let's unpack some of the other things that very much just debunk this regular narrative that are hard evidence that you can view for yourself. The SWAT team that they're waiting for to breach his room, they never came. Although Las Vegas has one of the largest SWAT teams in America, one of the largest SWAT teams in the world, they never came. The actual team that breached his room, we have one body cam that shows it and they put out a report saying who was in the breaching party. It was one SWAT officer. I think it was two canine officers whose dogs they left back in the cars and then a bunch of other police officers that just kind of like hodgepodge in there. And that becomes very important later when you start to ask where the fuck were the SWAT officers, what were the SWAT doing because they were doing something. But they didn't, they, the story is that they're waiting for the SWAT team. And the mainstream media at first tried to run with like this crate that CNN actually has a clip that I can give to you where the next day or two days later CNN is like tells a fantasy about how the SWAT team busted down the door and Patik tried to fight his way through them and they had a gun battle and Patik shot one of the SWAT guys in the leg and almost and he got out into the hall before they neutralized me. They just like literally made up fantasy on CNN live and we have the recording. I'll give it to you. And and obviously that none of that happened at all. And we know now from eventual release of files, documents and, you know, a body cam that it was only one SWAT guy and all these other police officers. And so we have this body cam from Officer Bitsko that they had to fight to get released and we only have one because they told everyone to turn their body camps off and that happened multiple times throughout the night. And I've got the clips that I can share them with you. And they are on that map that I was telling people about so other people can go and find them for themselves too. Where like a bunch of officers are like around about to do something. And there's a couple instances throughout the night where this happens where then they kind of are like, all right, body cam's off, body cam's off, body cam's off and they're all going around and turning off their body camps. And for whatever reason, I'm not sure if we ever found out why it's possible we did. Bitsko didn't turn his off. So Officer Bitsko's body cam is one of the cannot officers. That does exist. And we do have body cam footage of the breach. And they breached the door and one of them accidentally shoots three rounds. Like just like they just tripping out. Even though the official story is like, Pat it wasn't alive. He was already dead on the ground. He had been dead there for an hour. There's no reason to shoot his rifle, but they were just hyped up, I guess. So they breached the door. Three rounds go off really fast, which is kind of nothing. And then they enter the room. And when they enter the room, they're looking for the window. Where this guy's shot out of it. And you can watch it on the body cam and they go to the windows and they pull the curtains back and like, nope. I have no broken window. No, it's not broken. No, no window. And they pull the other curtains back and they're looking and they all are like, there's no broken window. There's no, no window. And they're standing right. So we have crime scene photos showing the floor with the hammer that he allegedly used to break this window open because Las Vegas has like crazy glass that you can't just break. So we allegedly brought this special hammer that'll break that glass. And we have a photo of that hammer with broken glass all over the floor with just shell casing, shell casing shell casing. It's just all because there's a thousand fucking shell cases in this room at this point plus 4,000 unspent rounds that he just got bored and didn't want to shoot. Just checked out. So in the photo, we see the ground next to the curtain of the window with the hammer with all this broken glass and all these shell casings. But in the body cam footage of them going into his room when that photo should already, it should already be exactly like the photo shows us. They can't find the window and they're not stepping on any broken glass or any shell casings at all. They're looking for it. They can't find it. And there's like six officers looking for this window. Take for that body cam footage to come out after the shooting. You know, I don't know exactly, but I believe it was months and months and months. It might have been a year or more. I think that's right. Right. Because it was never supposed to come out. It was never even supposed to. But all coverage is you said at the very outset, all coverage of the shooting had just died and never spoken. Yeah. Last like four or five days. And there's you can see graphs. People have kind of charted the number of stories about. And it's just like everyone's talking about it for two days. And then just gone completely gone. And then YouTube started putting started banning accounts for talking about it. Come on. All the different social media agencies started banning accounts for it. Yeah. And I have screenshots of on what kind of things that are because. Well, the grounds was spreading dangerous conspiracy theories and misinformation. But there had happened to have been a active shooter drill that was done in the area like the week before or something like that the day before. I think it was the day before. And so they've been recruiting crisis actors for this active shooter drill that was being run in the area, which you know, if you learn enough about these kinds of events, you realize that drills are a huge red flag. But I believe what was done is that then they accuse these conspiracy theorists of basically doing the Sandy Hook thing. And they they straw man the the journalism that was happening to say you're claiming that no one died. And that's so evil because you're saying that they're all crisis actors. And so we're going to ban you. And that's not what anyone was saying. No one was saying that no one died. No one was saying that it was all crisis actors. But they sort of finangled the one thing into the other thing into the other thing to say, well, there was an active shooter drill. So it was all legit. And you're all saying it was fake, which they weren't. And so you're banned. And so a bunch of channels got taken down. A bunch of journalists got banned off in platforms. And they did their best to shut it all down. But people didn't stop people just kept digging into it. It's crazy. Yeah. So they they breach. They can't find the window about a minute later, they breached the other room. And this is another impossibility with the official story. Patik rents these two suites. One is like the master suite on the because the those towers, they're kind of like these three pronged towers. And you can rent this suite that set that end of the tower where you have like the 180 degree windows of the whole of the tower. And he rents the one facing out towards this event. But he also rented well, it's not exactly facing towards like next to. Then he also rented the room right next door. And he had their adjoining. And so there's a door that connects the two. And the official story is that the windows in both rooms were broken out. And that he was shooting through the one room with his bolt action rifle to try to blow up the fuel tanks over at the airport. And he failed to do so. But he was in the other room shooting his bolt action rifle. And then he was running back to the other room with his ARs and rapid fire, bump stocking with his bump stock, but never jammed. Um, that's the official story. But then the police get in there. And the side room is bolted from the other side. And he's the only one that's there. There's no one else in the rooms apparently. And the way they say that is because his room was bolted from the inside, the side room, but the side room was also bolted. And then they had to breach it with explosive breaching charges. And it's on, you can see it on camera. And so, so he was magic is what she was magic, right? Because you can't bolt your side room from the other side while you're in a mass shooting spree and then wind up in your room and shoot yourself in the head. You can't do it. And so there's all these little things that physics intervene. Exactly. That physics and just reality intervenes once the evidence started to come out. And they've never really acknowledged any of that. That's all just kind of acknowledged. No. I mean, how could you if there's no acknowledging to be done? Yeah. And by the way, by then Lombardo was busy being chief of police in Lahina. If I'm not mistaken, you're not mistaken. Right. Yeah. So he was at his next important job. Where is he now? I don't know. That's a good question. Someone should track him down and maybe move far away from him. But so that that's the room. And just the room, just the footage of that, just that is enough. to say it's all it's all horseshit. And you have to go back to square one and start over with what actually did happen. And no one who put out that story, no official in charge, either Clark County Sheriff's, LVM PD, FBI, no one has ever explained how Stephen Patick could have locked himself out to my knowledge of his adjoining suite. Yep. But they also, they also don't explain how the locks appear to have been tampered with. There's a whole bunch of weird, so someone I forget his name. I have him sourced in my notes. Um, he got the door logs from the hotel. I don't know if you had a source that the hotel or something, but you got the official because the Las Vegas is surveillance everything. And they have logs of the, of the locks of every single room of when it's, when it's closed, when it's open, whether it was open from the inside of the outside, the deadbolt status. And they have the time recorded and everything. And there's, there's a shot heard by a witness earlier in the day, like three in the afternoon, three 30 in the afternoon, which is kind of maybe related, but a sort of a different story. But then throughout the day there in the afternoon, the deadbolt start doing really weird things where it's like open clothes, open clothes, open clothes. And then at one point it, um, what does it do? The door is open from the inside logged. And then the next log is deadbolt unlocked, meaning that after some weird deadbolt stuff has been happening, then at a certain point it displays something that's physically impossible, which is that the door was opened before it was unlocked. And then it was unlocked, which would imply based upon this is what other researchers, you know, kind of gathered at the time. And I would agree based on what I've seen of the evidence that they pulled out is that that means that you have just hacked the keycard system so that you can maybe remotely be unlocking and locking these doors, or you have some sort of altered access to these rooms. And that would start to explain how the locks could be locked from the inside with no one in there. Right. Because if you throw away the garbage Stephen Patick story, you still have to explain how you wound up with two suites with a dead man inside with the bolts locked from the inside and no broken windows on either side. Yeah. On either side. Well, actually, that's, that's a, I believe we aren't entirely clear because we have some helicopter footage. We have somebody cam footage and we have this bullshit narrative. I believe that the window in the other suite was broken out. Um, and I think that we have that on the helicopter footage. And I think you can kind of see it like it's a little hard to make it out and like some of the photos taken from the ground that night. But there are some HD photos where you can kind of make out that it looks like there is kind of a broken window in the other room. But it's paddock's room where the majority of the gunfire allegedly came from. That's where you see this police entrance where they can't find the window that's broken out and all that. So, so I guess the picture that emerges is one in which the facts not only don't support the narrative, the story, but they're like completely at odds. It's not a close call. It's not like, oh, do they see someone on the grass? You know, I'm not sure. Let's look at the, it's not like Butler where you have to get, you know, put in miles, hodel, they're important to be like, wait, what is with these cell phones? This is just just transparently fraudulent. Yeah. Like right in the, in the original video evidence, you can see the helicopters in the original footage that people put out from their cell phones. You can hear in the original evidence that was all over the internet that night. You can just hear the gunfire and know that it's not ARs with bump stocks. It's just not right. And then you can obviously hear all the testimony from all the people of all of these other things that happened that night that are complete lies. They're all made up. It's all just, it's just people hearing echoes two hours. Like why wouldn't, so this is why I went out to Las Vegas twice in 2017, but then just got caught up in life. Always more stories. Yeah. Or short attention span is, I'm not making excuses, but, um, but I didn't realize that the corpus of counter evidence was so enormous. It's certainly merits an FBI investigation. Certainly does. But here's the thing is I think they know everything that happened. What, but was there ever an official FBI investigation? Well, yeah. It depends on how you define it. The FBI was involved in the original investigation. And I believe that the FBI did rule on, you know, a certain element of this. And then the LVM PD put out their own report as well. And they put out a behavioral analysis of paddock like a year later, something like that. And I remember his, well, two things, but the FBI signed off on the totally absurd official conclusion. Yeah. They did. Okay. I believe so. And be his brother. I remember a busted for Kitty porn. Yeah. I don't actually know much about that. I don't either, but I just having lived in DC my whole life. I associate it was a while after the fact, right? Yeah. And it's like a joke in Washington. The Kitty, I mean, Kitty porn is disgusting and I couldn't be more opposed to it. He pornography in general. But Kitty porn specifically has a reputation in DC. Not among ignorant people, but among people pay attention as like the hallmark of a of a manufacturer's story. Like, oh, he got a rest for Kitty porn. He can't talk or whatever. And suicide hurt. Yeah. I was like George then at very much like George then assassination. So that would be people are laughing about that. Who I know. Oh, of course, the guy's busted for Kitty porn. Yeah. Of course, shut him up. Get him away from the. I'm not. Look, I have no specific evidence about George then or about Stephen Patick's brother, but that is a very well-known. It's a joke. It's a cliche. Nope. And especially when it's just so coincidental, that it's like, yeah, there are sickos out there. But is it just is it always that the, you know, brother or associated with witness, are they always the ones? Are they the sick? They're always in the Kitty porn. And you can't talk to them. But so you kind of bring us back to an interesting place here where once you throw the narrative out, you're like, all right, where do you even start with this? And for me, where you start is Stephen Patick is like, who is this guy? Yes. Who is he really? And I need to do even more in this. There's went back when I got into this story. There was just a million directions and I didn't go far enough down him. And I was doing that again more recently a little bit. Um, because who is Stephen Patick, right? Why the fuck did he would he even have been there? Because it's, it is factual that he did have all these guns in the room. It is factual that he did rent the room and he was there. And, and there's, you know, the picture emerges a little more when you look into his backstory, um, which is the basics is that he was 60 years old at this point and back in like the 80s into like the late 80s, he had worked at a defense contractor that was a predecessor to, I believe it was Lockheed Martin. Um, and I, I thought like he was like, you know, some commando shooting guns as far as I'm aware. I think he was, you know, in some sort of office element of this defense contractor. Um, and then he, I don't know, I forget if he hopped directly into a real estate. I think he had one sort of like intermediary where he was doing, uh, not sales, but he was still kind of like adjacent to the defense industry kind of end of the 80s. And then he got into real estate, um, and then allegedly he developed a gambling problem. And so he had, you know, a net worth of several million dollars allegedly, but then he allegedly gambled it down over time. Uh, there's a lot of dispute over whether he was making lots of money gambling or not. But um, I remember that. Yeah, right. But, but that little detail about him having worked in the defense industry in the past and then going into like the, the nondescript real estate is like, that's not suspicious on its face. You know, lots of people change careers over time. But it is a little interesting that a guy that used to work, and I, I don't have any proof of what I'm about to say. This is just kind of conjecture based upon that. But it's interesting that a guy that used to work in the defense contracting industry is back in kind of his prime years, like, you know, in his 30s sort of, um, then he goes into sort of a nondescript industry where your income can be fluid and things, you know, you're kind of be traveling. You can be in property, all these things. And then he winds up at what looks like an awful lot, like a kind of deep stady sort of an arms deal sort of thing, an arms deal that's involved in this absolute mass shooting. Um, that, that does give me pause and question of like, was he a private citizen that was stock because we'll get into the evidence that he thought he was doing an arms sale in a little bit. But I believe that he thought he was going to sell those guns. And I think that's why he had them all there. Um, and that comes down to the three women that were on the room with him. But the moment that you realize that you're being lied to about him being the shooter, you need an explanation for why the hell is he there with all these fucking guns because, you know, like I don't, I've been to Vegas and I didn't bring, you know, a whole arsenal of weapons with me and a whole arsenal of loaded magazines as well. Right. I mean, you don't bring, you know, six rifles to go deer hunting or any, any, how many rifles do they have? Uh, I believe it was 25. Well, it was, it was 25 weapons in the room. I believe it was the final count. Might have been 24 in the room. Um, and he had one revolver and one bolt action rifle. Well, it was 25 weapons in the room. I believe it was the final count might have been 24 in the room And yet one revolver and one bolt action rifle and then all the rest were AR platforms And then you also had a whole bunch of weapons at his other two houses as well Yeah, like 25 other guns at his other houses I need to bought a bunch for this and he was knowledgeable about guns. I remember that. Yeah, yeah exactly But who are the three women and why do we think he was planning to sell them? Well, at first they didn't exist but then investigators journalists Doug and Doug and Doug and they found out that there were three other women on the hotel reservation Officially their their names were on the hotel reservation the hotel knew they were there and I believe that they were checked into the side Sweet basically is my assumption. I don't know if that was proven or not, but the side sweet was booked with Stephen paddock's girlfriends credit card Mary Lou, Danley and These three women I have their names written down. We know their first names because it was their first names were said I believe it was on one of the police body cameras that was eventually released during the night, but we don't know their last names they Witnesses described having allegedly seen him gambling that day or the day before With women that looked to be of Hispanic descent or like Central South American descent and so Their names kind of match. Maybe they were some sort of Latina women He had Tannerite in his car is a key piece of this he had 50 pounds of Tannerite in his car Oh, which is usually used when you want to make things go boom not like I'm gonna blow up a building But like we're gonna go shoot in the desert totally have a great time 50 pounds is a lot of Tanner It's a lot of Tannerite to so Tannerite is but he also had a lot of guns ammonium nitrate. Yeah, and You can buy it in gun stores and it detonates not with fire but with velocity with force and You hit it with a with a rifle round and it explodes and it's Powerful and 50 pounds is enough to take your house out. Yeah, and so we don't really know why he had that or what he was doing with it but My understanding that Tannerite can be used for lots of things But it is often used to like stage like a fun gun shooting moment like I've never seen a used for anything other than that Yeah, and it's it's dangerous. I mean for sure. I've had some problems with it Definitely powerful. Yeah, and so The Tannerite a lot of people speculated I mean I tend to defer to their speculation about it because I have never shot Tannerite. I don't know about it people speculated that given these multiple kind of Points of information is that maybe one line of reasoning would be that he thought he was selling a bunch of weapons To someone rich There's not something that's fact based like we know for sure, but we do know that three women first name only that we're not supposed to talk about were registered to this room as well and We do know that he had the room full of guns and we do know that he didn't do the shooting At least I feel pretty confident that I know that and so then it's like well Why the hell would you have a room full of guns and it is not uncommon to sell guns in Las Vegas? I mean go to shot show right and so one possible explanation that might start to put some of those pieces into place is maybe he met some beautiful girls that knew a guy Something along those lines that was like hey, I know this really rich guy that wants to buy some guns and you know guns, right? Maybe he got honeypotted maybe it was some sort of operation targeting him to recruit him for this thing because You know you don't have to just explain it from Steven paddock's brain of like why is this maybe arm sale happening? But you have to explain it from like the big picture explanation of why did whatever Organization orchestrated all this why did they get Steven paddock into that room to do that thing, right? I lean towards speculatively that He was probably selected as a patsy for being some like, you know kind of vulnerable Unimportant guy that was you know down on his luck a little bit maybe and Wanted to make some money selling guns who maybe he was more involved. Maybe he had some intelligence connections. I don't know But I suspect that he was basically recruited by some hot girls to sell some guns to someone rich or something along those general lines And so he's bringing all these guns to Vegas or he's you know Stocking his room with all these guns to go out and shoot and the desert the next day maybe He didn't bring the tan right up to his room. He left the tan right in the car But you if you went to Vegas you probably wouldn't Leave an arsenal of guns in your car. No, you would want those secured in your room And he has all the magazines loaded Right all these magazines are loaded and that would make sense if he's trying to do a mass shooting But the moment that you realize that the evidence just does not support him doing the mass shooting Then it's like well why are the magazines all loaded Why is this arsenal here ready like this and if you were gonna go shoot in the desert that would be a thing you would do It you would load a bunch of magazines So hard as we don't know exactly why those pieces fit together But that's one of the most common theories is that these three women that were on the room with him In the side sweet probably That they probably had some sort of middle man connection because how do we see any motive? I mean did the authorities ever Give us a hint of emotive Because to murder strange though, they objectively said we have no idea what the motive was they said that I love yeah exactly they and you can watch our favorite sheriff He has a couple different versions of the quote of like we figured out the what the when the where the who the one thing We don't know is the why but the why is the one thing that matters exactly and that's so often a theme that runs through these things and when there is a clearly Articulated motive as in a manifesto Sometimes it's suppressed. It's like I mean a somber bin lots manifesto was suppressed It's still being it's not being so bad viral on TikTok recently right so I do think it's essential to know He used a weapon of course he did he killed people I know But why I've got a million weapons. I would never kill anybody so what's the difference between me and him? That's that's the thing you know You bring up a song been lot and right as it's a good time to start talking about the Saudi angle on this thing Okay, super interesting Because you're right the why for Stephen paddock is non-existent and that's the official narrative is that there's no idea why can't I just give the context to the political context? This is less than a year after Trump's election. Yeah, this is Jason all Dean concert Trump voters Jason all Dean is not a political activist, but he's open about his politics and they're Trump aligned It's also a great guy. Yeah, I will say but um, so these are Trump voters to get killed at The time less than you're after Trump's election all anyone's talking about his Trump People are extremely exercised about it. So it's hard to ignore that kind of I think it's impossible to ignore it But and here's where we get into these like there's different theories and and they all hold certain amounts of weight in merit, but most of them sort of have a Whole in that they explain this piece, but none of that pieces they explain this thing but not that right and so One possible narrative is it's like a government false flag to get gun control right? Just like do a mass shooting Construct a mass shooting incident and then more gun control and there's a similar compelling kind of a concept of more mass surveillance and Vegas is a really compelling place to put you know experimental mass surveillance technology Because you get the whole world comes to Vegas you get all sorts of different genetic like compositions of people that flood in and It's all private property where you can kind of do your thing and so two parallel storylines of like kind of a false flag to bring in more more of the gun control or more of the surveillance or both and That would be a reasonable Can I just ask you just as you must was like just I thought about this at the time trying to think through what is this and The gun control is almost always the first thing Democrats call for when there's a mass shooting they leverage the death of other people for a policy aim of course Always famously Sandy Hook and the rest They didn't do it that much after this. Oh, they shut the hell up real exactly and I noticed that at the time real fast Yeah, they did try to bring in more mass surveillance technology in Las Vegas They brought in more like body scanners and stuff. They tried to do this big New techno thing in Vegas And even basically failed because no one's gonna walk through the airport scanner like they actually installed some of these like Lido Scanners in Vegas that following years But like no one's gonna walk through that every time they're trying to get into their hotel or go to the casino floor and all this shit It's like that's just not good for business. So ultimately that that that initiative basically backfired at least in those big overt measures But I don't know what kind of increased biometric scanning and cameras and surveillance technology kind of got sold to all those casinos After the fact We know that Las Vegas is one of the most surveilled places on the planet and it was that night too Despite the fact that we have none of the footage. We have none of that surveillance but But that's where it's like certain Pete like it would make sense to be like if your conspiracy theorists is like oh It's a gun control false flag But then they're not gonna push the gun control and furthermore Why are you gonna false flag like attack all the concert goers and then have this? Further engaged conflict of multiple suspected gunmen all across the Las Vegas strip over at the airport Mysterious helicopters that we know are up there. It's like doesn't explain any of that no it's at all right You would just literally if it was about gun control You would actually just have a Steven Patik type character get a rifle and walk into the crowd and start shooting All right, so that's where it's like okay, we need to square all these weird pieces and how do we square all of these weird pieces and So you might think about things like a heist gone wrong or this got like a lot of the other versions that are more like You know the average person might come up with them Because you kind of see movies right and and if you kind of just like glance at all the evidence you might be like oh It's like if oceans 11 got really messed up in real life But it's not because in oceans 11 there's no reason to murder 60 concert goers with automatic gunfire are probably coming from helicopters That would never be a part of a heist like You would never do that and furthermore How would you convince any American no matter how slimy like how would you even convince like Hillary Clinton and Anthony? Weener if they got into the helicopter together like are they gonna shoot like automatic gunfire into 60 civilians out of helicopter like Probably not let's be real like I know we don't like them But but like you need to square it's a big step who the hell? would shoot all of these concert goers and how do you square the concert shooting with whatever else was happening and This is where I stumbled across the work largely of John Colin and Jason Goodman got big into this as well and a bunch of other people did too Mindy Robinson mentioned a bit in her documentary and many many more that I'm That I'm not mentioning right now but John and Jason they really Dug into this for a long time for many many years and they Peased out this narrative over time and when I first stumbled across it I Didn't have the depth of understanding or the the context of political awareness and Intell agency kind of history to really understand what they meant and so I heard it as like The baseline and we'll tease this out of fair bit I think but the baseline of the theory is like well Homme have been saw him in the crown prince of Saudi Arabia is in Vegas for you know the night or whatever and he's staying at his cousins hotel, which is the upper floors of the Mandalay Bay the four seasons All we'll lead been to law was owned 45% of that hotel chain at the time and so he's like staying in the hotel and So it was an assassination attempt on him and there's we'll dig this out a lot To try to understand what we do and don't know about it and let people make their own minds But the first encountering of it when I thought about it. I was like so That would explain an assassination attempt on someone like been Solomon might explain all this gunfire across the strip where there's like an evacuation happening and there's operatives running around and there's like two because All those shootings and all these hotels where there's no civilian victims really to note That to me implies two armed forces fighting each other. You know what I mean? It's just like basic Logic is if you have a bunch of gunfire going off all across a city and no civilians are getting shot Then it's because you have people with guns shooting at people with guns I would assume and And so it's like okay that explains maybe that kind of stuff maybe to explain the airport stuff Maybe to explains like an evacuation explains helicopters like turning off their transponders and hovering over the Mandalay Bay Which we saw them do And didn't see them do so to speak so it explains a lot of these pieces, but it's like But how does that explain shooting up the concert? It's like at first it was like are they shooting up the concert to create like to trigger his Evacuation protocol that doesn't make sense like I don't get it and it's because I didn't understand The historical context of Saudi Arabia and of Wahhabism and of al-Qaeda and of the power struggle that had been raging in Saudi Arabia for Years at that point and it had really intensified right at that moment and I still don't understand it because it's so freaking complicated but once you look at Saudi Arabia and their history their royal structure their political structure and the political seismic shift that has happened around the Salman line right now that piece starts to click into place because when you look at something so horrid as the Las Vegas shooting who is gonna shoot like 20-year-old girls in the face Which just reckless abandon like that that is like the definition of a terrorist attack and so if you don't know anything about the the incident How do you even come up with a perpetrator that could ever bring themselves to do such a thing? Yeah Is it North Korea? Is it Russia? Is it Iran? Is it you know who hates American people that much? The American brain can only explain that by attributing it to a crazed long gunman which sees by mental illness or something But the American brain cannot fathom any organized group exactly of people doing something certainly not like our own like you can be the craziest conspiracy Theres with like literally wrapped in tin foil sitting in your own microwave But you still can't like it is still not a legitimate argument just see that like a CIA officer It's gonna get onto that helicopter and shoot a mini gun it's not a chance. Nope And if I start leaving that I'm leaving and no like even the most horrendous like even Henry Kissinger Hillary Clinton Take your pick of like the most vile people in American history. They're not gonna do that and so it's like who would and When you look at the history of Saudi Arabia and the sort of warring factions of their religious and political ideology and the Wahabism hardliners that very much are Sort of aligned beside al-Qaeda and that are sort of where al-Qaeda like yeah, you know Fractioned off from and you know this far more than me that is Very much an ideology that is perfectly okay with killing Western young people with reckless abandon and the interesting thing is that MBS Muhammad's haulin then the crown prince still still a technical conference, but the man who runs out he Um I mean, he's just crushed them. He's changed everything since then right just crushed them But but specifically he's gone after specific people those people so let's let's unpack this way before we go further Just the the key question. Do we know that he was in Vegas that we do not and there's this there's this one video that that Question hinges around because people started to talk about this theory, you know in the months following this And in the years following it and this video emerged and went viral and I have questions over whether this was orchestrated in order to discredit the theory as Often happens where when a theory that we're not supposed to talk about gains power and steam and traction people start talking about it You release something that is supposed to be a piece of that theory that is easily disprovable Right and this video goes viral. I'm watching that right now. Exactly right This video goes viral of this evacuation that happens that night where there's these two guys surrounded by armed police officers clearly like clearing the area evacuating out of a one of the hotels and Someone gets it on cell phone camera and the two guys that are not police officers that are not armed One of them is wearing red shoes in a white baseball jersey and he's carrying a little bag That's like looks like an important Las Vegas He kind of money or something bag and the other guys in a suit and The idea is it's like is this guy in the white jersey? Muhammad been Solomon which is at first. It's like what are you talking about like dressed like that I don't think so But I who knows maybe was constructed to be like he's in disguise The short version is we know for a fact that that was not Muhammad Salman he was one of the like chiefs of security at that hotel And he posted online was like no, that's me. These are my shoes. I'm a sneaker head like here's all the corroboration You could ever need that's me. I was called into works. I live nearby and Because they had not yet cleared that building I came in with that team as they cleared the building and then you can see in the video right at the end of the video The cops keep going straight and and him and his and the guy in the suit They veer off to the right towards something and they have a little dialogue where it's like hey you go and go to the offices And they go to their offices to start working on the crazy security situation that they're in the middle of and so that video is Not at all related and has nothing to do with it But it got set into the narrative right at this critical moment Where I suspect that it was supposed to discredit this make sort of like muddy the waters of this question of was bin Salman in Las Vegas at that time and I Have not even begun to scratch the surface of the research that these other folks have done over years of trying to verify where he was that night And the best that anyone has gotten as far as I've seen is that there's a hole in his schedule where no one knows where he was And we know that he was other places before and we know he was other places after but those that specific little window of Time a couple days around Las Vegas around October 1st 2017 no verification of where it was at all So we do not know so Ibn Saad that like founded the king to massadi Arabia He had a bunch of sons and it's been his sons ever since and so the king of Saudi Arabia has been getting older and older and older Because as one has abdicated or been overtaken or whatever It's just been like first they were in their 30s and now they're in their 40s and now they're in their 60s and now they're in their 70s And now King Salman took took off like off as I said office because I'm American He took the throne in his 80s, right? So the last three kings of Saudi Arabia king fad king Abdullah and king Salman Super relevant to the current power struggle that's happening and king fad was 82 to 2005 um I'm no expert on religion on Islam on Saudi American politics But it's not hard to figure out that king fad was pretty hardliner and a lot of these guys are pretty damn hardliner This kind of wahabism this very like very Conservative religious government that they run and King fad He oversaw a whole bunch of terrorism and like let's let's not forget that yeah There's a lot of things that happen on 911 that I don't think the official narrative accounts for but we do know for a fact that Saudi Arabia was Very involved like Saudi Arabia represented what was it like 17 what was it was 17 of 19 yeah, I think was less than 70 other 15 or 16 out of 19 But it was a significant number right? Overlying majority majority the hijackers Whatever role they really played you know whatever conspiracy theory you want to be on and then Saudi Arabia also was involved in Sort of the intelligence around it. They were involved in they were baked in and when you get deeper into sort of like the CIA's analysis Post more analysis of what happened Saudi Arabia stonewall the hell out of them I mean like Osama bin Laden was born out of this sort of Saudi Well hobbyist mindset and he like took it in this direction Towards politics away from just religious perspective and towards political violence and political movement Kind of born out of America getting in there doing what we always do Right and there's all sorts of depth there that I don't understand But it's you don't have to understand all the depth of it to know that Has an interesting relationship with that era because Whether he was you know regardless of how involved he was during that era Osama bin Laden was Creating and growing al Qaeda and doing whatever it is you think al Qaeda was involved in not just in 9-11 but in all these other terror attacks too and And so these hardliners these brother kings There's this divide that emerges in more recent times with king Solomon and His son Muhammad bin Salman right and there's other people that are sort of aligned with them But there's obviously the two figure heads of this this newer Saudi Arabia. They are very different Muhammad Salman especially but king Solomon has been very much more progressive and Muhammad Solomon is very much like he wants to give women's rights and he's like throwing giant music festivals and he's trying to You know move their investments away from just oil they're allowing alcohol exactly they're doing all these things that are That from the hardliners perspective you're destroying The fate if you're destroying the nation you're destroying the kingdom in the regional context He's been radical for sure and there is there's a lot of articles news articles from the Middle East predating the Las Vegas shooting like in them in the years and months like there's some of them There are two years ahead of that where it's it's princess because there's thousands of these princes But some of them are very important and some of them are lesser important and There were very important princes basically creating like kind of manifesto level Text saying like we need to stop these fucking Weaklings from taking over and destroying the kingdom and basically calling on these hardliners to get together and kick these guys out and deal with them And there is a history of political violence back in I think it was the 60s was the first time that the king was assassinated and he was assassinated by his nephew I believe it is it believe it was his cousin. I think that's great and ever since it's I mean even before that but ever since It has very much been this game of thrones kind of place where you have a kingdom that has religion baked in it has this oil wealth it has And it has this history growing of political violence and of infighting for the throne. Oh, you're dying for the high-stakes stuff. Yeah for very high stakes and so as you approach the Las Vegas shooting And this is stuff that john colon and Jason could have been dug a ton into and you can go to john colon's YouTube channel and dig back through it all Because he did it on these like one hour long podcast and sort of expos a's that takes a long time to get through But he very much lays out his version of the theory and he's not the only one, but he's the most he's the most deep into this theory And I very much think it's the most likely I think it's the most fleshed out in logical theory all the way from Explaining why we saw terrorism that night, but also why we saw these other things But also it fits into the historical perspective of what was actually happening in Saudi Arabia at the time that we as Americans aren't aware of because The secession had just shifted been Solomon King Solomon not Muhammad been Solomon King Solomon was on the throne he took the throne What was it in 2015 I believe Yeah 2015 Solomon takes the throne and He changes the succession Uh, I believe it was earlier in 2017. It was like Maybe six months or so before the Vegas shooting and He changed it from one of these hard-liner guys To his son Been Solomon Muhammad been Solomon. It's very confusing with these names if you're American. You don't You're not used to Arab names But then the moment that been Solomon gets in there there is reporting about his actions There's you have to kind of triangulate it from watching what he does, but he immediately starts to consolidate power and one of the examples is he moves to dismantle their sort of intelligence apparatus and move it under the The jurisdiction of their like defense department sort of which he's the head of And the guy that wasn't charged the intelligence apparatus at the time was one of these hardliners from one of these other kind of family lineages and so it's things like that where he's like he's kicking people out of their positions He's changing around who's in charge of positions and he's trying to take away power from these various uh Hardliners that have had it out for him for years and do not want this shift to take place Um, so he's replaced a guy that doesn't want him there and now he's the crown prince He's gonna he's gonna take the throne and his dad might abdicate at any time right his dad is in his 80s Um at any moment He could either die or get sick or just decide that he's over it and his son is now the king And so bin Salman's not a dumbass and he knows that he needs to do something about all these opposing You know family members that are actively trying to take him out and they've been talking about trying to take him out for a long time and What I just explained about the uh the head of intelligence and that the nature of the power of the intelligence networks That's just one piece of what he's doing here and he's doing that for months leading up to the 2017 uh To the date of october first when this shooting happens and When the Las Vegas shooting happens It's right in the middle of this this building of tension this shifting of power That we think is over there right it's over in Saudi Arabia obviously and it's understandable that would be happening in Saudi Arabia So we kind of have a burden of proof to explain why would this be happening in Las Vegas And I don't know is we've met that burden of proof in the way the theory has developed over the years of people Kind of digging into this and trying to piece it apart But I'll will lead bin to law one of the richest of all of the Saudi princes. He's like I mean, I guess has changed over the years But he's we're talking like a multi multi billionaire in 2017 He was like the 40 something thryches person in the world by Forbes or whoever Um something like 16 or 17 billion dollars net worth if I remember correctly He is like the Saudi Bill Gates is the way a lot of people referred to him and he owned a 45% stake in The four seasons hotel chain and the four seasons hotel chain owns Well, they like co operate the top I think six floors of the Mandalay Bay above where the paddock was Um allegedly where paddock's room was And so the theory started to dig into people started to look at this like well So we have a faction this sort of Wahhabi hardliner faction that we know would willingly kill Massive numbers of Americans for whatever reason even if it's just incidental to something else. They would be happy to kill Americans. It's not like every Saudi Arabian person is this way. That's not what's being claimed by anyone. It's that there are There are people with legitimate terroristic ideologies in those factions. They're very opposed to MBS They're very opposed to MBS. They to them. It's an existential threat They need to dip and they're not quite about that. They have been talking about that for two years and more Um and the clock is ticking because MBS's dad is going to abdicate and MBS is gonna take the throne and MBS knows this and so in the Months leading into this shooting MBS is actually going after them He's seizing some of their money. He's restricting their travel He's reallocating power and consolidating power very actively and overtly not like we have to assume this will happen We know that those things were happening and so their their clock is ticking and their window of power and freedom is closing Because they're getting their travel restricted. They're getting their you know elements of power being taken from them and so you actually are looking at a faction that is willing to do the thing we see being done With motive to do it in the timeframe that we see it done in And then we have this window of lack of information of where was MBS at the time and we don't know We talked about that video that was probably just kind of misinformation fed in We do not know if he was in Las Vegas at the time No one has shown anything to prove that he was or wasn't it is worth noting that his brother His son KBS is KBS his son or his brother Khalid Min Salman he was the ambassador to America. Yeah. I think he's his I think he's his younger brother I think that's correct. Um Khalid Min Salman. I think his name. He is the ambassador to the United States for Saudi Arabia and he is very much in the same faction so Various people think that this has to do with MBS some people think it has to do with his brother Khalid Min Salman But we don't really know if they're there or not but Right after this mass shooting happens and whatever the hell it was Then Salman goes on this But right after this mass shooting happens and whatever the hell it was been Solomon goes on this What was called the Saudi perch and it includes the night of a thousand swords is this like kind of mythical night where he? My understanding that he invites all of the crown princes in for something like it was like what was it? They were going to unveil something or Had this like weird event planned oh, it was that they were going to give a citizenship to an AI Robot name Sophia It's this very bizarre little side quest where he's like we're gonna be the first nation to give citizenship to a robot is my Understanding here and it's like this big like and everybody come here and we're gonna have this big party kind of thing and then he locks them all in a hotel and He's the rich Carlton in the risk. Oh, and there's this whole there's all this lore and legend around it that like you have to kind of Sort through to figure out what really happened and what is like storytelling But it's it what really did happen is that over that night and then the weeks and months following he sees Billions and billions and billions of dollars of assets from all of these hardliner guys all these guys that are aligned with these People that had been slighted people that had been like that he had sort of stepped in their places of People that would hate him and want him dead and it totaled up to almost 200 billion dollars confirmed that he that he has seized from all these different people over the you know that this year or two time frame here after the shooting he a Couple of them die in mysterious things like playing like helicopter crashes Some of them are so for example is this I guess it's a story But it's like corroborated by a bunch of reporting and journalism and I think it's intentionally leaked out because he wants Been some and wants everyone to know this story that he takes all will he'd been to law the guy that owns the four seasons So tell with the richest of all of these hardliner princes that is against him and he Strings him up by his feet and he actually gets black water guys Apparently military contractors from black water American military contractors over there and they torture him They hang them up by his feet and they torture him for who knows how long maybe days Beating him and all this stuff and humiliating him and we don't really know what comes of it But his assets are stripped He's basically his power is neutered and that's done to a number of people But there's a lot of lore around what was done to been to law and there's a lot of theorizing by American journalists around this Las Vegas shooting that been to law might have been sort of the big money and sort of The big guy behind a big element of the planning of this thing because it starts to be The theory starts to be maybe it was an assassination attempt on been Solomon or his brother We don't know for sure, but what we do know is there was another assassin there was an assassination attempt later that year I think it was in The next year it was in June of the of 2018. I believe and it was at the palace in Riyadh and there's video footage of it and Once again, it's like one of these moments where actually it's like automatic gunfire going off and like like I don't know There's explosions, but it's like papa And they stormed the palace and tried to kill Muhammad and Salman and actually it's Pretty well speculated that he actually got shot at some point in that assassination attempt because he disappeared from the public eye for like eight weeks or 12 weeks or something like that um and so So you start to put these pieces of this puzzle together just the contextual stuff around it Where we don't know for sure that he was there that night and we don't really have evidence of Anything super concrete soddy there until we talk about the helicopters but We do have context for this turf this war over immense power and wealth and we do have context for Why they might be there in this hotel in this location? We do have context for their are assassination attempts happening on his life Obviously by those factions And then a year to the day to that almost to the hour maybe after The Las Vegas shooting happens Jamal Khashou you gets chopped up into little pieces Over in the embassy. It was a year to the day to the day Right was it was it in 2018 or was it after that was 2019 or 2020? I don't I don't recall. I think it was around 2018. I think it was 18 And what I but what I'm remembering is specifically John Collins reporting on this because he this is one of the things that he's here at N on That people then were like whoa Because when you account for the time zone difference From where he was he and Turkey. I think it was was in Istanbul. Missed on boat, right? And when you account for the time difference It's like pretty damn close to actually because he got he got chopped up I believe it was on October 2nd But when you account for the time difference, it was actually the night of October 1st The exact anniversary of this Shooting this possible assassination attempt It's like, okay. Well, what is Jamal Khashou? You have to do with this Well, the Khashou ghee family is this Deep power family in Saudi Arabia A non-Kashou ghee famously was this one of the world's most powerful arms traffickers that did business with Jeffrey Epstein and sold Trump his boat and all these things But they were tied in much more significantly politically than that and Jamal specifically Before he was a journalist, you know working for the Washington Post He was actually working for the head of Saudi intelligence um I guess doing journalism. Yeah, right and then you actually go further back and Some of these guys dug up reporting and photographs news reporting with photographs that he was actually in the moose ID Hanging out holding a rocket launcher way back in the day. Well, he certainly supported Those elements. There's no doubt about it even though his life didn't mirror their exactly their beliefs, but there's no I don't know the answer, but there's no question That he was not murdered because of his wash and post columns Question becomes critical of MBS the Washington Post like they care Exact others more than that and so then you start to ask yourself the question is like what Why was he murdered not just murder, but why was he murdered so brutally and intentionally in a place that was like a public spectacle? And it looks like it's to send a message Very much looks like it's to send a message. Yep, and you start to wonder like okay? Well when he does the night of the thousand swords when he grabs when he you know Confiscates all these people's wealth. He strings been to law up by his feet and beats him and then seems to intentionally let that story get out um And then this really public murder of this other guy that's aligned with those factions happens on the like one year anniversary of this event You start to see this trying angulation of vengeance of Something there and this is obviously speculation to connect all these things, but this context matters because again 60 people were murdered and there is an explanation and it's obviously not the mainstream narrative But then you have to explain how did 60 people die and why and there there's a reason for everything Even if it's like even if it's an asteroid just boom random collision There's still an explanation for why it happened and so You need to find a scenario that actually is reality that does fit with the facts that are true That explains the horrific thing that we saw and you're starting to see the reason why this theory took so much root and why so many people Are interested in it myself included is that it explains how you could do something so horrible to innocent Americans Civilians, but it also explains all the other weird operations not that we know for sure what happened in all those hotels But that you start to understand why you would have You know reports of armed gunmen in like tactical gear over there and over there and over there at the airport Why you have these weird helicopters going on? Okay, so the helicopters so I said just to recap super quick The story you're telling us remarkable by the way Um and it it does seem to fit All kinds of disparate pieces together in it to what appears like a cohearing hole But you don't know so I said do we know that MBS or his brother or any of his relatives were in town that day? No We don't but you said There's the question of the helicopters which I think you've already made a compelling case We're involved in the shooting. Yeah What do you mean? What helicopters? So? We know that there are helicopters in the air that don't show up on the Transponder data and we know that there's weird transponder data on helicopters that came from the Maverick and Sundance helicopter tour operators and all that but the question is is Even before you have seen John Collins research on the fact that there's some helicopters that never have Transponder's on that aren't on any of the flight radar data as in like there's literal ghost helicopters there that seem to be shooting Before you even know that If you're speculating that like there's some foreign assassination kind of attempt in there And there's helicopters involved is like well, where the hell did they get the helicopters? How do you get helicopters halfway around the world from Saudi Arabia? Like you can't just fly over the ocean and helicopter and go shoot someone and so These guys started to look into it and this is very this is directly taking from the research of John Colin and Jason Goodman Who did amazing work on this stuff? Like we all owe them a great dad on this Because they started to look There with like are there helicopters around and they stumbled across a thing called Operation Red Dawn It turns out that for the entire month of August the month before Well one whole month before the shooting um This hotel called the W in Las Vegas was rented out for the Saudi Royal Air Force Because They were bringing their guys over to actually do a giant training operation a joint training operation in this thing Called Operation Red Dawn in the desert outside of Las Vegas um simultaneous to that Saudi Arabia had done this gigantic weapons deal with American defense contractors and I mean America because you have to go through our government in order to do those contracts as you know And they had bought a whole bunch of military hardware from various defense contractors and that included a whole bunch of helicopters from Boeing and there's this new kind of helicopter that had just been designed by Boeing called the a H6i That was just finishing its first run of production and it had not been delivered to anyone else yet in the world I mean you can look these things up there these like compact They're like combat stealth Reconnaissance helicopters designed to be extremely mobile extremely small You can you can fold the rotors up and pack them into a shipping container like on a truck and they can slide right into a truck back Um, but they also can have many guns on them. They are extremely stealthy. They're very quiet They're very small. They have like just two seats in them so they are sort of uh a really specific type of helicopter that was just getting finished in 2017 like they were delivering their first shipments in 2017 and they were Actually there at this operation Operation Red Dawn where the entire Saudi Royal Air Force was in the Las Vegas area Just like a month before the shooting goes down um like one two to one months before the shooting goes down and People did all sorts of digging into like the description of the helicopters from victims and the the what these helicopters look like They've got this giant camera bulb on the bottom But the fact is that it's like oh wait a minute There's literally Saudi helicopters stationed right over there in the desert Just a hop away from Vegas for this giant operation where the Saudi like Royal Air Force is literally been on location Just before this thing goes down and those helicopters are Specifically a kind of helicopter. You couldn't do this with a blackhawk for example But you could pack one of those helicopters into a box truck and drive it off into the desert and just park it there And no one would ever know there's a helicopter park there because it's inside of a box And then you could just take it out unfold the rotors and You're off Amazing and so it's like wait a minute what? Because again you have to remind yourself that that in Journalism in the pursuit of truth You have to find true circumstances which you can evidence Hopefully corroborate as well by multiple sources That explains what you're seeing And what we saw is we have footage of helicopters We have reports of helicopters And we have flight transponder data that seems to indicate At least some helicopter activity that's suspicious from the airfield But pretty good evidence that there's helicopters that aren't even transponder dong And when you hear that gunfire It's like oh that would explain why the gunfire sounds like belt fed machine machine guns Because that's what's on these kinds of helicopters That would explain why we see these flying things coming around behind the Mandalay Bay and going With little lights in the back like often the darkness That would explain why there's trajectories of fire that are coming down directly from overhead on some of these people Yes, that would explain why Like it would start to fit into a narrative where at the helicopters that we do know where on the transponder data There's a couple groups of them There's one group of three that takes off earlier in the night They take off from by the tour helicopter operator And they fly over to the Mandalay Bay and hover over top of it And they turn their transponder off And their transponder's are off for the entire shooting And then their transponder's turn back on after the shooting is over And they fly over and join this group of eight that are taking off in the minutes after the shooting And flying north away from the strip We know that Yeah, it's on Yeah, the you can go and watch all the footage people record Multiple people corroborated it and recorded it from flight radar 24 at the time Now Transponder data is only historically kept for up to like three years, I think In flight radar 24 is the most Has the widest time horizon if you pay the $500 membership You can get I think three years of data So it's long gone now from public access But many many different journalists published video footage of these this transponder data corroborated it between each other And yeah, we know that Lots of weird helicopter stuff happened on the transponder data And then that's where John Colum took it one step further and triangulated everything And realized that he pretty well proved That even aside from that we have helicopters that aren't those ones At times when we know where all those ones are and there's I still see a helicopter in this footage right now that has flashing What looks like gunfire We also have a plane on that transponder footage that is flying under the call sign of a Southwest Boeing 747 And it flies over the airport and then does a right turn the way a helicopter would And then flies over the Mandalay Bay Or I guess it was the Delano not the Mandalay Bay for this one and then it hovers over the Delano For a while and then it goes off And it's under the call sign of a Southwest passenger plane like a Boeing 747 That also was somewhere else at the footage. It's a helicopter It's obviously a helicopter just by the way it flies when it's obviously helicopter because it's a fixed-wing aircraft don't hover Yeah, yeah, you know You know, we tend to fall out of the sky Boeing right you fly around America on that one can't hover But this one could this one though was apparent. It was labeled as this Southwest Airlines, you know passenger plane It flew and took a hard right turn at speed over top of the airport and then went and hovered over the Delano And then went took off so we have all this weird shit going on in the air and And so it starts to corroborate the idea that helicopters are involved and there's more than and there appears to be more than one thing of helicopters going on because you can't you can't explain helicopter shooting civilians from helicopters that are taking off from Sundance and I always forget the other one From these like tour operators, right? Um Maverick and Sundance are Very much a part of the community there. They run tours all over the all over Vegas every single day Their helicopters are known at the airport the air traffic control knows them they talked to them all the time right and we do have some weird Shit going on with air traffic control. We do have the audio of air traffic control An air traffic control didn't even know that the shooting was happened until like Several minutes after it had finished and we have the audio of it. It's it's almost tragic as the shooting is happening They're just directing traffic like normal and then as the shooting is sort of finishing Like right around 10 14 10 15 10 16 Air traffic control starts asking the helicopter operators because there's these two operators that are apparently launching two or helicopters at the time It's like hey Sundance or Maverick. Can you see what's happening over at that concert over there? What's going on? I see a lot of it's like police lights and stuff and they're like kind of chatting back and forth of like Yeah, I think the concert just got out but Unbeknownst to them 60 people are dead on the ground and the shooting is already fully happened and everything is you know At least that part of everything is done and then They start to get like in the next like eight minutes. They start to realize what the hell is going on and Then air traffic control starts rerouting everybody and starts trying to deal with it keeping the runways clear And then it's like the 30 minutes later where air traffic control comes through and says we have an actor shooter on the runway and then they asked to turn the lights off so That's where it became like if Helicopter shooting people you need to figure out where those helicopters came from because they almost certainly didn't come from these two or helicopter Operators right where we haven't even talked about the shooting that happened in those hangers by the way that was shooting in the multiple people reported shootings in those hangers and in other hangers in the airport as well, but we can come back to that Wait Were those do we know anything about those shootings? All we know is that there were three different 911 calls that came in sequentially That were from relatives and friends of people that were in the hangers because apparently the people in the hangers Were trying to call 911 and couldn't get through almost as though they were being jammed or something like that Somehow got calms out or something and that and so it was like a boyfriend of a girl that was in there and it was reported that there was a woman down who had been shot We don't know if she died or not. We don't we don't have an autopsy for many women that died in those hangers But it was that a woman had been shot and that there were gunmen in the hangers somewhere and there was a bunch of civilians trying to hide from them Trying to sort of like it's like run and hide just during the shooting at Mandalay Bay This those calls all come after the shooting at Mandalay Bay by a woman down. Okay, so it's not like I mean This whole time I'm thinking well, maybe it's just the echo of No, no, no, we have a woman down in that hanger. We have we have guns picked up in the street and handed to police officers in other parts of the city We have long guns. No no pistols There are magazines that are found in other parts of the city around the concert venue. There's AR magazines There's a magazine found out in front of the Tropicana. There's a bunch of casings found in in the parking lot of the Tropicana And I've got all sorts of video footage of this stuff that I'll give to you and you can splice in wherever you want And then people can go on to that map that I talked talked about and like the vast majority of what I'm referring to is on that map And you can actually click on it and see the footage original for yourselves And then there's also all the gunfire that was recorded after the fact and the chatter of Arms suspects Gunmen in all sorts of places being observed. We we know very well that there were Lots of other things happening, but we don't have a lot of other bodies except for this woman in the Helicopter hanger That was allegedly shot. We don't know she died. We don't know anything about her. I don't know anything about her Yeah, I don't think that we ever got any answers on that. This is the craziest story ever And the craziest part is how people just sort of let it let it go and didn't biggest mass shooting American history We never talked about it. No one ever followed up on any of this stuff. Yeah, no federal agency ever said wait a second We're gonna cut off highway funding unless you answer these questions. Well What did happen after it which is kind of where we were there is that MBS goes on this purge of his political opposition in Saudi Arabia The next time that Trump flew to Saudi Arabia he got the sword dance welcome Right do you remember that I do yeah that that is like not a thing you just give out to Donald Trump because you like him that is a whole different level of respect in Saudi Arabia is my understanding That's where we get that photo of Trump with his hand on the globe with the other Saudi guys is from that trip Also simultaneous to that Mohab bin Salman Invested up what appears to be two billion dollars with a fund started by Jared Kushner In the year following this this shooting which is an interesting choice um I mean it's not a completely unthought unthinkable choice But a lot of alignments start to happen Trump has been very pro MBS for a long time and I'll will lead this other guy who owned the The the four seasons and got strong up by his feet. He's hated Trump for a long time And there's you can actually he there's archived tweets of his that are like like Trump You're fucking idiot. Why would you do this kind of stuff? um and so after This shooting in Vegas You start to see Deep alignments strengthen between Trump's government and bin Salman and bin Salman's government and bin Salman is rounding up his political opposition He's modernizing Saudi Arabia. He's trying to turn them away from just oil and this old wahabious way of thinking and it's obvious like from a American National defense and national security standpoint That's like one of the most obvious things you can ever desire is for Saudi Arabia to stop being sympathetic to Okay, to style terrorism right Because there are factions in Saudi Arabia that are still very much like no F the infidel Certainly not all of them for sure and but you never thought you would see it in Saudi Arabia Because it's the seat of the religion because Mecca Medina the top two holy places are in the country Right, so they didn't have it was believed that government didn't have the latitude To become more pro Western because every Muslim has to go to Mecca so exactly And so it's an interesting moment in the political shifting of the Middle East world changing right and that's as like the Middle East is rising in wealth We're not all the best means like there's a whole other episode to do about the genocide in Sudan and the gold being smuggled To the UAE which is atrocious, but you can see it's like it feels like a Currency shift is coming and it feels like the Middle East is rising into their like modern incarnations No question and it feels like all these things are happening But I mean, I just one thing just to I mean, it's an amazing Explanation true or not But the piece that's missing in my mind is why if you wanted to murder Mohammed bin Salman Would you shoot up a Jason El team concert? That is a good question and that's the question that first got me hung up on this whole theory And I don't really know I it's still the most endearing mystery of the whole thing to me in that we have We've aligned on a story that has a perpetrator that we know is perfectly morally capable Doing so like essentially we're saying like kind of the most extreme jihadi terrorist factions. Yeah from that that That is possible, but it's like that still doesn't explain why it would be a part of the plan right and Different people come to different theories here and none of them really satisfy me One is that we have rounds that were fired at the fuel tanks at the airport so across from the Mandalay Mandalay Bay across Diagonally ahead of it is the concert but across directly is the airport beyond the concert and there's these giant white fuel tanks these giant metal white fuel tanks over there that got shot by bolt action fire and The I mean the police story is that one of them penetrated but didn't ignite but it was state they say that Officially eight rounds were fired at the fuel tanks. I don't know how they know eight specifically Two of them hit the fuel tanks didn't ignite And so there's a certain kind of faction of people that think that the goal was to ignite those fuel tanks and basically explode them Which to me speaks to distraction or chaos like cospandemonium as some reason Some part of a plan There's a lot of reason why you might want panda monium in the in an exit in something like this but um It's hard to say what that means but In that theorizing you could then say okay, well if the tanks don't ignite then just shoot the concert goers that'll cause pandemonium That that's never really satisfied my my question or curiosity so the idea that it was diversion Makes sense. I mean of course it does make sense to have any evidence so if the crown prince was in the hotel He likely would have been above Stephen paddock in four seasons portion of the hotel and Is to do we have any evidence anything weird was going on up there Not to my knowledge other than the fact that we have helicopters that We have helicopters that took off from the tour operator three of them early on before everything started that Go fly over top of the mandal a bay and then turn the transponders off and they're off for the entire duration of the shooting Don't really know what happens there um we have Helicopters that appear to be shooting that are circling around the mandal a bay in the footage and we have much later We have reports of a armed gunman first It's a possible suspect on the fourth floor of the mandal a bay. We're talking like an hour to an hour and a half later And then just shortly after that first call uh And it's it's I'm pretty sure this one was reported by police not not like a 911 call but like on police radio I could be wrong about that is it's first it's a suspect and then it escalates in a few minutes later It's like we haven't we have a armed Gunman in the on the fourth floor of mandal a bay and then we have no No follow up on that we have no context of what happened there whether that was real or not We don't know But other than that there's actually a serious lack of anything happening in the mandal a bay if there is the explosive reaching of the Of the police team getting in there the one SWAT guy with his team breaching into paddock's room um That's a question. We don't know but other than that there's not a whole lot of like reported activity Right one thing that uh, I believe it would call him again that notice this is In the photos of the room Can notice that there were loaded AK 47 magazines AK style magazines But there was no AKs in the room and they were loaded with 7.6 to get 30 that right there are full they were Completely filled um as though you were as though you had had a case that you were going to go shoot in the desert or whatever The actual explanation for why paddock thought he was there whatever that was He speculates. I don't I don't have a better explanation, but john colon speculates that The shot that we hear earlier in the day that was reported by someone on the floor They said it was like three 30 or so someone reported that they heard a shot In the mandal a bay a single shot He speculates that that's when it's even paddock was killed that They get it. They open his door whether it's whether they've already manipulated the key cards or they just knock and walk in and shoot him I don't know but this he speculates that that's when paddock was actually killed But if you are if you're playing out this narrative to try to make that make sense if you are Saudi hit squads and you walk into this room of paddocks filled with all these weapons You're gonna pick up the one you're familiar with Right that would make that would make sense in my wood right has the I should have asked this earlier Has the hotel ever released all the relevance for villains footage not a single ounce of it no Even though there is endless surveillance footage obvious or so every And and it's not that they really they didn't release footage that disproved people It's not that that that there was 9 1 calls and we were all kids people were conspiracy theorizing It was like something happened in the balladio so they release footage that showed nothing happened in the balladio. That's not what happened They didn't release anything at all Not that's incredible. Yeah Yep, and they put gag orders on all of their employees and everything it was just this Who won't say whatever you have I actually don't remember At the time trying to remember if this guy Was publicly traded he got yeah, he this guy got into politics the CEO of MGM He um, he sold off. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah, man. This is the thing about this story Is there so many details that are like what the fuck? The CEO of MGM I should almost refer to my notes He sold off 80% of his MGM stock like six months before The shooting happened. It was a Yeah, I should almost refer to my notes. He sold off 80% of his MGM stock like six months before the shooting happened. It was a, I'm probably gonna give the numbers wrong. It was a lot of money. But the number 80% I feel pretty dang confident about, he sold a shit load of his MGM stock in the months leading into the shooting. I think it was six months before. He later on was chosen to be the head of the COVID task force in Las Vegas if I'm at correctly. There's a lot of insider stuff like that. Perfect. Okay, what the hell is going on? Has anyone ever asked, you know, like the US government, the Saudi government, about any of this? I mean, other than, you know, journalists online, like podcasters that have sort of like posed the question. John, John Cullen is very fond of posing the question. Many Robinson made a documentary where like she rhetorically posed the question very angrily of like, like, what the fuck is this guy? Is like, are we ever gonna get answers? Are you ever gonna answer for this? And obviously there's no response to any of that as far as I've ever seen. I don't think anyone has ever really posed the question. And I think that, you know, you could explain it as a conspiracy theorist of like, who they never is, like they're not gonna tell us about 9-11. So why would they? But if you, when you go, the thing that's really interesting in my mind about this Saudi theory, which is very much just a theory, is that it does explain why it would be geopolitically relevant and sensitive to this day. Oh, and why, right? Like, because then you're actually talking about US Saudi relations right now with the soon to be king of Saudi Arabia. You're talking about Trump's family relationships because Trump was the president at that time and he was fresh in and I'm sure that he had something to do with if that's what happened. I'm sure that Trump had something to do with the response and the security and whatever happened. But then you're also talking about US Israel relations because bin Salman's relationship with Israel is very different than these, this more hard-liner, very old-school factions relationship with Israel, right? And so there's all of these relationships that shift around Trump's presidency in the United States and his relationship to bin Salman and bin Salman's ascendancy in Saudi and their relationship to everyone else in the Middle East, which is so critical. And so it's like, well, that does start to explain to my mind why it might not just be that they're covering it up because they're embarrassed and don't wanna tell you, but they might actually have this sort of like Trump card so to speak of national security. There's like a legitimate reason why we're covering this up. So I'm really shut your mouths because it's hard to like how do you cover? Even though those would be the victims in this attempted murder. If in fact that's what it was, I have seen that before where people are on the wrong side of an act of violence or the victims of it, but they don't wanna talk about it. Well, not especially when you're a king of some, a kingdom so powerful. You don't wanna expose a weakness. You don't wanna, and also, I've seen that. You don't wanna, I mean, you certainly don't want to expose, let alone what is it methods, techniques, and of the things that intelligence agencies don't wanna ever give away. It's like the way we do covert operations and covert extractions and all that. But even beyond giving away state secrets like that, it's like you also don't wanna expose all of the collateral damage that was caused in the wake of this thing. Oh, right, exactly. inevitably, let's just imagine that Muhammad Salman, they tried to kill him in Vegas. And he was the good guy in the story, even though that is not what's being said here. The life is all shades of gray. But there's almost no version of that story where a civilian isn't killed because of his team as well. And an American isn't killed because, the SWAT team wasn't there to do that because they were over there doing that, which by the way, where the fuck was the SWAT team? Right, so now that we've gone through all of this narrative and evidence just like kind of teasing out. And then we come back to where was the SWAT team. It makes a lot more sense in the audience's mind. And this is for me, this was how my own digging into it happened because I came into this naive and I look at all this journalism. And early on, I stumble across the body cam footage of them breaching the room. And it doesn't really stick out to me that there's only one SWAT guy with them, even though I acknowledged it. But it was like, yeah, that's weird. But then like after this snaking journey through trying to learn all these other elements of what was going on and you start to learn about the airport and you learn about the other hotels and you learn about the possible extraction of like a king. Then it's like, okay, so where was the SWAT? The possible extraction of the king do we have any suggestions that happened? No, no, we do not know. And honestly, now that I'm mentioning it and I'm kind of thinking it through right now, one of the own like, and I'm not saying this is concrete evidence, I'm actually saying the opposite because one of the most concrete pieces of evidence is that the SWAT team was not at the place where they should have been. They should have been, it's even had a store. This is one of the most decorated experienced and well-funded biggest SWAT team, one of the biggest SWAT teams in America. And they had one guy that one shooter in one room that they should have been breaching. But when you actually look at the true story, there's all these other things happening that might have needed their attention more. But my understanding is that SWAT is actually used for protection of high level dignitaries used for extraction of high level. Like that's the kind of thing that I could imagine them actually being diverted to. For sure. Because if this event was this more complex thing of some sort, they're not gonna send them to Steven Patrick's room. That actually, that's the last place you wanna send your SWAT team, right? Especially once the shooting from Patrick's room has stopped because if you're already getting reports of something going on at the airport or like if what we're talking about is happening at all, then you're probably getting reports directly from this whoever high level dignitary or person that's trying to be assassinated. There's probably deeper levels of intel being fed to whoever makes the decision of where the SWAT team goes. And so you suddenly have a pretty obvious explanation of like the SWAT team wasn't there because something more important was happening. And I don't think, and we know this SWAT team wasn't at the concert. We don't have evidence of the SWAT team being at the hotels. I don't have any evidence of the being at the airport although we don't really have enough evidence to say whether they were not at the airport but where were they? Because that actually I think is one of the biggest pieces of this puzzle. And you would have seen it with service as well. Right? So you said about 60 people were killed. Yeah. Over 100, I know we're shot. Yeah, I think it was 400 plus we're wounded in total. So that's a lot of survivors. That's a lot of families of the murdered. Have any of them raised these questions? A lot of them did early on and I think a lot of them still do but a lot of people I think feel voiceless. And in a lot of ways are voiceless. If no one's gonna go to you, if the media is not gonna investigate it, if there's never gonna be a federal investigation, then they have no recourse. And so what wound up happening was independent media started going to them. So there was no in the, I mean, I was in the fabled mainstream media at the time. I don't remember anyone really pushing on this for a hard, do you? No, if anyone. As far as I'm aware, you're the one that pushed the hardest. It wasn't that hard. No, yeah. We did get hassled by the police in Las Vegas, which was straight period because yeah, you work at Fox News, basically Pro Cop, all the cops know that. I've never had any problem with any cop. They're always so nice. And I think the only time I've ever had it in the last 20 years anyway, I've ever had a hostility from the police was in Las Vegas. And they tried to block us from our camera position, which was an evaken lot. I'll never forget this is an it was at night and they tried to make us leave. And I thought that's, and I remember seeing a producer, man, we've never gotten that treatment. Interesting. Were you, was it on any specific lot? Like, yeah, which right? It was a camera shot. So we were, we were, I was doing like a stand up facing the area where the shooting took place. And they just weren't about it. No, and they were weird about it too, really weird about it and hostile. And that was just so striking. Cause again, if you work at ask anyone or exit Fox, you know, you see cops and they're just so nice. Cause everyone hates cops except, you know, the Fox news anchors. That's their view anyway. So I've never, I never experienced that before. Yeah. And it was, it was weird. The whole government just shut up about it. And the mainstream media was like three days later, the story just died. Most, most horrific mass shooting in American history. And those victims, like a lot of them are still alive, but they're paralyzed. A lot of them have brain damage. A lot of them like lost limbs or eyes or things like that. It's, it's a real tragedy. And it's easy to get into conspiracy land only with it. And I do think it's important to try to uncover what really happened obviously, to try to dig out what the hell is this. But it's also, it's easy to lose sight of the fact that like, that was hundreds of Americans. And then by extension, thousands of Americans, thousands and thousands of Americans whose lives will never be the same because of that. Who lost family members, lost loved ones. And they, and these were like, it's really sad on that map that I was telling you about, they are shooting map. They have death reports of, of like all the victims pinned on to the map. And it gives you like their age, their name, their profession. And in some cases, it gives you a little description of who they were and what their life was like and what they were doing. And it's just so sad to read because like a lot of them is like, was there with her boyfriend to celebrate or anniversary, like was it kindergarten teacher or, you know, things like that. That's just, and that's where it really hits home where it's like, you need, you need an explanation that explains why something so evil would happen. Yes. And I think that's the endearing question that keeps the investigation open. But it's also the endearing question that makes it, makes it so that it wasn't solved by just like these basic explanations because we easily debunked the mainstream narrative. But then there was lots of other sort of like half baked versions of maybe it's this, maybe it's this, but none of them explained how evil it was and none of them explained the scope and scale of what it was. And to this day, there's no, there's no one proven theory. I've just sort of laid out what is the most explored. And I think by my standard, the most credible version of a theory. And a lot of people are pretty much on that theory at this point that they think that that's the one that is a version of true. But it's not the only theory. And it's far from proven. That's for sure. And it wouldn't be, I mean, there's a thing you asked like, has there ever been any investigators? I'm sure the government already knows. Of course. That's the reason why you get the cover up of this magnitude. It's because they know what happens. It's obvious whenever there's not an investigation. It's not because no one's interested. And we've seen that a lot. In fact, we've seen it so much that you sort of wonder at what point is just impossible to have like a functioning justice system because nobody believes anything. Yeah. And it's just over and over again when something happens, we feel like we're not like Charlie Kirk is months, months ago now. And to this day, I think the most Americans still feel like we don't have an honest set of answers. Whether you believe it was Tyler Robinson or you believe it was some version of some other conspiracy, I think that a lot of people feel very underwhelmed by the way it was handled by cash, the way it was handled by every government official involved. And that should have been the most basic one. Well, I didn't want to talk about this because I know everyone involved very well. And I feel emotional about it. And I'm going out, you know, day after tomorrow. Speak a turning point at Charlie's request. But I don't, so my, the hostel, that I, I don't know what that was. The onus is on the government to prove it was a loan government. OK, that's up to them, not up to me. That's the job. I'm not accusing anybody. I don't know exactly what happened. There's a lot of evidence that Tyler Robinson was involved, at least from what I read. If those text messages are real and the murder weapon is, you know, like I'm willing to believe anything, but I do think it's up to them to prove it to us. Yeah. Here's what I don't understand. There's been an enormous amount of rage, you know, different, people with different views getting out of each other. There's been almost no pressure on federal law enforcement to cough up the freakin facts and to tell a story that makes sense. Just it's got internal coherence that like, oh, that makes sense. Like I get it. Exactly. And there's no pressure on them. Even the question of motive, like again, I want to believe it was a loan gunman who was a training or something. I want to believe that a lot better of an answer, a lot more comfortable. Oh, 100%. I want that. By the way, my middle age man, I'm a normie. I don't want to believe anything other than what they tell me. But they've made it impossible for me. So, but I don't understand the motive. Like they're like, well, transgenderism, which I'm supposed to. But okay, was he transgender? Was he on hormones? Was he, how do you go from being this seemingly normal person to murdering a stranger with almost a dead certainty? You'll be, oh, pun it. You'll spend life in prison or be executed for it. Like that's a lot. That's a deep commitment. Okay. No. I'm not saying it doesn't happen. Of course it does. But like, how did it happen in this case? Yeah. And tell us the facts, right? Yeah. Yeah. And it's like, shut up. Yeah. And it's like, it's a parallel to the Las Vegas in the sense that just one piece of evidence in the case of Charlie Kirk, it's one piece of evidence. In the case of Las Vegas, it's like five trillion. Well, it was Vegas thing. The story is just like, well, what I was going to say is that the video is we know they haven't like in Vegas, we know that there's surveillance footage of the entire city. We know that every hotel has footage of everything that happened. And we know that they could release it and we could see these alleged gunmen. We could see these fake 911 calls, right? And in Charlie's case, we know that the camera that they release footage of this guy running across the roof, that camera sees the whole roof. That camera sees the shooting position clearly. I went there myself. And so it's like, if you have the video of the shooter running to get off the roof, you have the video of him taking the shot. And so it's these little things where you don't take that step to release the evidence that is so in our faces, to just give a little bit of trust to the public to clarify things. It's like, why don't you take this step for trust? Because like you're saying, it's their job to prove these things. It's their job to stop it's not up to you or me. I mean, I've stayed out of it, mostly I've really tried my hardest to say out of it. But I feel emotional about it. But you're watching the Trump coalition turn against itself, eat itself. And okay, fine. I mean, they're legitimate disagreements. Of course, I'm always for that. But no calls for the FBI or authorities in Utah or the college. There's no pressure on them. What is that? Yeah. Well, you wouldn't want to change the jury pool. That's the dumbest thing I've ever heard. Yep. It's kind of dumb. Do you know what crimes have covered? I was a police reporter. And like the first thing that happens is the authorities call you up and they tell you this exactly what this they tell you their story. That tainted jury pool. Yeah, it does in favor of conviction. Nope. So I've never, I mean, I've been around this for over 30 years. I'm not an expert in anything, but I've certainly seen law enforcement respond to a crime. A lot. And I've never heard anybody say anything like this. It doesn't make any sense. Like what does it even mean? Yeah. And to me, being like younger and newer in this thing, having more naivete, it's hard growing up. So I'm like the quintessential 9-11 generation. I was like 7-8-9. I was what was it? 2001, I would have been 9-11 happened. And so to me, with my life experience, it's just hard not to be like when you see the government act this way, it's because they're covering up one of these things. That I don't know what they are. By the way, when I acted that way, I'm covering something up. That's a human thing. If I'm hiding something, if I'm lying about something, there's a reason. I'm not doing it unless I'm like some total sociopath freak. I'm not doing it for fun. I'm doing it because I'm trying to conceal something. Exactly. And I think that we've just, I mean, we've always had them throughout history. We had them in Vietnam. We had them long before that. Like they've been everywhere in history. I don't know if it's information increasing the frequency that they feel like they're happening at or if it's corruption increasing as the empire sort of late stages itself. But it just feels like we're in this era now where every couple of years we get another one that is so big. It's hard to imagine a bigger one and then boom, COVID hits. That's like what could even be weirder than the end. It's like I'm not saying that one is more important than the other. But I think it's just striking that over and over, there's always more gigantic world events that feel viscerally like coverups where there's no reason for there to be a coverup of the assassination of someone like Charlie, especially when Trump like who Charlie got into power is in power. When that's there, like, and it's not like it's Trump's job to solve the crime. It's just that, you know, you would hope that he has a coalition in place and that his government and his FBI and his people that they should have no greater motivation ever than to solve this crime. But what about all of the people who, you know, neutrally or who are sad, you know, are every American? Why are they turning against each other and not against the authorities? Who's that? Who's job it is? I would always think this is what the race crap. It's like, black shit, hate whites, white shit, be afraid of blacks. Okay, got it. No one ever mentions like private equity. It did feel like a fight amongst yourselves scenario and this does too. I think it's exactly what happened during COVID and obviously I have a big bias here and people should only listen to me about Charlie Kirk through my bias around my reporting on it. But to me, it looks like the same sort of mass formation psychosis that happened during COVID. It's just that that was better at targeting the left because it was like collectivism of collectively we're going to write all the same people and left us our, you know, never mind. This one is targeting the right because they shot our guy and we loved Charlie and like, and these, these damned left us hate us, right? And we've got this, we've got our leftist Tranny guy and we hate and, and they're whipping it up on that and all the news is parroting the same thing and all of the, not many names, but all the talking heads on social media that are not independent. They're all saying the exact same narrative and so you get this spiraling narrative that is building this. I don't even know what the narrative is. Like I'm happy to buy into your dumb narrative just tell me what it is. Well, as I said, my preference is for a, an easy to understand non sinister or less sinister explanation that involves one guy. But if you're telling me the Tranny did this, actually the Tranny seems to be in federal protection right now with no charges against him, even though by the text messages, they released. He had for, he knew about it and didn't go to authorities. So how is he not an accessory? How, why is he under protection? What's this? So we can testify. We have the text messages. You don't need like what shouldn't a guy who knew about the crime, but didn't report it who lived with the gunman? Shouldn't he be charged with something? What about the people who predicted this on the internet before it happened? Where they and like, okay, so I don't really even know what this, what story are you telling me? I don't even get it. Right. Right. I'm upset. No, I totally hear it. And it's, I think it's a rage that a lot of Americans feel and they look for outlet because right. People see this piece that didn't make sense and some people see that piece that didn't make sense. And others see others just feel, just feel a weird vibe from it. But was the shooter transgender? No. So what they're saying? Okay. Then what is that story? Do you let them? No. What he became like gay for the transgender guy. But it's just like it doesn't have anything to do with it unless you can prove with the facts that like he actually had the motive, the means, the weapon, the location he was in. But what was the motive that Charlie had said bad things? I mean, look, a few times. I know that people were, you know, the left hate of Charlie fact, they celebrated his death fact. But to kill somebody you've never met, it's a pretty abstract thing to do and to plan it out and to go through with it. Right. 100%. So you're either completely deranged or your ideological motivation is so profound. You're a suicide bomber, basically, because you know that you're not going to die because of your murder. So that's just such a big step. I'm not saying it didn't happen. I'm just saying, tell me how. Tell me how the four point of a student that like nearly A's to ZACT became that. It's insane. And then the rage of like even asking that question. It's like, and I never say this, but I just will say, I'm just really, really well. Like not, yeah, not just green room friends. Like I know them really well. And, and, you know, loved him. So, and I know for a fact that his whole life was testament to this, he was for inquiry, you know, honest questions and people like, Oh, just asking questions, it's probably like, yeah, just asking questions. That's my birthright. Yeah. As an American citizen. Well, yeah, you think. And so you're, so what you're saying is that mass formation psychology clearly has taken hold among a bunch of people where it's like they just can't think clearly. Well, I don't think that it takes hold by accident. I think that it's the kind of thing that only happens when you have a massive propaganda campaign and it's like basically a state sponsored operation to control the information space as well. Well, there's definitely, I mean, there's definitely some of that flat out we know. I'm watching it. And I'm not going to, you know, whatever, I'm going to just shut up now because I know too many people involved and I, and I love them all, honestly. And it's like with the Vegas shooting with a lot of these things, it can kind of get swept under the rug, right? It can kind of get put away. And with Vegas, they managed to sort of just stop talking about it. And a lot of like, you know, independent journalists were loud, but there's a lot of other stuff going on and none of them really had massive platforms. And we weren't in the era of the internet we were in today yet. And so it was enough to just kind of sweep it under the rug and they never had to like build some big complex alternative narrative and flood the zone and have shills kind of doing and Charlie's just a different thing. And it's like each time like with COVID, we got our own slice of what is weird going on here. With Vegas, we got our own slice of like a cover up, right? Different, different suspicious crimes that aren't explained require different coverups. And it's like everyone has their own opinion about what's going on with Charlie. I have mine for sure. But, but the people are getting, getting wise to this. It's not adding up thing. Like it shouldn't be a mystery. Like when you have a regular crime in your town and you get a regular sheriff to come and explain the crime and show you the evidence and you get a regular court trial about it, I don't think that's usually like some grand mystery of like I think that the local sheriff is covering up the fact that this robbery happens. It's like, no, it's just like you've got evidence. You've got photos. You've got, it is what it is. But it's there's these certain moments in history where not because everyone's wanting everything to always be this way, but because sometimes the facts don't line up. Like they just don't line up with what we're told at all. And the Vegas is one of the most, like most intensely, like powerful, tragic, violent and deadly of all of them. And it's one of the ones where the facts line up less than any other. I totally agree with that. I'm actually shocked by this conversation. Someone with like a passing familiarity with that I thought, but I just didn't realize how absurd the story is. Like it's absurd. And the crazy part is how much there actually is right there open source. Like just vegashewdemap.com that I was telling you about. Just that one webpage has just hours and hours and hours of stuff that immediately disprove the mainstream narrative. And it's just that's COVID. It was all there. I mean, vaccinating people you knew got COVID. I mean, what? I mean, this was happening all not that I knew a lot of vaccinating people I tried not to spend time with. I was always uncomfortable around the vaccinating people. But I did know some and they all had COVID. And I'm like, this is clearly a lie. And then every day you'd be a company time. They've never got over. They still have COVID. But then you'd watch on TV. So even effective, you can't get COVID. And it's like, how can they say that? I just sat like a dog with my jaw open. Like, what is this? I'm watching this. So I guess you wouldn't last question. So I've never seen anybody is about you. I've never seen anybody sort of come to prominence faster ever in our world. And that's led to a lot of speculation that you're a CIA officer in disguise. I'm like, yeah, but beside I haven't even seen that. But yeah, probably not a side. And so I, you know, my personal explanation is just an amazing explainer and a diligent researcher. And you're really interested in what's true. And those are the three qualities that make a successful person in our world. However, it's worth asking like, how the hell did you get so famous so fast? Where did you come from? And how did you decide to do this? Yeah. I've told the story a few different times. But it's, it's, I'll never get used to it. It's wild. It's bizarre to go from the life I had three years ago to the life I live right now. But it was a combination of luck and skill and timing, I think, as far as I can tell. in that I did study the social media landscape to try to figure out how to get into it. Because I wanted to get into it. I, at first, I thought I was going to get into it with ultra running context. I thought like you need to do something unique that's like really special. And I thought what ultra running is cool and unique. But ultimately that's not, that's like this weird ego mindset that is not the way to do anything in life, least of all beyond the internet. And so in doing that for about your, you explain what that means. that that there's a lot of dudes, especially women have the same problem, but it just presents differently. There's a lot of dudes with ego on the internet trying to show off how frickin cool they are and you should subscribe because they're cool. And that is a hollow reason to follow someone. And it's a hollow way to build an audience and it's a hollow way to build your platform, your job and your life. Because inherently it's a, it's a, it's a dog eat dog world where everyone is just out for themselves, right? It's a world where everyone that's doing it for those reasons is just going to try to do what's going to make them look the coolest and be the best. And inherently you're not the coolest. No, exactly. You're not the coolest. You're just a dude. And we're all kind of absurd actually. Unfortunately by the time I was kind of, because I've worked in kitchens, I worked in education and teaching. I worked, I traveled and done travel work. I don't know all sorts of stuff throughout my life. And by the time in my early 30s, I was kind of wanting to get into this largely because a COVID because I was like, fuck work and in kitchens. I'm done with that. And I used to do these kitchens. Align cooking, kitchen managing. I love cooking on the line. So cooking everything from breakfast cooking to pizza to fine dining. Are you a good cook? Yeah. Yeah. Really good cook. I mean, I've got like eight or nine years of experience. Like cooking all sorts of different genres, some really amazing co-workers actually. Oh yeah. Yeah. And I like worked at a hand thrown pizza place for a long time and I, how'd you stay so thin? I have Crohn's disease. Oh. Yeah. And so it's like that, then that's actually where the ultra running was really interesting thing is that for me nutrition and health and food has always, ever since I figured out what was going on with my health, nutrition health and food has been a huge part of my life. And I was just getting, getting right. I had no choice in that God because then once I got my health right, I was like, whoa, it feels amazing to feel regular and amazing. And then I just like dove into fitness and running and all these things. And so by the time I had kind of like COVID had clearly woken me up to, I don't want a dead end job and I don't want to work in kitchens and I don't want to live this life anymore. And I used to be a teacher. I was raised by teachers. I'm supposed to be like, my spark is for learning and for like sharing learning. Because teaching is not really teaching. Teaching is sharing the experience of learning. Exactly. Right. It's sharing the spark. And I know that and I knew that. And I knew that learning happens where people pay attention, not where teachers tell people to pay attention. And so if you really want to change or inspire kids or like teach kids, you ought to be where they're looking, which is in here. Yes. Right. And I knew that four years ago when I had kind of stopped my last teaching gig. I guess it was like three. But I was scared to take the leap and somewhere during COVID, eventually it was just like whatever I'm into fine. Let's start. And I started in running content, but it was just, it was wrong and I knew it was wrong. But I learned a lot and I studied the industry while I was doing it. And then eventually I shut that down. I was like, I want, because if you're going to do this, it's going to be your day job. Right. And so if my day job is to like make ultra running content and look really cool and stuff, then I have to go on an adventure every week. I have to go do some new crazy athletic accomplishment every week to try to be cool on the internet, which is a horrible thing to do with your life. Yeah. And it turns all of your fun adventures into your work. Exactly. And it's a bad business model. If you're just thinking about a business model. And it's like, well, I should be doing information for a million reasons. And I flipped and switched. That's exactly right. Exactly. And it's a bad business model if you're just thinking about a business model. And it's like, well, I should be doing information for a million reasons. And I flipped and switched. And right away, I, I mean, I had some skills that were really applicable. And I had a lot of luck along the way of people that I met and people that saw my stuff and people that enjoyed my content. But I had really good timing too, where I started on TikTok right when the censorship wasn't too bad. And they were pushing longer videos. And I got on to X right as Diddy was happening. And then Candice found my Diddy reporting and kind of boosted me there. And then I got into, I intentionally got onto YouTube after Trump was elected so that I wouldn't be throttled by old YouTube policies. At least that was my theory. So I've had a mixture of factors, but ultimately, I don't know, man. It's been crazy. It's been a wild ride. Yeah. I mean, you went from anonymous to famous like faster than it was uncomfortable. Yeah. It's like the kind of thing where fortunately, I don't have like, I can only imagine if you had like some weird fucked up life in your past. And then suddenly you are famous and you're like, oh gosh, because fortunately, I was just like a hippie that ran around the woods and like had taught kids and it's like, it's like cool, whatever. I'm perfectly proud of my life. I have no issue. No felony record or any debt. Exactly. Nothing. No criminal record. Nothing crazy. And it's like, but it still is like a weird like shift of how you like how your privacy privacy is like, what is your family think? Like how do you kind of keep your family safe from the public eye in general to? It's just a crazy transition. And it's crazy to transition from being able to say whatever I wanted when I was first starting because the whole point was to just do like I started the first TikTok account called canceled this clothing company. As in like, cancel me, I'm going to say some crazy shit. I'm just a conspiracy theorist like I'm just going to do 10 foil. But I was always actually just trying to do evidence based trying to figure out what the hell is going on out here. And I knew that you need permission in yourself to go anywhere in order to figure it out. It's like growing up on 9 11. It's like, well, what the hell happened there? And it really teaches you you have to be willing to like listen to crazy theories and digest crazy ideas and maybe they're not true, but you got to make sure they're not. And so I thought that like I had started this whole thing just kind of saying whatever I wanted doing whatever I wanted. And as I kind of grew really, really fast, like holy shit, there's a lot of weight and and gravity and what we do here. And it is and we are in a really charged and important time. And I try to hold both those truths at once now somehow so important because you can't like acquiesce to the gravity of the situation and then like stiffen up and become like calcified and just stay within your lines and be careful all the time. Because sometimes you have to say audacious things and sometimes like sometimes unbelievable things are what's really how we have to really to think audacious things. And if you don't, if you don't allow yourself, if you live in a mental prison, you're you're going to miss things. And you got to stay authentic too. It's like if you are, if you let the scope of the task or the scope of the audience or whatever limits you and like constrain you, suddenly you're not authentic, you're not doing what you're really doing. But also you got to be careful to not be authentic in a way that like you will regret, which I actually love. My favorite thing about this industry and about this world, this job is that social media in general, and I think I'm a huge proponent that other people start making things online. Not everyone should, but there's a lot of people that are just scared to start, but they're like on Twitter anonymously contributing to the conversation. I'm like, do make a video. It's way easier for us to interact with you, to way easier for us to understand you. And the reason why I think this industry is so wonderful is because it's sort of like the, it's like your whole human self is here in this because you're communicating things. You're not just communicating facts and information of it like a journalist. You're also communicating like how to live, how to be like, who are you like what's going on here? What do you believe, right? People choose what conversations to be a part of, but ultimately like who you are while you do this journey is immensely connected to how good you are at the job. Oh, right. And how well you can put your message. Oh, absolutely. How well you sort of like figure out the facts. And so, and you can go anywhere you want. Like I said at my platform in a way where like I can go make running content if I want or I can go do a burger joint and need a burger and support a family on burger restaurant. It's like I just launched an app that'll let me support family and found around businesses and stuff. And it's like I can do anything I want here. And the only limiting factor is if I'm like, whole and healthy and happy and true to myself. And there's really no other job like that. Teaching is kind of like that and that how you show up in the classroom is like you're doing this full human experience with other humans. Yes. And are facing with them. And that's one of the coolest things about teaching. And in some ways this is very similar. But like making pizzas isn't like that, you know, delivering food isn't like that. I've done them both. Yeah, it's fun. And it's I highly recommend that everyone do like some honest real like restaurant work, blue collar work, construction work. Oh, all that kind of stuff. It's just so freaking good. No, I was forced to do it. But I just I'm principal, you know, growing up, I was a pizza delivery boy. I was a factory worker. Yeah, a lot of fun to do the gas station. Yeah, dishwasher. But no, I completely agree with that. So where will you be sort of starting research next? I am pretty dedicated to sticking with the Charlie thing for a while until we figured out, but it's, but that's not your question. But well, that is my question. I mean, so that's that's where your energy is focusing. I firmly believe that here's my perspective in my bias just to qualify what I said before. I'm sure people already know this, but I believe that what happened there was not what we were told. And just like like as with Las Vegas, the moment that what you're told is not true, a million other things immediately coming to play because why the fuck are you lying about it? And then like why is so what is this? Because suddenly if it's even slightly not true, we're looking at a cover up plus we're looking at a different purpose. We're looking at something else here. And so when I look at Charlie Kirk's murder, I see what looks like a cover up and I see that that's not true for many reasons. But then I can't square any other version of the story that is not one of the most important political moments in our time right now in terms of the political factions involved in terms of the shifting geopolitical relationships in the world in terms of what's going to be happening to my people in America today and now in like the unity or disunity that might we might experience over the next 10 years here and beyond. And so when I think about like what's the most important story that I can devote my time to figuring out right now to hopefully ensure a better America for my children to grow up in, it's Charlie Kirk. And I don't know is that I don't really believe that we're really going to ever get an answer, which is unfortunately a hallmark of these types of things. But I'm damn well going to spend my time to try. And that doesn't mean I'm going to exclude everything else. Like for example, I'm actually now that you kind of brought this Vegas shooting back up, I've gotten inspired where I want to go back and learn a shitload more about that and kind of dig even deeper and get more familiar with that because that will inform the other thing and then that will inform the other thing. I'm very much focused on what happened to Charlie Kirk and watching this trial play out and watching the spider web and branches of that play out. But I'm also trying to shift back to I would mention this app. So I'm shifting back to folks on corporate corruption in America as well because in a lot of ways like the big like 10, four, like 9, 11 kind of things, they're fun. But like how your food is being poisoned and how the corporations are being incentivized to basically shit all over us and take all of our money. Like those sorts of things affect our day to day lives, right? Private equity affects like real people every day in America. So that's a very much more grounded thing that I'm trying to focus on. And then the other thing is well actually I shouldn't really talk about that story yet. But I have a friend that is on a story that is kind of like a financial thing that we'll look into later. So you can care. I'll thank you for spending all this time. It's been a pleasure, man. Good to see you. I've been a long time fan, but you've only been here three years. But I am a fan. And I think you're brave and really interesting and trustworthy. So thank you. There's an honor. Thanks.