Thank you, Professor, for doing this. Let me start with the most simple of all questions. How are nuclear weapons different from conventional weapons? Nuclear weapons are different from conventional weapons in many ways. One of the things that I like to say is that they really defy the kind of concept of both space and time. And let me explain what I mean by that. If you have a conventional weapon and you exploded over a city or wherever, that explosion is going to have an impact in that local place. And it's going to have that impact in time. And then you could come back and clean up the area and rebuild and so on. Nuclear weapons are not like that. And you could explore a nuclear explosion in one place, in one location. And in one split moment of time can have both global effects. And it can have impacts over actually even thousands of years through the effects of radiation and the kind of radioactive isotopes that get deposited in the environment. But there is sort of a number of ways in which even a single nuclear weapon explosion can be incredibly dangerous in devastating. And then there are a number of impacts in which a nuclear war, in which many nuclear weapons are used, can be obviously quite clearly much more devastating. So the thing that people know about nuclear weapons is that one nuclear weapon can be much more powerful than any kind of chemical explosion. So for example, the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 80 years ago almost exactly, had what's called energy yields of 15 and 21 kilotons of TNT. Now these bombs were made out of uranium and plutonium. Uranium for the Hiroshima bomb and plutonium for the Nagasaki bomb. But when we describe their energy yield would describe it in terms of the equivalent amount of chemical explosive that you would need. So that's where the 15 kilotons, 15,000 tons of TNTs, how much you would have needed of chemical explosive to produce the energy equivalent to that explosion. And that in and of itself is huge. And just to give you one kind of point of comparison, the Oklahoma City bombing, which I'm sure you remember, it was actually the first year that I was living in the United States. It was in April of 1995. And it was a devastating event. It was the equivalent of two and a half tons of TNT. So Timothy McVay had filled the rider truck with chemical explosives, lit it up outside of a federal building killed 168 people, including 19 children in the daycare center. And there was damage in the radius of two, I think, 16 blocks, something of that order. So absolutely an incredible and devastating event. At the same time, that explosion was 6,000 times less energetic than the bombing of Hiroshima. So 15,000 tons of TNT versus 2.5 tons of TNT. So that just begins to give you a scale for just how powerful a single nuclear weapon can be. And then on top of it is that we now have weapons that are far more powerful than the Hiroshima Nagasaki bombs. In fact, in 1945, the US had three nuclear weapons. One was used as a quote unquote test, the Trinity test in the desert of New Mexico. And then two were used on the tax and on Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Today, we actually have 12 on the order of 12 and 1,500 nuclear warheads, many of which are far more powerful. How much harmful? So we noted both US and Russia have nuclear bombs currently that are on the order of one megaton. That's about 70 times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb. At the height of the Cold War, when we were first testing nuclear weapons and actually first testing hydrogen bombs, which are different from the atomic bombs that were used in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. And I can explain that as well. We were even testing the largest test that the US had ever conducted took place in the Marshall Islands. It's called the Bravo Test, Castle Bravo Test. And there was a thousand Hiroshima bomb equivalents. And yet, the Soviets actually tested something even more powerful. They did so up in the North Sea region called Navaya-Zemya. And they tested some accounts save 50 megatons. So that's more than 3,000 Hiroshima bomb equivalents. I've even seen accounts to save 58 megatons. So that would be basically 4,000 Hiroshima bomb equivalents. The Castle Bravo Test, which took place on March 1, 1954, that test, that mushroom cloud. So we also have this vision of a nuclear explosion that produces the mushroom cloud. That mushroom cloud was 25 miles or 40 kilometers high. And the widest was 60 miles wide. So 80 miles wide, the mushroom cloud. It's quite simply something that's unimaginable. And that test actually had truly devastating consequences for people living in the Marshall Islands. About 100 miles from where the test was conducted, the population was living in a place called Rongalapatol. And those people were very, very sick and impacted by the test. It's a long story. They stayed there for three days. They were moved away. But to kind of cut to the present day, and this is actually from some of the research that I've done with colleagues and students at Columbia University, the currently, there's still parts of the Marshall Islands where radiological contamination is very high. And that testing ended in 1958. So it's now nearly seven years later. And there's still contamination. The quite simply is not safe. The way I like to put it is it's not safe for multi generational community to live in and to live their full time. The most dangerous lies, not the ones that are shattered in your face, the most dangerous lies are the ones that whisper to you. And chief among those lies is the idea that prayer doesn't work. It doesn't matter. Oh, thoughts and prayers, they say mockingly. Actually, prayer is the single most important thing. And the single most effective thing you can do ever. The push to morph America into a godless country didn't happen all at once. It was a very slow process. And the people who want you to fall for it through ambivalence, but not even noticing. Downloading the Hollow App is the perfect way to foil that plan. It's one of the most effective things you can do to root yourself in God to improve the life of your family and your life here and in the year after. So the idea of little lies pulling you from the truth is not new. The classic CS Lewis book, The Screwtape Letters, puts it perfectly. And how is new as prayer series encapsulates the message of that book resisting the forces seeking to separate you from God, embrace faith and prayer. It is literally the only way. Downloading Hollow will help everyone here loves it. Everyone in my family loves it. Daily conversation actually. So there's a battle for your attention, for your heart, and ultimately for your soul. You can ignore it where you can be prepared. Hollow is the number one Christian prayer app in the world. And that is a well deserved accolade. Download Hollow today, reclaim the power of prayer, which is the fundamental prayer in the universe. Three months of free Hollow at hollow.com slash Tucker. So what would happen if a nuclear weapon, modern nuclear weapon detonated over Times Square? Yes, over Times Square, one megaton bomb is going to have, so there's something that makes the numbers a little more complicated. You can have two different kinds of explosions. One can be an air burst, and one can be a surface explosion. In the case of an air burst, what you actually do is you cause a lot more damage, a lot more the shock wave is sort of stronger and the destruction of the city is much more effective. A surface burst produces more radiation and kind of more of those long-term effects. So between the two, let's just say that basically the radius of this fireball is about a mile. And so you now have, depending on where it explodes, you have a radius that in the fireball is quite literally the temperature of the sun. And so you have a fireball where everything is evaporated, absolutely evaporated. And then again, depending on the effects in the air burst or a surface explosion, you kind of have these different concentric circles of heavy blast damage where just everything is absolutely destroyed, the shock wave is such that everything collapses, buildings collapse, everything collapses. Then you might have a kind of lethal radiation dose, concentric circles. Then you might have moderate damage where you still have buildings collapsing, injuries are widespread and so on. And you kind of keep going, but you start out with quite literally evaporating everything in this fireball and you kind of keep going out of that. And in New York City, for an air burst, you're looking at something like on the order of one and a half million people dying and about two million people being very severely injured. There's also a concentric circle where the temperature is so high that everybody gets third degree burns. And this is something that happened, of course, in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. It's where people skin quite literally melts. There are kind of descriptions from survivors of the bombing of seeing people with their skin looking like it was clothing, just sort of hanging over them. This is quite simply a site of total and absolute horror and devastation. And it would destroy a US city the thing that we know. It rendered uninhabitable. Rendered and rendered potentially uninhabitable for decades, hundreds of years, potentially even thousands of years. Again, it all depends on how you do it, how large the weapon is, how it's detonated. But the really scary thing that we do know, and this comes from the kinds of war games that take place in Washington all the time, is that because we now live in the world with 12 and a half thousand nuclear warheads, it doesn't just end with one. Nuclear war had been used on one city. We not only have all of those warheads. We also have things like intercontinental ballistic missiles, which can actually carry multiple warheads. Once delivered them all to the same target. So you might, if you wanted to attack New York City, you might explode one in Times Square, but you might explode one on the upper west side and another in Brooklyn and another in the United States. So you could have a kind of constellation of explosions. And the war games in Washington suggest that 100% of the time won nuclear weapons explosion regardless of how it starts. And accident, a miscalculation, a deliberate use, it all ends in the full blown nuclear war. And part of the reason why it all ends in the full blown nuclear war is that the kinds of structures we've built, the kinds of policies that we have on this, are such that you just, you pretty much just follow the protocol and the protocol is that the U.A. attack if you, the United States has something called launch on warning. And that means that if we think we're being attacked, even though we haven't absorbed an attack, even though we haven't actually seen that a warhead has exploded in one of our cities. We launch an attack. And these decisions are made in a matter of minutes. This is described really kind of with amazing clarity in the book by any Jacobson nuclear war scenario, which describes exactly minute by minute how nuclear war starts and can start. And then what happens for the next 72 minutes? And then sort of these long-term consequences of nuclear war. And I can talk about some of them. So 72 minutes, the entire war, that's the duration of the war. That's the duration of a war between the United States and Russia in any book. The scenario is that basically the US gets attacked by a kind of lone warhead coming from North Korea, attacking Washington, D.C. That's an intercontinental ballistic missile, which we detect within seconds of the launch. And then there's a second in her scenario. There's a second warhead being exploded launch from a submarine in the Pacific and exploding in Diablo Canyon, which is a nuclear power plant in Southern California. And in that scenario, the US, then responds to the nose, it's being attacked by North Korea in a matter of minutes. Makes a decision to attack North Korea. I think the response is something like 82 nuclear warheads. But the route that the warheads take from our ICBM silos in the Midwest, in the codeness and so on, the route goes over Russia. And in any book, the scenario such that the US can't communicate fast enough with the Russian leadership and Russians now think they're under attack because they're detecting these warheads coming their way. And so they launch an attack 1000 nuclear warheads and then the US responds in turn and attacks the United States. And these kinds of estimates of what would happen, the number of casualties people who would die and so on, in a US Russia full blown nuclear war. The current estimate, and this is based on slightly more than 1000 warheads from each direction. And it's equivalent to about one third of the current arsenals. The number of casualties from the moment of the explosions is on the order of 360 million people. And that's nothing but the deaths from, you know, you were either incinerated or you were your body was broken into who knows how many pieces by the shock wave. That's not even including deaths from radiation which would occur over some period of time, of course, very intensely in the immediate aftermath, but then also over time. And then there is the business of what such a nuclear war would actually do to the environment of the planet. And there it's not just about local effects. Now we get into the global effect. So back to my initial assertion, the nuclear weapons serve the five rules of time and space. The time aspect is this radiation impacts that can really the radiation contamination that can last for decades, hundreds, even thousands of years for certain radioactive isotopes. The spatial aspect is that of course, there is a local impact of the nuclear explosion, but in the case of a nuclear war, the impact becomes global. And there are at least two different ways in which this happens. One way is called nuclear winter. I can explain what that is. And the other is ozone layer destruction. And these are actually things that we've known about both of them for a long time. Although I will say that more recently, we've had much better simulations just much more computer power, much more surveyability to really figure out what that would look like. So let's start in order. What's nuclear winter? So nuclear winter is the idea that the following a nuclear war, there would be such widespread fires everywhere that would burn things like everything that's in the city and produce so much so that we go up into the atmosphere and block incoming sunlight. And that as a consequence of this, for a period of about, again, depends on how many warheads, what energy yields and so on. But for a period of up to about 10 years, temperatures would drop so significantly. Some estimates for the war that I keep, citing of one third of US and Russian arsenals are used up the estimates, 10 to 15 degrees Celsius. That's about 18 to 27 degrees Fahrenheit. This is a completely different planet and those temperature drops occur very, very quickly. And so the temperature drop, what it does, is it actually makes it impossible for food to grow, in particular, in the Northern Hemisphere and kind of our bread basket latitudes. And food just begins to stop, stops growing, agriculture begins to fail and people begin to starve. And the estimates there, there's a paper that was published in Nature Food by Alan Robach and Lily Gia and their colleagues at Rutgers University. According to that paper, this particular scenario where I said 360 million people would die from the attacks, they estimate over five billion people would die of starvation. Why do they kill you? Simply save stops crime before it happens, which is the way to stop it. Most security systems work backwards. They react to a break-in. They alert the authorities, what's already in your house? Woo, you don't want someone in your house in the first place. You want to deter that. That's why you get simply safe. AI powered cameras detect threats while they're still outside your home and then alert real security agents before anything else happens. Those agents take action right away, confront the intruder, let him know they're being watched on camera, call the cops, sound to siren, triggering a spotlight, whatever it takes to get them out of there. That is actual security. Simply saves monitoring agents, have your back, even when you're not at home. Wait for someone to break in in a home invasion. Yeah, no thanks. We trust simply safe. Why will there are no long-term contracts or hidden fees? It's been named best home security system for five years running and there's a 60 day money back guarantee. Set up is super easy. The app is simple to use. The monitoring is reliable. Real peace of mind whether you're at home or not. And right now you can save 50% on a simply safe home security system at simply safe.com slash Tucker. Simply safe. S-I-M-P-L-I safe.com slash Tucker. There is no safe like simply safe. Over 5 billion within two years of a nuclear war from starvation all around the planet. And here's a kicker actually. The number is actually really more than 6 billion because when they wrote the paper, they based all of their calculation simulations modeling on a worldwide population of 7 billion. We now have more than 8 billion people on the planet. So that just quite simply means that you're going to have an extra 1 billion people dying of starvation. So it's really, I mean, this is quite simply. This is not, this is the end of human civilization. This is the end of humanity as we know it. I'm not saying I don't think we know that everyone would die. Although it's quite possible. I don't think it means all of life on the planet would be extinguished or even that's possible. But this is quite simply not the planet. We'll live on today. And then on top of it, there's the radiation effects. And I can talk more about radiation. And then there's this business of ozone layer destruction. And that's somebody at Columbia who might actually knew quite well he passed away recently in his 90s. His name was Maal Ruderman. He was one of the first people who they wrote about in the 1970s about nitric oxide production. There's a consequence of nuclear war. And the impact that this would have on ozone layer, on the ozone layer. And that kind of research has been done also more recently within new models, simulations, and so on. Those estimates suggest that the war scenario I keep mentioning between US and Russia would result in 70% ozone layer destruction. This is again, this is not a place where you go out to Sunbait. This is a place in which UV radiation is incredibly dangerous, not just to people, but it would also impact agricultural production because it would impact plants. So again, this would be another hit on food supplies. But this is all of this. It's just so horrific. This idea that we would ever conduct something like nuclear war. I mean Reagan and Gorbachev said in 1986 nuclear war cannot be one and must never be fought. Khrushchev said in the 1960s that the survivors would envy the dead. And yet here we are, you know, 80 years into the nuclear age still in, I would say in many ways playing nuclear roulette with Iran. Not, yeah. Yeah, ever more recklessly, especially in the last three years. I mean, ask you a couple of questions just to tie up what you just said. You said in the simulation, the theoretical account that Annie Jacobson wrote about in her book, very influential book, Diablo Canyon Nuclear Setting California is hit with a nuclear weapon. What is the effect of a nuclear power plant getting hit by a nuclear weapon? That one is really, really devastating. I hadn't actually, I mean, I think with the war in Ukraine, we had to sort of gone a sense, right? That a nuclear power plant presents this very kind of special type of threat in war zones. And this was the war in Ukraine was actually quite simply the first war where we had active fighting in a country, active military conflict, violent conflict in a country that had nuclear power plants that just had not been the case previously. And there are a whole lot of things you could say about nuclear power and potential dangerous threats and so on. But in the case of a conflict, a nuclear power plant can become a weapon in and of itself. Of course. So I read the book a while back. So I use it possibly you could get an exponential effect. Absolutely. No, no, no, this is now a radiation. So now people are dying all over the western United States from the absolutely enormous amount of radioactivity that is spread, right? So you hit the nuclear power plant. It's not the blast in the fire. But I mean, yes, it is there locally. But that's not what's going to kill the people in LA. What's going to kill the people in LA is the radiation that's going to spread. So what does that look like? That was my second question. You said you would flesh out the concept of the danger of radiation. What does that look like? We know something about that because of the bombings 80 years ago. But we know something about that because of the bombings from 80 years ago. Absolutely. And I can say a little more about those. But we also know a whole lot about the impact of nuclear explosions on the impact of radiation on the environment because Hiroshima and Nagasaki were not the only two or even count Trinity three times. It's not that we've exploded nuclear weapons three times. We've exploded nuclear weapons more than 2000 times on this planet. And that was a quite a full nuclear weapons explosions as part of what it's referred to as nuclear weapons testing programs. I was. was a quite a clear weapon. Full nuclear weapons explosions as part of what it's referred to as nuclear weapons testing programs. I was in March at the United Nations actually at the third meeting of states parties of a treaty called the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. I was speaking to a woman from French Polynisha where the French tested nuclear weapons. She's actually a member of the French Polynisha parliament now. Her name is Kinemouera Cross. She's a relatively young woman. I think in her 30s she's a mother. She had she's had leukemia for many years. And many people in French Polynisha have been impacted by the testing that took place there. leukemia can be a result of exposure radiation. Absolutely. And I can explain that as well. But Kinemouera said to me something really interesting. She said, you know when we call it testing, when I was young and people would talk about all we had the testing, I just imagine scientists kind of playing in the laboratory and you know doing some kind of a test. These were full blown nuclear explosions. I described Bravo, described the Soviet so-called test, the Tsar Bomba. There were over 2000 such explosions. Many of them atmospheric tests. The majority still underground tests, but even underground tests have had devastating consequences. In 1963 there was really a kind of seminal agreement that was made initially just by the US, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom of stopping atmospheric testing. And that was a real victory for the people of the world because it helped to some atmospheric testing continue China and France actually both continued to test in the atmosphere post 1963. France tested in the atmosphere until 1974 and trying to test it in the atmosphere until 1980. So both of those continued. Everybody else has conducted to our knowledge underground tests, to my knowledge only underground tests. As important as it is, politics is not the answer to this country's or man's greatest problem, the only solution is Jesus. Sorry, that's true. At its core, politics is a process of critiquing other people and getting them to change. Christianity is the opposite. Christianity begins with a call for you to change. Me to change. It's called repentance and it brings you back to God. When God is at the center of heart's change, only that will lead to the end of abortion, the greatest atrocity of this country is ever participated in. The normalizing of killing babies is a stain on this country. Our friends are pre-bored in doing everything they can to stop it by providing free ultrasounds to pregnant women. Pre-bored is rescued over 380,000 children. There are a lot of nonprofits out there, a lot of them call themselves pro-life. I wouldn't trust all of them. Sorry, I do trust pre-bored. I know them well. What they do works. Once some other hearster child's heartbeat for the first time, she becomes twice as likely to have the baby. The ultrasound saves lives. It's 28 bucks for you to sponsor an ultrasound and join pre-borns movement. Just call pound 250 and say the keyword baby. That's pound 250 keyword baby or pull it up at pre-born.com that's pre-born.com slash Tucker defend the pre-born. There's nothing more worth it. I hope you'll join us. Tell us what the effects of radiation. How long does the pollution last? How bad is it? Depending on what kind of a bomb you have, I think go back to a key distinction here. We have two types of nuclear weapons. One we refer to as atomic bombs. Those are again 1945 weapons. Those are based on the process of fission. Fission is when a nucleus of an atom splits. Basically one element, we all know elements like hydrogen and oxygen and carbon and so on, but an element like uranium or plutonium splits and produces two other elements. Energy is produced in such a reaction. A tiny amount of energy is produced in one reaction, but when you have many, many reactions, you can have a lot of energy. Another process is called the process of fusion and that's when actually nuclei of two elements come together and produce energy that way. For example, two hydrogen nuclei come together to form helium and energies produced that way. That process actually takes place in the sun. That's how the sun produces its energy. Fission is a good thing. We wouldn't quite simply wouldn't have life on this planet if we weren't for fusion, but again, using fusion for the purpose of weapons is a whole other thing. Depending on what you do and here's the interesting thing about fusion or hydrogen bombs in order to actually bring, so if I have hydrogen nuclei, this is just step one second to just remember what an atom is what elements are. We have different elements on the planet. The atoms are the smallest units of the element, but those atoms are made up of different kinds of particles. The nucleus is at the center of the atom. It might have just a single proton liking hydrogen or it might also have more protons and also neutrons and so on. Then there are electrons around it. In chemical reactions, everything basically happens with, not basically, everything happens with the electrons. The nuclei just stayed the same. With nuclear reactions, everything is about what happens in the nucleus. The nucleus either splits or the nuclei, in-fission or nuclear, come together in fusion. In fusion, if you have a nucleus that is positively charged, electrons are negatively charged. This is what keeps the atoms stable. If you have one nucleus that's positively charged trying to come together with another nucleus that's positively charged, they repel each other. So they repel each other. You actually need to invest energy to overcome that electrostatic repulsion and the amount of energy that's needed can only be supplied by something like a fission bomb. Even for fusion, for hydrogen weapons, we actually need to have fission as the fuel that kind of sets up the conditions for the fusion to actually take place. How much more powerful is the hydrogen bomb than the bombs dropped on rosumen like this? So the bravo one was a thousand times more powerful than a Hiroshima bomb. The currently, like if we have a one megaton bomb that's about 70 Hiroshima bombs, but hydrogen bombs, actually there's kind of no limit like you could keep making them bigger and bigger and bigger. Somehow we've stopped making the really big ones. I think China has probably the most powerful, the most high energy hydrogen bombs currently in their arsenals. I think they have five megaton bombs, hydrogen bombs in their arsenals. That's more than 300 Hiroshima bomb equivalents. But then again, if you have a missile that can carry 10 warheads, it almost doesn't matter, you know how much a single one is. But just back to radiation. So basically, what you're doing is you're producing this chain reaction of splitting atoms or fusing them. And in so doing, you produce some radioactive isotopes, radioactive elements that are going to basically be in the environment both locally. They're going to get kind of blown up, things get blown up, be evaporated, going into the mushroom cloud. You produce these radioactive isotopes, they're mixed with everything. Some of that will kind of fall back onto the planet locally. Some of it will be carried up into the atmosphere, high level of stratosphere and so on. And actually become part of a global deposition where you go so high up in the atmosphere, it stays stays up there. And then you could also end up having, depending on exactly how far up it goes, you could have it come down with weather events. And so when the United States- So it's raining, nuclear isotope? So it's raining, radioactive nuclear isotopes. The US mentioned the testing in the Marshall Islands. We also tested in another Pacific Island state called Republico Kiriboss. And we tested on our own soil both in Nevada where there were 100 atmospheric tests and some 828 underground tests as well as in Alaska where there were just underground tests. But the testing in Nevada actually produced fallout that went all around the United States. And it quite simply depended on whether or not there was rain in a local. So the fallout was carried across towards the east given the easternly winds. And then if there was a rain, a weather event in some place, the fallout would get deposited there in their maps of the United States. The quite simply looked like you gave an empty map to a child and they played with paint and kind of sprayed blotches of paint onto the compound. Exactly. And it's where radiation had been deposited from these- Do you know the health effects of that? The health effects are very severe and very serious. So let me just name a few of the top radioactive isotopes that are problematic. There's something called iodine-131. There's something called season 137. Something called strontium-90. And there are a number of different isotopes of plutonium. And the thing about these is that they quite simply last in the environment for different amounts of time. So some of them, there's a concept called half-life. So a radioactive isotope will have a specific half-life. And what that means is if you have, if you start out with say a thousand atoms of this isotope, after its half-life, you will have 500. And after another half-life, you'll have 250. And so on. And so after six, seven, quality, even 10 half-lives, it's going to be gone from the environment. iodine-131 has a very short half-life. It's eight days. And so within a matter of weeks, it's gone from the environment. But if you were there at the time of the explosion, and if you got exposed to iodine-131, that actually went onto your body mostly because the iodine actually went into the grass and then the cows ate the grass and people drank milk. It goes right to your thyroid. But it has caused who knows. Numerous numerous cancers in this country, but actually in many other parts of the world. strontium-90 and cesium-137 have half-lives of about 30 years each. That means they stick in the environment for a few, a couple hundred years at least. And what's interesting about both of these isotopes, strontium-90 is chemically similar to calcium. And you know that when you drink milk or cheese or whatever, you take in calcium, the calcium goes into your bones, goes into its, building up your bone marrow. And strontium-90 will go to those exact places. So the reason we mentioned leukemia earlier, the reason that people got in, especially they called leukemia, the atomic bomb disease in Hiroshima and Nagasaki after the bombings, the reason for that was the exposure to strontium-90. Also importantly, because it acts like calcium, it also gets incorporated by plants will take it up from the environment and you can you can ingest it. Cesium-137 is the same half-life, you know, around for a long time, is chemically similar to potassium. And you also know that if you eat banana or if you drink some kind of electrolyte drink or something, you take in potassium. While the same thing happens, if Cesium is in the soil, plants will take it up thinking because it behaves like potassium, they take it up, it gets incorporated. And now when you eat that food, that Cesium is now getting incorporated into your cells, the kinds of soft tissues that use potassium, your brain actually needs a lot of potassium. And so, when instead of taking up potassium, you've now brought Cesium-137 into your body. Now the Cesium is this radioactive isotope that's going to basically after a certain amount of time, it's going to split and it's going to give off gamma radiation. And now that gamma radiation is inside your body, it's attacking your cells, it's attacking your DNA, it's making you sick. And a lot of kind of soft tissue cancers, including brain cancer, come from that Cesium-137. Do you see markedly higher rates of those cancers after Hiroshima and Nagasaki? Yes, absolutely. I mean, the estimates for the casualties of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings, it's often cited what people think. It was like 70, the ideas is maybe 70,000 people died on the day of the attack. And then another 70,000 by the end of 1945 from both kind of acute radiation sicknesses, while the cancers continued to happen. There's a particularly touching story of a young girl who was two years old in Hiroshima, the day of the bombings, her name was Sadikus Asaki. And when she was 12, so 10 years after the bombing, she developed leukemia, she had been growing well and was very athletic and very active. And she developed leukemia. And she is the one who she learned the story of the paper crane, the folding of the origami. And she learned the story that if you fold a thousand paper cranes, your wish will come true. There are now some differences in kind of details of what happened, how many paper cranes she folded and so on. But needless to say, she died. And after she died, it was actually her friends who wanted to do something in her honor. And essentially over the decades, the paper crane, the paper cranes that she was folding really became a kind of symbol of peace. And this sort of message, she was wishing, folding the paper crane, she was wishing not just to get better, but she was wishing for world peace. And that's kind of what got taken up by. So if you had the US and Russia fire one-third of their nuclear arsenals, you're saying that every study projection has shown like an elimination of life on earth, basically, certainly human life on earth, human civilization. Yeah, I would say it's absolutely, certainly. And the world is we know it. Whether we all perish or some people survive, the latter is certainly possible. This actually, the UN is now advancing a study on the consequences of nuclear war. Something that really hasn't been studied, I would say, in terms of the current, the world that we currently live in. Right? So we live in a very globalized world. We often might eat food from other places in the world. Right? Like, what is that in the current context? It wasn't necessarily true to the same degree in the 1980s, people, for example, ate food that was more local and so on. So what does that look like today? The science of nuclear winter and for example, ozone layer destruction, that's very, very solid science. It gets attacked all the time, but it is very solid. And old, you said this has been something that people have been studying for 80 years. How many nuclear weapons are there in the world globally? Today, we have 12 and a half nuclear warheads in the world in possession of 9,000. 12 and a half thousand, sorry, 12 and a half thousand nuclear warheads in the world in possession of nine nuclear arm states. US and Russia have the vast majority, over 90% of the nuclear warheads are in the possession of US and Russia. We pretty sure of that. I mean, we know where these warheads are. Yeah, no, we actually know. The good news about nuclear weapons is they're not a garage project. There are other things you could do in your garage that could be very dangerous. You can't do that with nuclear weapons. It takes a tremendous amount of not just resources and human ingenuity but infrastructure. Part of the reason they did that in the Manhattan project in the Los Alamos, it was all that isolation and so on. Do we know where they are? We do. For the most part, we know where they are. Not probably not all of them. I think it's kind of known where, for example, Russia's military bases are, but perhaps not exactly how many where and how. The other piece is that we do have a lot of nuclear warheads on submarines, which could be pretty much anywhere in the world's oceans. What's interesting, so submarines keep moving most of the time. Isn't it dangerous to have a nuclear warhead continuously on a boat that's some of these nuclear submarines or carrying so many warheads, they're carrying so many missiles and each missile is carrying warheads. I think they call them handmaidens of the apocalypse. There were incidents in the 1950s where US and the Soviet submarine crashed into one another. They're also there. Nuclear armed. Nuclear armed. What happened? And nothing happened. We've actually been, I mean, this is the one way of looking at the history of the entire nuclear age, so 80 years of the nuclear age. It's that we've been very, very lucky. That the scenarios I'm describing, the scenario in New Jacobson is describing, the scenario I'm nuclear winter ozone layer destruction. There's a whole other thing which you probably also know about because I know you spoke with Dennis Quaid, the electromagnetic pulse. That's another thing you could do. You could shut down the electricity over entire countries. I can eat like three nuclear warheads to shut down the electricity over the entire United States. And this isn't a case where it's a blackout and we're all in convenience for a week. This is like the electricity is not coming back. So you wouldn't even need to explode nuclear weapons on cities. You just need to shut down our electrical grid and then good luck to all of us. So during the cold where a Russian sub-Soviet sub-but in the US sub collided, luckily, you know, the bombs didn't go off. But there were also examples of warheads being lost, right? Yeah. Warheads being lost, warheads being dropped to the bottom of the ocean. There are about 50 nuclear warheads at the bottom of the ocean. So it's a safety nuclear warheads right now at the the bottom of the ocean. Yeah. No one's tried to retrieve that. Well, off of submarine fell off of plane, you know, all kinds of accidents. It wasn't just to sub- To submarines colliding. It was also there was also airplanes carrying nuclear warheads colliding. There were ones. Yeah, there was ones a nuclear warhead that was dropped quite literally into someone's backyard in South Carolina. It didn't go off. It had like multiple security kind of systems and the last one held everything else you know, had given way. Wait, the US military dropped a nuclear bomb in someone's backyard in South Carolina? Yeah, absolutely. I forget the exact here. This was most of these incidents were in the 1950s. But that was kind of a period of really stupid accidents. And then the, you know, the, what it's often referred to in the field as close calls. You know, sir, God more more sophisticated in 1962. Of course, we had the Cuban Missile Crisis. Yes, famously. Hall, famously, a Hall set of things. And really what we understand from that is that could have led to a nuclear war, you know, from, from deliberate kind of, you know, US Kennedy was under a tremendous amount of pressure to actually invade Cuba by that point. The Soviets actually had nuclear warheads and missiles in Cuba, you know, had that invasion or they're gone on it, you know, we quite simply would have had a nuclear war. But it wasn't just that there were, there were incidents during that 13 day period. Three of them on the same day, October 27th, there was a Saturday. It's often referred to as the black Saturday. There were three things that happened that day. One was a US plane that was doing some kind of monitoring in the near the North Pole and had accidentally gone off lost radar, lost kind of the ability to navigate where they were and gone deep into the Soviet Union and was actually too high up for the Soviet, you know, defense to air fence to, and they really tried to shoot it down. But the guy escaped. Then there was an airplane that was shut down over Cuba. And the American captain was killed on that day in Kennedy, did not decide to move towards an invasion and so on. And then perhaps the most serious one was where the US was trying to enforce a blockade of kind of, you know, the Soviets weren't supposed to be coming to Cuba to, you know, bring any surmilitary equipment. And to enforce this blockade, they were using something called depth charges. But they were using kind of simulating depth charges that and depth charges like a weapon to attack a submarine. And so they were using ones that would sort of simulate an attack but not really attack. And one Soviet submarine had three officers on board was being attacked by these depth charges. They interpreted it as a real attack. They actually thought that maybe there was a war going on. And they were nuclear armed. They had a nuclear torpedo on board. And what they needed, this wasn't, you know, like they needed permission from some higher authority. They needed all three of them needed to agree to employ the nuclear warhead. One of them, his name was Captain Archipov, decided that he did not want to approve the USO nuclear torpedo. And basically saved the world in that moment the very next day, till 28th was actually the end of the Cuban Missile Crisis where the Soviets agreed to withdraw their nuclear missiles from Cuba. President Kennedy had in turn agreed that the US would withdraw its nuclear missiles from Turkey. This wasn't known until relatively recently because at the time Kennedy asked Khrushchev, you know, you have my word, we'll do this, but I just need a little time and I'm not going to make it public. And that was the agreement and ended the Cuban Missile Crisis. And that was a very, very, very dangerous moment. Seems to have changed President Kennedy's views of nuclear weapons are hardened his views and he became entirely committed preventing new nations from acquiring nuclear weapons. He became committed to preventing new nations from acquiring nuclear weapons that was absolutely really important to him. But he was also, he was very, he was looking towards disarmament and it was even before the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1961, he gave a very famous speech at the United Nations General Assembly in which he stated something to defect of we must abolish nuclear weapons before they abolish us. So this is quite simply something we've known for a long time and this was Kennedy understood this before we understood nuclear winter, before we understood those on layer destruction and maybe around the time we were figuring out the electromagnetic pulse and so on. So he understood before we understood those on a layer of destruction, maybe around the time we were figuring out electromagnetic pulse and so on. So he understood this at the very deep level. The part where he really put in his energy was the atmospheric test ban treaty and that was negotiated with Khrushchev on the following year in 1963. That was a tremendous achievement and a really, really important achievement going back to our discussion of radiation. Often sometimes when they sit in a room full of people or stand or whatever and speak about this, sometimes say there are people in this room who are alive today because of that atmospheric test ban treaty because had we continued to test to the degree and the levels that we were doing, we would have just sickened more and more and more people in our own country and around the world. One thing I'll just add is that I didn't say earlier because I was talking about the isotope segne, never told you about plutonium. There are actually different isotopes of plutonium and some of them have half lives of thousands of years. There's a isotope of plutonium with a 24 and a half thousand year half lifetime. That means that thing is going to be in the environment for a couple of hundred thousand years. So this is again back to that issue of transcending time and space. This is not something that just has an immediate effect between it up and we move on. The plutonium, in fact, the plutonium has been deposited globally and we have, we actually have an understanding that hundreds of years from now, hopefully there will be scientists who studied the planet who will say, oh look, this is when they tested nuclear weapons. Here's the plutonium line in the geologic record. Can I ask you about President Kennedy's efforts to prevent nuclear war? One of the things he did, it's been written about to some extent, is try to prevent David Benghoreen, then Prime Minister of Israel, from developing a nuclear weapon at the demonus site. I think we have a lot of correspondence now that shows the president demanding inspections of the demonus site. Benghoreen resigned as Prime Minister, I think, as a result of this controversy. What happened there? Yeah, I think Israel was really avoiding any sort of oversight by the President Kennedy thought that proliferation of nuclear weapons was incredibly dangerous. He was definitely concerned and didn't want other countries acquiring nuclear weapons. This eventually led even after his death to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, whose goal was that, but there are other goals and I can talk about them as well. In the case of Israel, he felt very strongly that if this was our ally, we were going to tell the rest of the world not to acquire nuclear weapons. We also had to actually do what we were preaching and be consistent in our approach to Israel in nuclear weapons. But they went ahead and I think it's thought that the first functional Israeli nuclear weapon was developed in 1966. This was actually, interestingly, before the nuclear non-proliferation treaty came together, it was negotiated over a long period of time, but finally kind of signed in 1968 and then it entered into force in 1970. It's still currently one of the largest international agreements amongst states in the United on the nuclear-armed states of Sinda. So that treaty recognizes five nuclear weapons states on their U.S. Russia, United Kingdom, France and China. Those are the five that had nuclear weapons up to that point. The declared nuclear weapons arsenals, again, Israel had actually begun its program. At this point, Israel has, you start to have 90 nuclear warheads. The other five of what's interesting is they were from the very beginning of the treaty. All five were recognized as nuclear weapons states. But China and France didn't join the treaty until 1992. So it's sometimes takes time for these treaties to actually bring the India-Pakistan North Korea. So there are four others. So nine nuclear-armed states, five recognized by the United Nations, also all five members of the U.N. Security Council with veto power. And then the four that are outside of the treaty, Israel, which has this unique policy of ambiguity of an undeclared nuclear arsenal. But again, we think it's a 90 nuclear warhead arsenal. And we're sure there is. Yeah. Oh, absolutely. I think there's no doubt about whether or not they have them. In the end, Pakistan never joined the nuclear nonproliferation treaty, both essentially, tested nuclear weapons underground. They each have on the order of 150 nuclear warheads today. And then North Korea was actually a part of the treaty until they left the treaty in the early 2000s and have since pursued nuclear weapons program. We think that North Korea actually currently has 50, 60, maybe 70 nuclear warheads. But North Korea has done is it has also actually developed the delivery systems. And we think that today North Korea actually has the kind of delivery systems that could deliver a nuclear warhead to any part of the United States. And this, to me, is actually really for many reasons why we have to eliminate the clear weapons. It can make a case about that very strongly. But in the case of North Korea, it seems utterly crazy to me that you have a country like the United States, which let's for just the moment imagine that we live in a world free of nuclear weapons who's going to attack the United States. We've got the oceans, we've got the conventional military. I've actually heard of our mutual friend Professor Jeffery Sachs said that the United States could be the safest country in the history of humanity. But in a world with nuclear weapons, we are so vulnerable and we're not just vulnerable with however you want to classify Russia and China, but let's call them adversaries or near peer adversaries. We're vulnerable to them, but we're also vulnerable to country like North Korea, which is relatively small, relatively poor. This is not a world superpower. And yet North Korea could destroy the United States as we know it. Where is Iran? This is such a heavily politicized question, but there's got to be a science-based answer. Where is Iran on the continuum toward getting a nuclear weapon? Iran has been enriching uranium to 60%, which is you don't need that for nuclear power. It is not quite weapons grade, although if you wanted to make a weapon, you actually could make a weapon even out of the highly enriched uranium they currently have. Now, my understanding is that they, and I actually listened to their statements in venues like the nuclear nonproliferation treaty meetings at the UN, they always say they're not interested in building nuclear weapons. They do emphasize that their religion requires them not to pursue nuclear weapons. I actually think that they're not pursuing nuclear weapons. How hard would it be? I mean, they have every incentive to any country that has its capital city bond probably wants a nuclear deterrent. I would think, it just common sense, how hard is it given where they are right now technologically? How hard would it be for them to build nuclear weapons? I don't think it would be very hard. I think if they wanted a nuclear weapon, they could have had it a long time ago. How hard in general is it to build one? It is hard. It is a huge investment of resources, both human and financial resources. It is a hard thing to do. It's not a garage project. It's not something that's going to evade, especially if we were to pursue nuclear disarmament, especially in the world of today's technologies. It would be very relatively easy to track activity, to set up inspections, to do the kinds of things that would rid the world of this threat. Right after 9-11, we heard a lot about the potential for a dirty bomb, nuclear material with conventional explosives attached that would pollute an area. What would that look like? Is that an actual threat? I think that remains a threat. I think that woke up some people in the early 2000s to think a little bit about the threat of nuclear weapons. Interestingly, it was in 2007. I think this sort of terrorist threat was a big part of why they did this. It brought Kissinger and George Schultz, both of whom were former secretaries of under Republican presidents, as well as Bill Perry, Department of Secretary of Defense, under Bill Clinton and Sam Nana, a long time Democratic senator from Georgia. Brought the four of them together in 2007, they wrote the first of a series of articles in the Wall Street Journal titled Something Like Toward the World Free of Nuclear Weapons, in which they actually make the case for both why we need a world free of nuclear weapons and why the United States should lead that effort. Can I ask a dumb question I should have asked before? You've said it's been long-standing policy for over 70 years that if the United States believes they're incoming nuclear missiles, that it will strike the country of origin. What's the thinking there? I've never questioned that, but if you think about it, I mean, if there's nothing you can do to stop. I think so much of this is actually I love there's a quote from Daniel Ellesberg who released the Pentagon Papers in this best known for that. He passed away a little over a year ago or so. Daniel Ellesberg after that kind of effort to end the Vietnam war really ended up spending decades speaking about nuclear disarmament and nuclear weapons issues. In his book, The Doomsday Machine, there's a quote I really, really love. He says that nuclear weapons policies, current past and current are dizzingly insane anymore. That's really all I have to say in response to why would we, if we think we're being attacked by one or two nuclear warheads, why would we send 82 to North Korea? I think- Well, I mean, if there's some way to stop the nuclear attack, then of course. If it's them or us, I'm for us. However, if there's no way to stop the missiles from coming up, if there really is no technology that allows that, then what is the point of killing a hundred million other people? Yeah, if you're going to die. It's a really, it's a really good question. I think one has been debated. So nuclear deterrence has kind of become a sort of mantra. So you just step back for a second. I think one of the problems we have currently in this country, is number one, most people are not aware of this threat. Don't understand nuclear weapons, don't understand what they could do. Sometimes when I speak or write or people will respond, oh, I remember that can cover when I was in school. People of a certain generation still sort of have a sense for what is going on, but many young people are just utterly unaware. There is a section of society, however, that is aware and understands what nuclear weapons are and understand some of the basic facts that we've been talking about and so on, but has been convinced by this idea that nuclear deterrence works and nuclear weapons keep us safe. And that's just all there is to it and there's just no way to undo or put the genie back in the bottle or any of that. And the truth is that there are many problems with nuclear deterrence. The first and kind of to me most fundamental is that there is quite simply no plan B for what happens if nuclear deterrence fails. It's just kind of like an autopilot, you know, we're under attack, we're going to attack them. And even if you think about a scenario which somehow actually managed whoever the enemies are, we managed to disarm them or disable or even if we somehow magically had a dome over the country, which by the way we're not going to it's never going to work. We've tried this and there's just no way to actually do that. But even if we did to destroy such an enemy, right, we would need to use so many hundreds or thousands of warheads that we would create nuclear winter, we'd create those on layered destruction. It would be in the Cold War, we call it the Mutallious Shirt Destruction or Mad. It is actually always sad. It's always self assured destruction. If you're going to go into nuclear war, whether or not you end up getting attacked, you're going to create conditions that are going to actually destroy your own nation. I just want to tell you a story about the United States. So this, you know, the claim that I made a little earlier about the United States actually having in my mind, having the most to gain from pursuing a world free of nuclear weapons. I was at a place called Walton Park. It's in the United Kingdom. It was like being in a Jane Austen novel. It's a place where the UK's Foreign Ministry basically brings experts, diplomats, academics and so on to discuss various issues all year long. One week a year, they devote to this nuclear non-proliferation treaty diplomacy. I was invited there last December. These meetings are held. It was about 30 of us actually spoke, but it's a large room. It's about 80 people. It was all very, very interactive. In one such exchange, I actually made this case that the United States has the most to gain from a world free of nuclear weapons. These meetings are held under what's called Chatham House rules. I can talk about what happened, but I can't talk about who said it. So I'm not going to say who said it. But a person responded to me and I had made a comment to their remarks and then made this comment about the US. And this person responded to me after which I wasn't allowed according to the rules to respond. So I'll tell you what the response was. The response was, you're right and I was shocked that they accepted this. You're right that the United States would be safer in a world free of nuclear weapons, but our allies would not be. And so because I was not allowed to respond in the room, I waited until it was after that session had ended. In the lunch line, I approached this person and I said, how would the American people feel if you told them that we're not pursuing nuclear disarmament because of our allies? And take a guess what he responded to me. I don't think he cares with the American people. Now he said, now you sound like Trump. And I said, that's not an answer. He goes, a person goes, you want an answer? There would be no Europe. It would all be Mother Russia. So there's this, the idea. But they're deranged. But seriously, like how are we accepting to be under mortal threat as a nation, as a people, as humanity all the time, JFK had another, he had so many brilliant statements and quotes and so on. Another one was like humanity was not meant to live in a prison awaiting its final destruction. I mean, that was his view was like we're all just sitting in this prison awaiting the nuclear war destroying our world. It does seem like we're, there's been this thing, the doomsday clock and I don't know how take that very seriously because like how would you measure that? But just watching the rhetoric carefully, it has changed since the Ukraine war started. And you're seeing, I saw a credit piece by some lunatic at the Atlantic Council recently suggesting that we, you know, engage in a limited nuclear strike. Absolutely insanity. And so the taboo around using nuclear weapons, at least in this country, has almost evaporated. Like what is that? Yeah, I mean, I think the taboo is still there. But I think some people are definitely pushing, pushing the envelope and pretending as if we really can fight and win a nuclear war. So maybe I'll be the win. What, oh, I of course agree. What does that mean though, technically a limited nuclear strike? I think people think that you could have exchanges on say say that we gave Ukraine a few kind of low energy yield and low energy yield means Hiroshima bombs or that kind of size and near range that you could use in a battlefield. Nuclear weapons. And people have called for that. I think that's in discussion. I mean, I think anyone who discusses that should be in prison for treason. I agree. Yeah, any policy maker who advocates for that is is imperiling our entire nation and world. And that's a crime. Yeah. No, in the fall of 2022, after the start of the Ukraine war, there were serious discussions in the White House. And then estimate from the Biden administration that there was a 50% chance of nuclear weapons use over the war. The war you know, your teacher Columbia, I mean, you must know some of the people in the Biden White House. I mean, like what? I actually don't. Okay, they don't want to talk to you. But I mean, these are supposedly adults, Jake Sullivan, you know, Tony Blinken, like what are they thinking? I mean, the closest I come to is when I when I try to speak to diplomats, these are people mostly from the state department or from the US mission to the United Nations, or examples like the one a game from Wilton Park. I've also spoken to diplomats from other nuclear weapon states, including like a UK diplomat where it was making this case that you know, nuclear deterrence could fail. And because yeah, you're right. And I said, and then what, you know, we destroyed the entire human civilization, we destroyed the planet with making it in hospitable to not just human life and that's not going to happen. So they not only don't have a plan B for if nuclear deterrence fails, they also really don't want to think about it, right? Like to them, the solution is just you just keep going. And to me, it's just unfathomable to me, the idea that we're kind of putting all of our eggs in this nuclear deterrence basket when we actually recognize that things could go wrong, not just deliberately, not just because someone decided to implement the strike, but because accidents could happen, because a missed calculation could happen. Besides the Cuban Missile Crisis, besides these absolutely ridiculous stupid accidents in the in the 50s and even the 60s. In the 1980s, we had two incidents in 1983, the first one in September, the second one in November, where we quite literally, you know, could have had the start of a nuclear war. One was called Able Archer that was in November. That was a NATO exercise that had become, they had actually added some new kind of elements of realism that were interpreted them by the Soviets for the real thing. And they thought they were under attack. They started quite literally, you know, putting nuclear warheads onto missiles and were ready to attack. And thankfully, that was, it didn't go all the way. In September, there was an incident where an officer in the Soviet army in some military base that was monitoring whether the Soviet Union was under attack received literally like a computer glitch five signals in the row that warheads were coming towards the Soviet Union from the United States. And it turns out those glitches came from an alignment between high altitude clouds and satellites. So something that had not been predicted or accounted for. And according to the computers, the Soviet Union was under attack. This person, his name was Captain Stanley Slav Petrov, had decided this was a false alarm and actually, you know, didn't pass the information onto his superiors, thus averting nuclear war. The Cuban Missile Crisis incident that I was describing with the submarine, that's often referred to the man who saved the world. And then Petrov is also sometimes referred to as the man who saved the world. We've quite simply been, have had so many incidences where we just actually got lucky. And there are scholars who really kind of study all of these examples who say, no, no, no, it's not the nuclear deterrence work. It's that we have really been very lucky. Not all countries that have nuclear weapons are the same though. Some are clearly a greater threat, not because they're more evil necessarily, but because they're more unstable. And the UK, I would say, is a perfect, you know, authoritarian country, a failed state in a lot of ways that's got rioting in the streets, clearly in a very steep downward trajectory. Why should we sit back and allow, like the UK to have nuclear weapons? It actually gets much better than that. The UK has nuclear warheads, they're their own nuclear warheads, but the only way they can launch them is using US delivery systems. And so it's not just that they have them. It's that actually will help them to have a viable, you know, quote, unquote nuclear deterrent. So it's that one's actually in our corner squarely. And we just recently transferred or began transferring some nuclear warheads onto UK soil. It was something we used to do, and then we removed them and now we brought them back. Why would we do that? I don't know. In a country that's collapsing, that will not be there in current form in 20 years. That seems very reckless. I mean, when the Soviet Union collapsed in 91, they moved nuclear warheads out of a bunch of different satellites, states, including Ukraine. Ukraine and Belarus and Kazakhstan. Right. And when South Africa, you know, ended the part date in 1994, they moved the yeah, moving nuclear weapons out. So, but we're moving nuclear weapons into an increasingly volatile country. We actually have, so it's we of course have our own nuclear weapons. And then we have on our territory as well as in the submarines that travel all around the planet. And we also have nuclear warheads in five other years now, six, because it's clear we brought some back to the United Kingdom. We have them in Germany, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands and Turkey. To me, we have any in Romania? Not to my knowledge, not to my knowledge. To me, you look at a globe, and you look at how small Europe is, nuclear weapons in Europe are just about the craziest thing that you could be doing. And they're all aimed at Russia? They are, yeah, many of them would need kind of bombers planes to be delivered. I mean, they're there to determine what their to deter Russia. I mean, what some country like Belgium is doing with nuclear weapons, because really all you would need is like, Belgium is so small. You'd need like 10 nuclear warheads to destroy all of Belgium. So there's never Belgium ever again. It's real insanity. Well, Belgium can't even settle its own ethnic disputes internally. Yeah. Yeah. So wow, this it doesn't seem like removing in the right direction. We're not moving in the right direction. Also, there are some Yeah, so wow, this it doesn't seem like removing in the right direction and we're not moving in the right direction. Although there there are some developments in the international scene. So let me just make this case for you know for the US just to underscore this point that the US has a lot to gain from this. So in 2007, Kishan Jirstwold's Perry, none they write this article they say the US should be leading the world. Towards the world free of nuclear weapons the US has a lot to gain from this. And then it was I think that whole in 2010 there was actually a review conference of the nuclear non proliferation treaty that actually had come up with a kind of action plan that was very promising. It was a 13 step towards the world free of nuclear weapons kind of action plan with sort of very specific both a kind of set of goals and timelines and so on. And then by 2015 all of that had collapsed and it's large part because of what happened in Ukraine in 2014. Now we start to see this you know the stress between the United States and Russia. It's again it's no longer you know maybe we're working together to rid the world of the threat which was really the goal of both Reagan and Gorbachev instead now we're adversaries again. And now in some sense the international community is sort of locked in on kind of living in a world which could end at any point. And it was really a group a large group of states on this was an effort that was beginning right around that time. And that focused on what people refer to as humanitarian consequences of nuclear weapons. So this is again going back to what have nuclear weapons done to people in Hiroshima Nagasaki. What have they done through these nuclear so called nuclear testing programs to 2000 explosions around the planet. And what is the research the kind of stuff that I've been describing nuclear winter or some layer destruction so on that tells us about what is it stake in the world with nuclear weapons. So these states started you know negotiating eventually and agreement which is called the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons that was negotiated in 2017 and it's an international treaty that entered into force in 2021 and that currently has 73 states parties. And then other 25 signatories so in the international agreement there serve two levels one is the signatory ahead of state or someone like a foreign minister signs and that signals to the country is sort of ready to commit to these things in principle. And then a ratification follows often through national legislative bodies. Whatever the rules of a particular country are and after ratification the country is actually committed to everything outlined in the agreement. So the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons or TPNW basically arose now almost 10 years ago and has been active since entering into force in 2021. And the goals of the treaty are quite simply to prohibit any and all activities having to do with nuclear weapons. And the idea here is that the countries that are part of it so clearly none of the nuclear arms states are part of it and I would say not yet. But the idea here is that because of things like nuclear winter because of things like radiation that spreads all around the planet. These countries are saying that you know your nuclear arsenals are not just a threat to your enemies or to your own populations. They're actually a threat to all of us as well and we want to say in the fact that you currently hold the ability to destroy the world. I think they want to say that they're not getting one because nobody cares. So if you're North Korea it's like why do we care what you think if you're the United States why do we care what you think. I mean it does seem like the way that states deal with each other encourages everybody to get a nuclear weapon. We don't boss North Korea around anymore because they have nuclear weapons. We just killed a bunch of people including civilians in Tehran and there's nothing they can do about it because they don't have nuclear weapons. So those are law of the jungle rules which I object to as a Christian but they seem in force. Like I don't know what you do about that. So I think the idea that I think to me it is nuclear deterrence that is the problem in and of itself because if we're going to continue to claim that we have nuclear weapons because they keep a safe then absolutely everything you just said follows from that right. Every country they can should acquire nuclear weapons for itself to keep itself safe. That is of course preposterous because we agree. But I would flip it around. By the way I just wanted to say I'm arguing with you because I don't think any of this will work but I share your views on the goals. I mean I think the weapons are evil. I think they're actually probably inspired by supernatural forces that's my view and I think they've wrecked the world already. However, I just know the way people are and I don't think that people have nuclear weapons in order to secure their own safety. I think they have nuclear weapons to ensure their own power. I have at times described it as a license to be bad. Well of course. In this license to do everything we really really really bad. I mean I think from my perspective kind of looking through the history it's been actually really interesting to study. You mentioned the Doomsday Clock. So let me just say something for a minute or two about that for people who don't know. So the Doomsday Clock is something to the bulletin of the Atomic Scientists which was founded by the likes of Einstein and the Oppenheimer. So on who were very worried about the threat of nuclear weapons. In the mid 1940s they founded this organization in 1947. They were publishing their first like issue of the bulletin and they asked an artist. Mark the little Langdorf Langstorf or something to draw cover. And she just she drew cover with a clock with the time showing seven minutes to midnight because she thought we would serve. You know that was a kind of good representation of how dangerous things were with midnight representing this sort of nuclear Armageddon end of the world. And over time the clock sort of became something that they would annually sort of adjust and became a kind of indicator of where we are in terms of the dangers. Also over time they added other existential threats to their considerations of the time of the clock. Currently the clock is 89 seconds to midnight. And we can totally talk about always this you know like how do you make sense of these numbers and so on. I don't really see them as I don't see them literally as oh it's 89 seconds to midnight and that's somehow mean something. I see them as relative numbers so are we for example one way you can think about it is at the beginning versus at the end of a presidency right our is the is the doomsday clock. Further or closer to midnight and I did this little analysis since 1947 we've had 14 presidents interestingly seven Republicans and seven Democrats. Very interestingly only under five presidents as the clock actually moved away from midnight. And those five were four Republicans Eisenhower Nixon Reagan and Bush senior and only one Democrat John you can probably guess John F Kennedy. Those are the ones paid for it. And so under Republican administrations there has been a move. Cumulative move away from midnight of something like 19 minutes and 10 seconds over time. The farthest we've ever been from midnight was in 1991 it was 17 minutes to midnight. So we've really done a lot of damage since and Democrats have actually brought the clock closer to midnight by actually I got those numbers Democrats 19 minutes and 10 seconds staggering 19 minutes and 10 seconds towards midnight and Republicans 13 minutes and 39 seconds away from midnight. So on the whole the Republicans have been much better than Democrats and I think we have to I think for this country first and foremost the general public needs to be aware of what's at stake. And needs to hold its leaders responsible. I think President Trump is is probably since John F Kennedy and then arguably Reagan as well who was very committed to this after a certain point in his presidency. President Trump is the only one who said who has said things like we have so many nuclear weapons we could destroy the world with them. He has questioned our plans to modernize the nuclear arsenals and spend actually a tremendous amount of money on them. So I think that the US public can ask you just what would be the thinking behind quote modernizing the nuclear arsenals. Oh that's those are plans that have been set in place for more than 10 years those are plans that have been made under President Obama. President Obama got up in Prague and talked about the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons in 2008. And then more or less turned around and made plans for modernizing the US nuclear arsenal. The logic is that our weapons are going to get to all them we need new ones. But the price tag is currently estimated up to $2 trillion but given the overruns and all kinds of ways in which these types of programs can go over budget. Who knows we're literally talking about spending trillions of dollars to perfect the way of destroying the world. I mean is anyone saying that our current nuclear arsenals just wouldn't work? I think it's a plan over a decade or two of kind of replacing. I do think that they've in some sense consistently been updating but this is a whole other this is like a whole sort of new way of building them, making them. I mean this is a lot of this is pay off to the fence contract. It's driven by the military industrial complex. No doubt about it. They, you know, this is a very important, you know stream of income for them. The US not only spends more on defense than the next 10 countries combined. We also spend more on nuclear weapons than all countries. They have them combined. So I think here's my conclusion to everything that you've said. I mean I agree with your goals vehemently. I think the and I but I don't know how to achieve them. I'm skeptical of treaties because people ignore them or won't sign them or whatever. I do think the first step toward any change begins with articulating the truth. Yeah. And stigmatizing, re-stigmatizing the use of nuclear weapons. Anyone who is even suggesting or thinking about or opening the possibility of using nuclear weapons is a threat to the world. And that's certainly worse than cigarette smoking or drunk driving or any other crime that we have least stigmatized in this country. Absolutely. And that person should be like disinvited from every dinner party. And like you should look at that person and scream criminal at him because it's what he is. And let's just start there. Yeah. If I let it cigarette in an elevator, I am a criminal. And I'm treated like one. Man, if you did that and someone caught you on video like you lose your job, I just cigarette an elevator. But if you get up at the Atlantic Council, you're like, we need to use like, you know, low yield nuclear weapons on the battlefield in Ukraine or a lot of them in D'Arussia to win the Eastern provinces back. It's like, whoa, we'll debate it. No, no, you're evil and you're a threat to the world. Like maybe we just start there with social sanction. Absolutely. I think we also have to in some sense stigmatize the very idea that somehow nuclear weapons are a symbol of progress, of advancement, of, you know, success. I think I really do think that the ability to destroy humanity should be seen as a symbol of shame. If fireballs are not progress actually. No, I don't think so. There's a symbol of hell. Yeah, absolutely. Pope Francis was actually a strong supporter of the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons. And he wrote the clared stated more than once that the mere possession of nuclear weapons was immoral. In my mind, this is quite simply the, really the most important issue in the world. Because everything else is, you know, not going to get solved if we destroyed the world in a nuclear war. Most mistakes are fixable. This one is absolutely. And I, you know, I mentioned Jeffrey Sachs before as well. We were at the Vatican together last November. And he said something like, we can fix all these other things unless we blow ourselves up. And that's quite simply what we're facing. And without the general public really waking up to the realities of what we're facing, people were very engaged in the 1960s. Some of that general public engagement was really key to Kennedy actually getting the atmosphere. Test ban treaty pass because it needed to be ratified by the Senate. And the senators were absolutely not interested in passing this. He just he galvanized the general public. He went on a kind of two months tour speaking to people about the issue. And by the time the Senate voted, there wasn't 81 to 18 senator vote. I mean, it was an absolute wipe out. Well, again, I would refer you to the end of that story. Yeah. He was replaced by maybe the worst president in American history who fought who embraced not just the Vietnam War, but nuclear prophration. Yeah. Professor, I really appreciate this. I hope every member of the U.S. Senate sees it. And I hope you keep trying to stigmatize the most obvious evil I can think of, which is nuclear war. Thank you so much. Thank you for having me. Oh, my gosh. Thank you. We've got a new website. We hope you will visit. It's called new commission now dot com and refers to a new 911 commission. So we spent months putting together our 911 documentary series. And if there's one thing we learned, it's that in fact, there was foreknowledge of the attacks. People knew. The American public deserves to know. We're shocked actually to learn that to have that confirmed, but it's true. The evidence overwhelming. The CIA, for example, knew the hijackers were here in the United States. They knew they were planning an act of terror. In his passport is a visa to go to the United States of America. A foreign national was caught celebrating as the World Trade Center fell. And later said he was in New York, quote, to document the event. I didn't know there would be an event to document in the first place because he had foreknowledge. And maybe most amazingly, somebody in unknown investor shorted American Airlines and United Airlines, the companies whose planes the attackers used a 911, as well as the banks that were inside the twin towers just before the attacks. They made money on the 911 attacks because they knew they were coming. Who did that? We have to look at the evidence. The US government learned the name of that investor, but never released it. Maybe there's an inspiration for all this, but there isn't actually. And by the way, it doesn't matter whether there is or not, the public deserves to know what the hell that was. How did people know ahead of time, or I was no one ever punished for it. The 11 Commission, the original one, was a fraud. It was fake. It's conclusions are written before the investigation. That's true. And it's outrageous. This country needs a new 911 Commission, one that actually tells the truth to try to get to the bottom of the story. We can't just move on like nothing happened. 911 Commission. It's a couple. Something did happen. We need to force a new investigation into 911 almost 25 years later. Sorry, Justice demands it. And if you want that, go to newcommissionnow.com to add your name to our petition. We're not getting paid for this or do this because we really mean it. Newcommissionnow.com.