This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Blue Apron. Blue Apron is a really interesting new podcast sponsor that I really enjoy because I like cooking but I've always been pretty caveman-like in my cooking. I don't really use recipes. I don't buy cookbooks. I mean I've read some recipes online for certain things like I've smoked a hand before and things along those lines. It's kind of fun. But I never really set out and cooked meals under very specific or rigid instructions, you know, buying certain amount of recipe ingredients and measuring it out. I've never done that before Blue Apron. Blue Apron is a really unique program where they send you the food every week with detailed photographic directions. They send you the recipe. It's really easy to follow and it's delicious food. It's like it's like eating out at an interesting restaurant and you get to do it yourself so you get this cool sense of satisfaction after it's done. Here's how it works. For 9.9 per meal they'll send you the right ingredients in the exact right proportions with simple recipe instructions right to your door. Meals are between 500 and 700 calories per serving. Although you really wouldn't guess it because they're very delicious. You would think that you're cheating. Blue Apron includes step-by-step directions, excuse me. Blue Apron includes step-by-step instructions with pictures. So it's really idiot proof. I've made quite a few things now and I get new things that are delivered to me every week. New lists like this week. They have also vegetarian options as well. The vegetarian ones are like fresh gnocchi with I don't even know how do you say this kind of mushrooms. M-A-I-T-K-E-T-A-K-E. My Taki. My Taki mushrooms. Gnocchi and my Taki mushrooms are sweet corn and brown buttered thyme. Pepper Aripas. A-R-E-P. See it's all complicated crafty food. Chicken with candied pistachios and snow-pea radish saute. Indian style salmon with tomato chutney and cranberry bean stew. BLTs. Hayashi Chuku cold ramen chicken breast with shrimp and grits. Mexican style beef stuffed red bell peppers. Really yummy stuff. Really interesting stuff too and it's fun to cook. It's like a little project. I do it. It takes me about a half an hour for each meal and I enjoy it very much. And if you're into something like that you should try it out. Go to blueaepren.com forward slash rogan and you will get your first two meals for free. That's blueaepren.com forward slash root rogan. That's me R-O-G-A-N. Blueaepren.com forward slash rogan. You'll cook incredible meals and you will really appreciate the quality and the freshness of the food. It's fast, it's fresh and it's affordable. That's blueaepren.com forward slash rogan. We are also brought to you by stamps.com. Stamps.com is another one of our long-standing podcast sponsors that has been. I've heard nothing but positive responses about it. A lot of people use it. Brian Redband uses it to send all of his stuff from desquad.tv. A lot of our friends use stamps.com because it's a really easy way to send packages. Going to the post office can be a tremendous pain in the ass. And with stamps.com you can avoid that and you can print official U.S. postage directly from your computer either in your home or your office. They provide you with a digital scale. If you go to stamps.com and click on the microphone on the upper right hand corner and enter in the code word JRE you will get a free digital scale and up to $55 worth of free postage. It's a $110 offer. And when you get that digital scale you simply weigh your packages. Print up official U.S. postage with any normal computer printer. Slap that sucker right on the box and boom hand it to the postman and you're done. You don't have to deal with any of the nonsense that comes with going to an actual post office waiting in line getting stuff measured out. Stamps.com is more powerful than a postage meter and just a fraction of the cost of it. You will save up to 80% compared to a postage meter. I'll say that again because you're not going to believe it. You can save up to 80% compared to a postage meter. That's true and you'll avoid all the time consuming trips to the post office. We use stamps.com and stamps.com is an excellent choice if you have any sort of a home business or an office where you send things out of. It's way easier than going to the post office. Now when you go to stamps.com before you do anything click on the microphone and the top of the home page and type in JRE that stamps.com and enter the code word JRE for your $110 bonus offer which again includes up to $55 in free postage and a free digital scale that you're not supposed to use for mushrooms or we don't use that. Last but not least we are brought to you by Onnet.com that is ONNIT. If you have not heard on it has the latest and greatest in our kettlebell series. The new ones are called the Legend Kettlebells. We're out of zombie kettlebells for now. Getting them in but we now have the werewolf and the werewolf is pretty dopelicious and it is 62 pounds. All the kettlebells that we have the artistic kettlebells they are all 3D balanced and what that means by 3D balanced is they look cool but they're also balanced correctly. You don't want anything to be weighted too heavily on one side and that way it sort of defeats the whole purpose of making a kettlebell. They also have extra large handles for enhanced grip strength. I can't say it enough. I am a huge fan of working out with kettlebells. It is the main method that I use for strength and conditioning training and it's benefited me tremendously. What they are is they're essentially these giant balls of iron with these huge metal handles and you swing them around and in doing so it promotes what they call functional strength. We have several workout DVDs that are also for sale onnet.com and not just DVDs for kettlebells but also DVDs for sandbag workouts, DVDs for steel mace workouts, DVDs for just all sorts of different body weight training exercises as well. We have a huge selection now including my favorite which is the extreme kettlebell cardio workout DVD, the extreme kettlebell cardio 2, extreme 2 kettlebell cardio workout DVD which is the latest and greatest by Keith Weber who will be on the show next month. We also have a wide variety of supplements and foods, including hemp force protein, earth grown nutrients which is an excellent supplement to add to your morning shake to ensure you're getting your daily amount of greens, really super healthy stuff with antioxidants, powerful greens from both land and the sea wheatgrass, barley grass, oakgrass, kale, kelp, all sorts of different stuff. spirulina, alfalfa. Just the idea behind it, just getting as many nutrients into your body as you can especially earth grown nutrients, really healthy, natural, easy for your body to digest with five major components, all that listed at onnet.com and the other things along the food lines are the warrior bar which is another big favorite of mine which is natural organic buffalo meat, no antibiotics, no added hormones, it's buffalo meat, pressed in an ancient Lakota recipe with no added preservatives, the way it's done is the same way they used to do it probably more than a thousand years ago. It has only 140 calories but with 14 grams of protein and 4 grams of fat for every 2 ounce serving, very healthy and it doesn't feel you know you can satisfy your cravings and your hunger and you don't feel like it dummy for doing so. Go to onnet.com, o-n-n-i-t and use the code word Rogan and you will save 10% off any and all supplements. We are a human optimization website and even if you don't go to onnet and purchase things, there's just a huge source of interesting stuff at the onnet academy. Lots of fantastic workouts that you can check out and a lot of inspirational stuff, great articles. The onnet academy is one of the the newest and expanding forms at onnet not expanding forms but forms at onnet pages at onnet. Lots of really cool stuff there that you have that you could go there and just get it for free. But if you want to buy anything, use the code word Rogan and you'll save 10% off any and all supplements. All right, Rupert Sheldrake is here. Keep the music in Jamie. The Joe Rogan, experience. Thank you for your patience, Rupert. Robert Sheldrake, ladies and gentlemen. I came to know of you through the trial logs that you did with Terrence McKenna, who I'm a huge fan of and Ralph Abraham and I thought there were some really fascinating conversations and in all of Terrence's MP3s are very, very thought inspiring and made you really look at things from a very different and peculiar angle that he had a very unique way of looking at the world. But I came to know of you from that and I came to know of your ideas of morphic resonance, which I found to be really fascinating. And if you don't mind, just explain to folks at home listening what the concept of morphic resonance is. It's the idea of memory in nature. The idea that the whole universe has a kind of memory. The so-called laws of nature and more like habits. Each individual in his species draws on a collective memory and contributes to it. It works on the base of similarity. Any pattern of activity that's similar to a later pattern of activity in a self-organising system influences it across space and time. So what it means in effect is that if you train rats to learn a new trick in Los Angeles, then rats in New York and Sydney and London will learn the same thing quicker, straight away. There's actually evidence that this surprising effect happens. If you crystallise a new chemical that's never existed before, then after you've made it in one place, it should get easier to crystallise all over the world. So it's really a theory of habit and memory and it enables new patterns of learning to spread quicker than they might otherwise do. And it means that it should get easier to learn things that other people have already learned. So this has been proven, this concept of rats being able to learn one thing in New York quicker because they learned it already in San Francisco? Yes, I mean it wasn't done to test morphic resonance which is still very controversial. It was done to test something else. It was done years ago before the Second World War, a professor at Harvard called William McDougall, wanted to find out if rats could learn quicker what their parents had learned. So he trained these rats to escape from a water maze, they had to swim. If they went out the wrong exit, they got an electric shock and if they went out the right exit, the wrong one was lit up with a light, the other one was dim. If they went out the right exit, they just escaped from the maze. And he tested them to see how many trials they made before they learned, always gave out of the dim exit. And the first generation took about 250 trials before they cottoned on what was happening. The next generation it was about 180 trials, the next generation about 150. They got better and better. And he thought at first this was because there was something being passed on to the children maybe through modifying the genes or something like that. And inheritance for client characters. That was a kind of taboo in 20th century science. And so people questioned his work but because he was at Harvard and because he was a famous professor, they couldn't just dismiss it. He showed a huge effect. So people tried repeating his work in the University of Edinburgh, Scotland and Melbourne, Australia. And they found that their rats started more or less where the Harvard rats had left off. And in Melbourne they did an experiment that was particularly interesting. They went on getting better, the ones that were descended from the train parents in each generation. But they found that all rats of that breed even if their parents had never been trained were getting better too. So whatever it was it wasn't something to with modifying the genes or what people would now call epigenetics. There was something else much more mysterious going on. And since they were new what it was, it was just ignored and forgotten. That is really fascinating. So that would kind of make sense that if somehow or another, the genes or whatever that is in the rat is able to communicate with other of the same species, of a similar genetics of whatever it is that they're doing, whatever undefined thing that they're doing, connecting with them, even across continents, across the other side of the planet. Yes. Wow. That's right. And so the same would, I think the same happens in evolution naturally, in nature. There was a famous case with birds called blue tits in England, an American who called them chickadees. That in the 1920s started raiding milk bottles. In Britain we had then and we still have a system where you get fresh milk delivered to your doorstep every day in a bottle and then they washed the bottles and used them as a great system. We have it right now in London. So in the 1920s they had cardboard tops on these bottles and someone noticed in Southampton that the cream at the top of their bottle had disappeared. The top had been torn up and the cream had disappeared. And when they watched they saw that every morning these blue tits in Southampton had figured out they could tear off this cardboard strip and get free cream every morning. Then everyone was sort of interested in this. Then it turned up many, many miles away in another part of Britain. Then it turned up somewhere else. Blue tits don't fly very far. They're home-loving birds and they don't migrate. So scientists got interested and they set up a network all over Britain of people to observe this habit and they got reports. It was coordinated from Cambridge University and they mapped the spread of the habit and it became clear that it was spreading faster and faster and it was being independently invented in other parts of Britain. So much so that the professor of biology at Oxford, Sir Alice De Hardy suggested it must be happening by telepathy that it was spreading too quickly. And the most interesting records are from Holland because they started happening in Holland as well. And during the war Holland was occupied by the Germans and milk deliveries stopped. They didn't start again till about 1948. About seven or eight years after they stopped. Blue tits only lived three or four years. So there would have been no blue tits after the war that remembered the golden age of free cream. So when the milk deliveries began again in Holland they started drinking the cream or made straight away all over Holland. So I would say this is a kind of collective memory that spread by Morphe Residence and was remembered by Morphe Residence. And that's another example of this going on in the real world. Incidentally they've now stopped doing it. They used to steal our cream in London until about ten years ago when we switched to semi skim milk. There isn't any cream on bottles of semi skim milk and blue tits have more or less given up in Britain now because so many people have switched to semi skim milk they don't get any cream. It's not worth the effort. So at the habit it's died out. That's pretty fascinating. The idea that human beings start off as a blank slate has really been questioned quite a bit over the last generation. And genetics in particular they're starting to understand that there's certain particular traits and memories that you can actually learn from your parents. Like there was one study they did with mice where they had taken mice and they had given them an electric shock and coincided that electric shock with a smell of citrus. Like there was electric shock in their feet. Do you wear this test? Yes I am. It was published in Nature and with the provocative title inheriting the fears of fathers. It's a very, very fascinating study. Amazing stuff. I mean that I think could be partly due to Morphe Residence. Have you explained it to people before? No please do. I don't actually know how but please do. Well what they did was they used a chemical, a synthetic chemical called acetophenone that smells sort of vaguely fruity but it's something that mice would never have encountered in nature because it's a synthetic chemical. And they took male mice and exposed them to smell of acetophenone and they gave them a mild electric shock on their poor when they smelt this stuff. And the result is classical Pavlovian conditioning. You know a few times of that happening and as soon as they smelt acetophenone they were terrified. It's perfectly standard stuff in science. What wasn't standard was they then bred from these mice and they did some of the experiments using artificial insemination so that the mothers never even met the fathers of the next generation. And then they tested their children and their grandchildren and whenever they smelt acetophenone they were just paralyzed with fear. So they inherited the fear of this chemical in a single generation in a way that regular science simply can't explain. And this went far beyond anything anyone would have expected. There's evidence from the details of the experiments that it involves some changes in the sperm, some change in the genes or the epigenetics which is the packaging of the genes. But no one can conceive how a mouse learning to avoid the smell and being frightened by it, all that no one knows how all that information could be transferred into genes and the sperm. So I think at least part of the explanation of this is morphic resonance that if you make some animals averse to something then other animals are the same kind will be frightened of it. I did a very similar experiment actually years ago with a skeptical scientist in Britain called Stephen Rose. We had a controversy in the Guardian newspaper. I used to write a column in the Guardian and I wrote a thing about the nature of memory and how morphic resonance helps to explain it. We could discuss that later if you like. But Rose was outraged by this. He'd spent his whole career working on memories saying it must be inside the brain and he worked with Dale Chicks. And in the Guardian he wrote a response to my article and challenged me to do an experiment in his laboratory under his supervision to test what he called the seemingly absurd hypothesis. Well what the experiment we did we had Dale Chicks and Dale Chicks pack at anything bright. So we had them pack at a silver bead and after the silver bead they were injected with saline solution it was just a control. They didn't feel ill or everything was fine. We also had them pack at a yellow light emitting diode and after they'd packed at that the chicks that had packed at the yellow light emitting diode were injected with something that made them feel sick. Let the implore ido think it was. It made them feel sick. It didn't kill them. It just made them feel ill. And you know if you ever eat anything and you feel sick after it you never want to eat that thing again. It's a it's called condition diversion. So these chicks when you tested them a day or two later they would avoid yellow lights but they'd pack at the chrome bead the silver bead which hadn't made them sick. And that's straight forward they learned to avoid it. But what I predicted was that in some we if we did the experiment over and over again every day we get a new batch of fresh chicks and test them with the yellow light emitting diode and the chrome bead. I predicted that they'd start avoiding the yellow light emitting diode but not the chrome bead because of the influence by morphic resonance from previous chicks. They'd start avoiding it even before they'd been made a verse to it for the first time they were exposed to it. They they wouldn't go for it. They'd be more wary of it. And that's exactly what happened in this experiment. So this is actually something that's well known in the rat poison industry. I mean most people haven't spent much time looking into the rat poison industry in how it works but one thing that happens to people who try to poison rats through a living is that if you try some new kind of bait with a particular flavour, rats eat it and they get sick and they die. But it works for a while but after a while rats start avoiding it they become what's called in the bait shy and not just in one place but the bait stops working you know miles and miles away so they have to keep inventing new baits. That's why most rat poison now is based on warfare in which causes bleeding, fins that blood and causes bleeding and it doesn't usually affect the rats for days after they've eaten it. They don't associate it with any particular flavour because it's slow acting. That's why people have had to switch to warfare in as the main rat poison because this aversion to things that poison and became so strong. And there's something that actually some people who are listening to us might know about which I heard about from a guy in America who fishes for bass and he was telling me there's a constant development of new lures for bass fishing I did you do do this? Yes, I have fish quite a bit. Well apparently people are always inventing new lures that work very well for a while and apparently they stop working and not just in one place but elsewhere so there's a constant development of new lures. Now if that could be documented that might be another very interesting case of morphic resonance if bass keep getting caught and they're in pain when they're caught by being fished with a particular kind of lure then other bass later even in different rivers or lakes when they see that there would be more of us to biting it so it stops working. So I think there could be many examples of this out there in the real world. When did you come up with this concept? Is this your concept, the concept of morphic resonance? Yes yes I came up with this in 1973 long time ago I was doing research at Cambridge University on plant development, hard plants grow and I became convinced through a variety of reasons that the attempt to explain the whole thing just in terms of genes and molecules and proteins wouldn't work. I was at the very leading edge of this so I mean the main plant hormone is called oxen, au-x-i-n and I figured out how it's made and then I figured out how it's transplanted transported around the plant and this was a massive advance and this is kind of textbook stuff now in university textbooks the mechanism of polar oxen transport. So having figured all that out I then realized this wasn't enough to explain plants because all plants have the same hormone in it's moved in the same way in every plant and it's moved the same way in petals and leaves and stems and roots and it's moved the same way in palms and cabbages and roses and yet they're all different. So I got interested in something in biology called morphogenetic fields, the idea of invisible fields that shape living organisms so there's like an invisible mold as a flower grows it's kind of an invisible mold that shapes the way the petals develop and the flower develops or as a leaf grows that's kind of invisible mold for that leaf called a morphogenetic field like a kind of invisible plan. This idea was not invented by me to be in a rounded biology since the 1920s but the key thing was to understand how these fields could be inherited and I was sure it wouldn't go through the genes the genes just caved for proteins so they had to be some other kind of inheritance how could it work and I was wrestling with this idea in Cambridge and then the idea of morphic resonance came to me if you have a resonance across time between similar things you could explain this inheritance of form and of instincts and animals in a non-genetic way which would give a completely new way of understanding biology and inheritance. I then realized that this would apply to learning and memory and many aspects of human behavior so I wrote this up in a book called A New Science of Life which was published in 1981 it took me years to think this through I realized that it would be controversial so I had to be very sure of myself before I could write about it. Then I wrote another book called The Presence of the Past which puts the theory forward in its fullest form and that's my main theoretical book and since then I've really been trying to develop these ideas, test them, do experiments and so on. Anyway it was my idea in the first place and since then it's become widely discussed in many areas. When you say that you had to be sure of it what did you do that made you sure of it? What kind of testing have you done to sort of hammer out this concept of morphic resonance? Well there were two aspects to being sure about it. The main objection that I got from my colleagues in the scientific world especially in biology was not that not what's the evidence they didn't say what's the evidence they just said this idea is unnecessary because we're going to figure everything out in terms of genes and molecular biology. So one line of research I had to do was to see whether the conventional approach in biology was likely to work or not. And so I had think really deep about standard science is this going to work? They just said give us time we'll figure it all out. We don't need new ideas. We basically everything's fine the way it is. And that's what led in the 1980s to people formulating the human genome project and which culminated in the year 2000 with the publication of the human genome. So they thought that that was adequate to explain once they got into the human genome, once they mapped it out, they were going to be able to explain pretty much everything about human being. That's right. They actually thought that and that's why there was a huge investment. Hundreds of billions of dollars were invested in genomics and biotechnology on the grounds that genes explain everything. One gene, one characteristic, there's a gene for everything. If you can figure out the genes and manipulate the genes, basically you can control life. And if you can own the genes or own patents on the genes, you can make billions of dollars. That was the thinking and that was almost everybody was into that. But I was convinced that genes were grossly overrated that they couldn't do most of these things that people thought they could. Because what genes do is code for the sequence for amino acids and proteins, protein molecules which make up. these things that people thought they could. Because what genes do is code for the sequence of amino acids in proteins, protein molecules which make up our muscles and you know the blood cells and they're the enzymes and so on a major part of life, are coded for by genes. But there's a huge difference between making the right proteins and the shape of your nose for example or the instincts of a spider to spin a web. I mean it's like saying you could explain the structure of a building by knowing the chemistry of the bricks. I mean you have to have bricks and you have to have cement and timber and stuff to make a building. And if you have defective bricks you get a defective building but it doesn't explain the plan of the building, the shape of the building. So I was convinced that these things would never be explained by genes that we needed something like morphogenetic fields and morphic resonance to explain them. So part of thinking about this was thinking hard about what regular science could and could not achieve. And incidentally I'll come to the evidence in a minute but one of my predictions that this biotechnology thing would be a disaster. It would mean people lose huge amounts of money. I advise my friends if they're investors just don't bother you know the only way make money and this is by getting in on the bubble and selling out in time because it's not really going to lead to that many useful products. Why are you so convinced? Because I thought that the role of genes was totally overrated and this is in fact what's happened. Were you alone in this or were there other scientists? There are a few people but most people went along with this you know and it's interesting you see that the human genome project they expected they'd have about 100,000 it turned out when they finally announced it that there were only about 20,000 genes. We have less genes than the sea urchin and about half as many as a rice plant. That was a huge surprise to people and it soon became clear that it wasn't going to deliver on most of these promises. Craig Venter who had the private genome project which was a rival of the publicly funded one he's a very very competitive guy. He got there first you know he saw it as a race and he was going to win and he did and even though he was technically very successful and the publicly funded genome project was technically successful. Once they'd done it it became immediately apparent this information was almost useless and Craig Venter's his company, Celeridgee Namex, the shares collapsed in a few days from about $60 a share to about 12 cents a share and when he was interviewed after that he said he's got a great sense of humor he said I'm a guy who's made a million the hard way by working my way down from a billion. The thing is it didn't work and in around four or five years ago there was a development in science that most people haven't heard of yet outside science but it's really big within the scientific journals called the Missing Heritability Problem. What they did is they took the genomes of 30,000 different people because it's quite cheap now to sequence genomes. Sequenced about 30,000 genomes and to figure out what genes do what you know that they looked at the people 30,000 people they knew everything about and their height their diseases history and so forth. They started with height because height's easy to measure you just need to take measure and it's already known that tall parents tend to have tall children and short parents tend to have short children. You can predict the height of children when they're grown on the basis of the parents height with an accuracy of about 80 percent and in the technical language they say height is 80 percent heritable. Well they figured out the genes complete a genome of 30,000 different people they knew their height so they then ran all these correlations and statistics to figure out which genes were involved in height and they found about 50 genes were involved in controlling height then they suddenly found some were more important than others so they made their best models waiting some more than others and coming out with predictions and then they picked some people at random the genomes they did all their sums they'd identified the genes they ran the computer simulations and they predicted these people's height on the basis of their genome and then they looked up the height to see how good this method was it turned out they could predict height with an accuracy of 5 percent. Now you can do it with an accuracy of 80 percent just by using tape measures in a way that's billions of dollars cheaper. So the gap between the 5 percent and the 80 percent the 75 percent that's not explained by the genes is called the missing heritability problem and it turned out that the same was true of most diseases for it there's a few diseases where a defective gene gives a defective protein and you get a clear predictive value, cystic fibrosis is one of them sickle cell anemia's another so there's a few rare genetic diseases where this method works very well but for most diseases breast cancer cardiac problems the predictive value of the genome turned out to be only 5 to 10 percent and all these companies sprang up that would offer to sequence people's genomes and predict their diseases and the last one 23 and me was put out of business by the FDA just a few months ago because their advertising was misleading they cannot predict with more than about 10 percent accuracy the likelihood that you'll get a particular gene disease on the base of the genome except for these rare genetic disorders. So this company their entire business model was predicting people's vulnerability to certain diseases? I think that was their main business model I mean there are certain things where genome sequencing is still valuable and used you know if you want to find out what your racial background is you know where the genetic ancestors come from it's really good for that and it has very useful information. I'm not saying this is useless I'm saying it has limited uses but nothing like the bonanza of profits that people were expecting. There was a report by the Harvard Business School on this a few years ago on the biotech business and they said no one had ever invented such a massive money losing scheme in the history of humanity. So I think that's because it was based on false assumption of what genes do you see? That's fascinating what is the when when people hear about the experiment with the mice and the smell what's the smell call again? The acetone. What is the conventional explanation for this this memory being passed down into these animals that have never experienced that before through through breeding? Well there isn't really one you see because the it's something that people are likely surprised about because the idea that you could actually that you could give off the brain or or the nose or could actually give off influences that travel through the blood and selectively modify sperm changing genes or the packaging of genes nothing like that had been contemplated before and this suggests something going is going on that regular science doesn't know about and that's fine from the point of view of science I mean if you discover something new then you have to try and figure out how it works but no one really knows and this sort of pushes molecular biology beyond its limits really and people are working on this now and trying to figure out how it could happen. What are the conventional theories? Is there any well there aren't really I mean no one knows how smelling something could affect genes or the packaging of genes and even if they could even if you could say there would be a modification of the sperm to make people more so they offspring the mice that descend from those sperm more sensitive to acetone that doesn't necessarily explain why they'd be afraid of it I mean if they'd trained in a different way acetone could have they could have lit their lips and thought this means food so you've got quite a lot of explaining to do and how these genes or the packaging of them could influence the brain is way beyond anything we can understand it present so I think most people would say we just don't haven't figured it out yet and this is a fairly recent experiment too many years ago yes a few months ago yes it was published a few months ago how long did they work on this for though well I suppose they must have been working on it for several years before they're published it but I mean what's exciting in biology at the moment is that the standard off-the-shelf explanations that people used to have it's all genetically programmed and that kind of thing this is falling apart until the year 2000 there was a huge taboo in biology against the inheritance of acquired characteristics which means say a father builds up his muscles and becomes stronger at all lands particular skills the idea that the children could inherit that was considered impossible it they said no it's all inheritance is just genetic of course you get environmental inferences if if a dad takes it boys to weightlifting classes and stuff then obviously they'll become more muscular but the idea that it could be anything could be passed through the genes that had been learned or acquired was absolutely taboo it was a heresy in 20th century biology in the West interestingly in the Soviet Union they went the other way started like the idea that if people got better at things their kids would be better at them automatically they'd inherited and geneticists in the Soviet Union were persecuted and people who did research on the inheritance of acquired characteristics were well-funded and prestigious and this polarized things even more there was a kind of cold war in biology as well as in everything else but around the year 2000 it became clear that the really is an inheritance of acquired characteristics and has been rebranded epigenetic inheritance and it's now a really hot topic in biology and these mice inheriting the fear of their fathers experiments a part of this new wave of research on epigenetics and it turns out that a lot of things these Soviet biologists were claiming are actually true one of the things I think ought to happen is that somebody who knows Russian preferably someone who's in Russia goes back through these archives of Soviet biology from the 1920s 30s 40s and 50s when tens of thousands of biologists in the Soviet Union were working on what we now call epigenetic inheritance and it's a goldmine of information that could be dusted off and could be really helpful to science but nobody's done that yet because it's usually assumed the whole of that's being discredited and even Russians don't want to talk about it. That's so fascinating it's so fascinating that scientists are just now piecing together this new information just start putting it together and purely anecdotal evidence I have young daughters and they wrestle around together they play in the bed and laugh and joke and I've been doing jiu-jitsu since the 1990s and my daughters assumed jiu-jitsu positions I see them do it before I've taught them now but when they were little like three and four years old my my my my youngest would do what's over under control she would grab her back and grip like a certain way that you teach people to do and then she would throw her legs over it's called taking the back it's a it's a position a standard position in jiu-jitsu but it's not a normal position for people but she would automatically go to it pull my older daughter on top of her and take her back and it was the craziest thing to watch as a martial arts commentator someone who understands you know the correct way to do positions I would watch her do it I was like she knows what she's doing I don't think she knows why she knows what she's doing but she assumed a position that I've done countless times thousands of times in my life it automatically came to her and I'm like that has to be somehow or another in her code somehow or another it's gone from my body into her yes we exactly well there's a really really interesting case and you see I would call that morphic resonance that she's resonating with you she's got your genes you've got your proteins and those of her mother as well of course but this similarity to you means you'd be in a particularly strong resonance with you and would pick up things that you've acquired and I think it's interesting you see in many traditional societies children would follow in the footsteps of their parents you know blacksmiths sons that become blacksmiths and in India the caste system you know if someone's a potter their kids have become potters and if they're a weaver their kids have become weavers and I think this is partly because people would have a special aptitude for doing things their parents had done for skills their parents had acquired not through the genes but by a kind of resonance obviously training and growing up in a household where people know these things plays an important part but even before the regular training begins you'd expect them to show these tendencies and so that's a particularly interesting example because you're able to observe these positions most people wouldn't notice but that's the kind of thing that I think is likely to be going on all the time yeah there's been several of those positions there I mean sometimes it's just play and I see them just rolling around but then there's like these clear patterns like one of them is knee to the belly to the mount there's this position that you do when you're in what's called side control you put your knee on someone stomach you slide it across and you get on top of the mounting them with your hips above their hips and she does it instinctively and it's not an instinctive move for most kids and I try to I try to be objective when I watch it like how much of this is just natural human movement and how much of this is like her actually having some information and there's clear blips where I go look at that like that it that is normal like in jujitsu class but it's not normal for kids like there's there are things that they've learned and then there's also like when I've taught them stuff they pick things up like they already knew it it's like I used to teach martial arts so I've taught quite a few people and I know children are a little easier to teach than than other folks but there's children of people who are martial artists and then there's children of people who have never studied martial arts and the children of people who are martial artists were almost universally easier to teach and it sort of backs up that idea yes I mean one could even do experiments on this you know you actually one could quantify it my own approach to science is that you have to start from what people have noticed like your observations with kids of martial arts people including your own and then if you want to take further you could do more rigorous observations and the standard explanation people say oh well they've seen their parents do it or they've seen videos or pictures of it around the house and that sort of thing that might play some part in it but I think there's likely to be much more than that to this and one would obviously have to do special experiments to check it out but I imagine I think in many areas it should be easier to teach kids whose parents have done something like my own kids my two sons are extremely musical brilliant new musical ones are professional musician though well I play the piano my grandfather was a church organist my uncle was a church organist my father was very musical my mother was played the piano and was very musical my wife's family were musical her mother was a concert pianist her father was a pianist in the singer and right from the age of four they wanted to play the piano they wanted to learn music and they showed a tremendous amount of ability to assimilate it there are sometimes people who are very musical who come from non musical families but some of the greatest musical geniuses come out of musical dynasties like Bach I mean he came from a dynasty of musicians and so I think these things are probably easier to learn if parents have learned them it's so fascinating just the concept of learning things and learning things from some really unknown source one of the things that you brought up in the trial logs I thought was particularly interesting and really resonated with me was you were talking about how children in New York City are afraid of monsters that it's a natural inclination for children to be afraid of things in the dark with large teeth that are going to eat you and that this goes back to the time where we were you know regularly predators took babies they like big cats or you know monsters as it were in the night would steal people would eat people when preyed on human beings that it makes sense that these children have this intuitive instinct built into their genetics or whatever it is well exactly I mean the the the standard sort of picture of the human prehistoric past is man the hunter striding out onto the savannahs of Africa and stuff but it was much more I think the case man the hunted I mean humans are particularly defenseless against big predators and until recent times were very vulnerable to them like tigers in India during the under the British rule even as later as the 1940s there were thousands of people a year killed by man eating tigers and they usually go for the most vulnerable I mean when predators are working in Africa when lions are attacking herds of antelope or something they go for the old and the sick or they go for the young because they're the ones that are the most vulnerable so probably over huge amounts of human history young children had indeed been eaten by predators and and still were and probably today in some parts there were maybe still are these were the most realistic fears for huge periods of human history and so I think it's fascinating that young children have these nightmares this study in New York looked at the nightmares of young children nearly all of them were about being chased by monsters or scary animals and of course we feed this imagination in children through fairy tales think of grims fairy tales you know you like little red riding herd where there's the big bad wolf you know that is going to eat up little red riding herd there's so many stories in fairy tales of wolves that could eat children and although nowadays the image of wolves has been sanitized and we're told they're basically fairy loving creatures etc they are predators and if they get the chance in the past I think they they did eat children so not just in the past it's in the present if they have the right numbers we know we've talked about this in the podcast but there was an instance in the 1400s in France where wolves killed 40 people in France it's just a matter of them reaching the right numbers yes world war II there was an instance where the Germans and the Russians had a ceasefire because so many of their troops were getting killed by wolves they united together to take out a giant super pack of wolves in Russia because you know there was hundreds of wolves that were just slaughtering soldiers wolves are dangerous they're tricky animals they're just we eradicated them to very low numbers and then when the numbers start to build up again they start getting more and more dangerous again well I've seen this myself we spend our summers on a remote island in British Columbia Cortez Island BC and about 10 years ago the wolves came back they swam from other islands and at first most people there are sort of liberal kind of people they thought it's great wildlife returns etc but these wolves became increasingly bold and our family and some land up there we have a forest we don't have a house we just have forest land and my sons were there on our land they've been sleeping out when a big wolf suddenly appeared and looked very very threatening and they'd been told don't run if you see a wolf so they stood there and they faced it and then this wolf sort of puffed up it's fair and charged them and it stopped a few yards away and they backed off slowly and they ran when they got around the corner but this wolf was clearly threatening very very scary then they started eating people's dogs and there's nothing I've never seen a faster transition from someone who is a kind of wolf loving liberal once they're dark hot heaten they wanted the guys with guns to come out and teach these wolves a lesson and they did some of them were shot and now they're much more frightened of people they keep their distance they're still there but if they if they hadn't been a pushback from the people on the island they would have got increasingly bold yeah there's an issue that's going on right now where people resisting the idea of hunting wolves because they reintroduce wolves a lot of the western United States and in some places they've reached very large numbers thousands of wolves in Idaho and a couple of these areas where they've decimated elk and mooch mousse populations or elk and deer populations rather and you know there's a lot of people that are animal rights folks that aren't there they're not there and they resist it very strongly like the idea of killing wolves as barbaric and evil but to the folks that live there they're like no we love animals but you have to deal with this you got a real problem here especially when they form large packs they get very dangerous in Russia they had these super packs of wolves in Siberia that were taking out horses they were showing up hundred wolves at a time they were showing up these horse tables and slaughtering a horse and you know there's not much you could do about a hundred wolves no well given all this background I think that's so fascinating that for young children especially urban young children who've actually never seen they would never see a wolf in their life or any other scary animal these are the things that haunt their nightmares and I think this is part of a kind of collective memory I mean the more realistic dangers for young children being run over by cars sexual predator or sexual predators but that's not what their dreams are about it maybe what their parents nightmares are about but not the children themselves so there was a television show in America that I hosted called Fear Factor and it was a game show they had to do these stunts and different stunts had you know different things they had to do one of the things that I found incredibly fascinating was some people had irrational fears about certain animals whether it's spiders snakes arachnophobia and those fears were undeniable they weren't just like people are nervous of heights like I'm nervous of heights I look over this out of Bill and I were who but it's not an irrational fear it's a normal natural fear of I don't want to fall yeah but there are some people you would show them a snake and they would they would black out they couldn't stay conscious they would they would hyperventilate and they would faint and I couldn't believe there were normal folks when I would talk to them there would be nothing that it would indicate in any way that they were psychologically deranged or there was something missing in their you know whatever developmental period that they'd gone through something that got screwed up and they were just missing a giant chunk of what makes a person a normal person no they seem completely normal but you show them a spider and they would and I was wondered like what is is that maybe some someone down the line in their history was bitten by a spider someone down the line was poisoned by a snake and survived or they saw someone poisoned by a snake I mean whatever it is it's real and it's a these are real psychological issues that people have to deal with a rachnophobia and a phyteophobia in in in particular they're very strong yes well I think these could easily be inherited phobias I mean it's well known in animals that you can have instinctive fear and of course it makes sense for animals you probably know those experiments they do with day-old chicks or with ducklings you have them out in an enclosure outdoors and then they do these experiments they have cardboard cutouts and with a silhouette of birds and you pull them across on wires and if you pull across things with a silhouette of a hawk these these ducklings just freeze you know the fear responses just freeze they freeze it whereas if you pull across something looks like silhouette of a pigeon or you know a red-wing black-work bird or something they don't so they have an inherited fear of things that could in fact be dangerous and it's perfectly in terms of evolution it makes perfect sense to see why that would work these baby ducklings don't have time to learn which birds are harmful and which are not but an instinctive response a fear to something that is actually scary may sometimes lead them to respond something it isn't like a cardboard cutout but it's I think these things make complete sense biologically it does make sense if you stop and think about it if you really take in a consideration all the things you have to learn to survive as any animal as just this idea that these mice would learn somehow another through their parents to avoid that that certain smell because that smells associated with electrical shock it only makes sense that somehow or another biological life would transmit information in as many ways as possible yes which your idea is so fascinating because you're not even talking about biological life transferring information through genetics you're talking about it through some unseen force that has yet to be defined and that's when things get really squirrely and is that when you that's must be when you experience the most resistance to these ideas because the resistance to these ideas I'm sure before they propose this idea that genetics or that these mice would somehow another inherit the fear of the smell from their parents that was probably not very well received before it was proven but then it was proven so now it sort of has to be accepted and has to be taken into consideration but your idea is still very fringe oh yes it's it's the interesting thing is you see the response I get to this from from some scientists is is actually extremely emotional and irrational when my first book a new science of life came out there was a very famous editorial in nature after the leading science magazine a few months after the book appeared to start with nature ignored it but then a lot of people got interest I was doing programs on the radio in Britain there was an article editorial in the Guardian saying what an interesting idea and it's a lot of serious discussion going on new scientist magazine launched a competition for the best ideas for experiments to test morphic resonance and and it was beginning to be discussed the editor of nature who was a reactionary figure in science so you know old style materialist mechanistic hardcore scientist wrote a famous editorial called a book for burning on the front page of nature comparing my book unfavourably with mine camp Hitler's book saying that this was a profoundly dangerous book wow and he said this is the best candidate for burning there has been for many years and it was completely irrational this attack on my book it was emotional irrational polemical he didn't do it as a joke and this of course produced a backlash because quite a few scientists thought this was the wrong way to respond to a scientific hypothesis so a lot of letters in nature for months afterwards were backing me up and saying you know this something should be seriously discussed not simply denounced but the fact is that this started a kind of controversy which has been going on ever since but until the year 2000 most biologists thought genes did everything no the epigenetic thing has taken Until the year 2000, most biologists thought genes did everything. No, the epigenetic thing has taken over and the missing heritability problem. There's much more openness than there was, because it's clear we haven't figured it all out. Interestingly, Charles Darwin was not a neodarwinian. Neo-darwinian evolution theory says it's all done by the genes. Evolution's just about random mutation and natural selection of gene frequencies. This is the basis of Richard Dawkins' work, for example. His book, The Selfish Gene, is based on that model. Darwin actually believed in the inheritance of acquired characteristics. He thought that animals could inherit the fears of their fathers, and that most of adaptation could actually be passed on to animals and plants descended from parents. He thought that was how evolution worked. He even proposed that when something had been learned, there could be movement of something through the bloodstream that could affect the sperm and the eggs. Exactly the kind of things that's now being considered in this fear of the father's case. So movement through the bloodstream. So if you learn something like say if you touch something, it's electric fence, and it shocks you, there's movement through the bloodstream that teaches your sperm this. Well that's what Darwin thought. He wrote a book called The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication. It's less well known than his most famous book, The Origin of Species. But in the variation of animals and plants under domestication, he was so convinced that plants and animals could inherit what their parents had learned. He tried to figure out how it might work, and the last chapter is called The Hypothesis of Pan Genesis. The name he gave to his theory that somehow little bits were detached from the brain and went through the blood and affected the sperm. Now that's more or less what people are saying, trying to explain the mice inheriting the fear of their fathers. That aspect of Darwin's work has been airbrushed out of scientific history. Darwin also wrote a paper in Nature about a dog that he came across. Whenever this dog got near to a butcher's shop, the dog was completely terrified of butchers. And Darwin figured out that his parents, one of his parents had been kicked or badly mistreated by a butcher. And this dog had inherited a phobia of butchers. Now, Darwin published that in Nature that shows you how very different Darwin's ideas on evolution were from his 20th century successors. And the reason that modern evolutionary theory is called neo-dirwinism is to distinguish it from Darwinism, which included the inheritance of habits. Very similar to what I'm saying. What I'm saying in terms of the inheritance of habits through morphic resonance is actually really close to what Darwin himself said. But it's not what neo-dirwinians say because they've tried to say all inheritances in genes and you can't have these other things. But now they have to change their tune because, as I say, in the last few years epigenetic inheritance, the inheritance of acquired characteristics is back in fashion. Well, there's many people that haven't studied Darwin's ideas at all that aren't familiar with the amount of resistance that Darwin received when he was proposing these ideas, like these weren't accepted ideas at all. In fact, the majority of scientists at the time were more of a Christian faith, weren't they? Yes, but it was the response to Darwin was particularly interesting, you see, because many Christians in England after being surprised by his ideas actually said, well, that's fine. If God's the creator of life, then why an earth can't go and create a solution? Right. Create life that can evolve by under its own steam. And his ideas were quite rapidly accepted by the Roman Catholic and the Anglican, the Episcopal churches and the Methodists and so on. This fundamentalist creationist thing is a peculiar American phenomenon. It didn't originate until the 20th century and it was started in America. It's virtually unknown in Britain. I'm actually a practicing Christian, I'm an Anglican. And I never meet creationists in England. I've never heard anyone. What's that? What exactly is an Anglican? The Church of England. The Church of England is the sort of halfway between Protestant and Catholic. What happened in England under King Henry VIII in the 16th century was that he nationalized the Church. And he said, okay, the Pope's not head of the Church anymore. I am. And the priest can marry. We'll have the services in English and bishops can be married. But the services remain much the same. And the Church of England, if you go to Anglican services, very like a Roman Catholic service, except that we have married priests, we have women bishops and women, a women priest. Oh, radius. Right. Just from a Catholic point of view. But anyway, the Church of England is, so it's never had the sort of extreme Protestant doctrines like Southern Baptists and so on. It's very similar to the Catholic Church. It's now one of the most liberal churches. But Anglicans on the whole had no problem with evolution. They still don't. I've just been doing a workshop last weekend at the Esselin Institute in Big Sur, which I was co-leading with the Bishop of California, whose cathedral is Grace Cathedral in San Francisco. Very beautiful cathedral on Nomp Hill. We were discussing the kinds of things you and I were discussing. He was completely open to all this. There was absolutely no problem discussing this with an Anglican and a Piscopalian bishop. It's a very far cry from what many people's image of Christians is opposing evolution. The general view that many Christians have and I'm one is that the evolution of nature, if there's a creative power in nature, it may be God given in the first place, but what God did was to end our nature with a power to create new forms of life. That there's a kind of intelligent creativity in nature. You don't have to have intelligent designing engineer outside nature, tinkering with the machinery and manipulating genes as the intelligent design people think. You don't have to deny evolution altogether to say God's involved in nature in some way. It's perfectly possible to have a view where God is in nature and works through nature and there's a creativity in nature which doesn't require the universe to have been created in 6,000 years ago that completely accept the evolutionary history of the universe in cosmology and in evolution. And just say, well, if there's a God, then that's the way that God works through this evolutionary process and through the creativity of evolution. So the fundamentals of Christians and the new earth Christians, that's a uniquely American thing you think? Yes. I mean, they do have followers, a few followers in Britain, but they take their lead entirely from America. And they've got a new batch of converts to their point of view in the Islamic world. Creationism, in spite by American creation, is as big in Turkey and many other Arab countries and stuff. But it's a peculiarly American phenomenon. We know how it all came about in America, right, where it really took off. It became a part of the political system, the Reagan administration. They started recruiting the radical Christians and that became a part of his electoral base. Yes. It's a very, very interesting history. It had always been, for most foreigners, American politics is completely impossible to understand. It's impossible to understand how people can be so polarized and so extreme in their views. And I read a book recently, which made it much clearer to me. It's called The Sword of the Lord. It's written by a guy called Andrew Himes, who was raised southern Baptist, seven of his cousins are southern Baptist ministers. His grandfather, his grandfather, who was called Rice, was one of the inventors of American fundamentalism. And it's a fascinating historical study of this phenomenon and why they were like that. And it made a lot more sense to me. I mean, it's still very bizarre and very American. Yeah, we're hard to understand even for us. We, you know, everyone's constantly trying to refocus our political system, or sort of redefine it, calm it down, reach what I mean. Everyone's looking for a more moderate conservative or someone who is a more conservative moderate. We're always looking for someone who meets the bridge, someone to join the two sides. So we don't have these radical polarizing, opposing forces, the left and the right. It seems so childish to me. What this book made clear and what was for me, a huge revelation was that all of this is rooted in the American Civil War. And there's a sense in which in some people's minds the Civil War is still going on. It's just that the sides have switched and the Civil War, the South was Democrat, the slave-owning South. They're political party after the Civil War was the Democrats and the Republicans were the liberals who wanted to free the slaves. And one of the most interesting switches that's happened is this switch. So now it's gone the other way around. The Democrats and other liberals and stuff and the Republicans have become the more right-wing forces. And powerful in the South, which was exactly the opposite. Very bizarre. So what this book does is trace the history of this fascinating movement. But what's so interesting is that in the Civil War, both sides were using biblical texts to justify their position. But the southern Baptists and the religious people in the South actually had a much stronger biblical basis for slavery. Because the Bible's full of slaves, the Old Testament's full of slaves, the Israelites were slaves themselves, their own slaves, in the New Testament, everyone owned slaves. It was taken for granted. There were no abolitionists in the Bible. So if you base your faith on the Bible, you can make a much stronger case for slavery than you can for abolitionism. But you have to take the Bible as literally true. And that gave a strong incentive for people in the South to make the Bible literally true because you could justify slavery much better than if you interpreted it in a liberal way. So actually the spirit of Jesus was to liberate people from bondage. They say, okay, where's the text? It doesn't say anything about liberating slaves. So fundamentalism gave a kind of impetus to this. And it was very, very fascinating to see how that played out. Because on both sides in the Civil War, they were both invoking the Bible. Both sides were Protestant. Both sides were head ministers preaching to inspire the troops and get them to fight. And after the Civil War, the way in which this tradition of fundamentalism that had developed in the American South to justify slavery gave a kind of ready-made way to use biblical texts to argue against all sorts of other things, including evolutionary theory. Whereas in Europe, in the traditional Catholic and in the more liberal Protestant churches, people hadn't taken the view of the Bible as the literal truth. They'd taken the view that the Bible's a guide to what might happen that a lot of its meaning is allegorical or symbolic. But the kind of so-called liberal interpretation of the Bible goes back to the second century AD or something. It's been the mainstream view for a long time. You're a scientist. What leads you to be a practicing Christian as a scientist? Well, I spent years as an atheist. I mean, when I was educated as a scientist, part of the package deal is atheists. You know, I grew up with all the standard, about time as 14. I was at a religious boarding school. Christian boarding school, I was the only boy in my year who refused to get confirmed, because even at 14 I identified as an atheist. And I thought science means science and reason, religion and superstition are things that the past, scientists of the vanguard of human progress, all that kind of thing. I believed that. But what made me begin to doubt it was I began to doubt that this was the right way forward in science. And I began to think that this mechanistic molecular approach to treating animals and plants as just machines was an inadequate view of life. I'd gone into biology because I was fascinated by animals and plants. I kept lots of pets as a child. My father was a herbalist. I collected plants. And he taught me about plants. He had a microscope laboratory. And so I sort of really got into science as a child. And when I started studying at science at school and university, the first thing we did was living organisms, was to kill them and grind them up and then look at the enzymes and their liver or whatever. It became clear to me that we were not really studying life. We were studying death. And when I was a child I kept herming pigeons. And I was fascinated with how did they find their home. I asked everybody. I knew men who kept herming pigeons. It was a popular sport in Britain. It still is. And I had some myself. And I used to put them in a box and cyclos far as I could on my bicycle and released them and then cycle home. And they always got home before I did. However far I took them. So this completely intrigued me. And I thought we were never going to understand this by just grinding up their livers or looking at their genes. So I began to doubt the mechanistic worldview. Then I encountered psychedelics. And that was a huge change. I mean nothing in my scientific education had prepared me for the kind of mind opening effects of LSD. This was in the 70s, early 70s. And I had studied nerve impulses and hormones and that kind of thing, which is what we got in science course. It came about the brain. And I knew about the anatomy of the brain and nerve impulses. But these visionary experiences that psychedelics opened up showed me that was far more to the mind. And indeed far more to reality than this very, very limited model. Then I got interested in meditation because I thought, well, it'd be good to be able to explore the mind without drugs. And I'm not anti-psychodetic at all, but I'd be good to have different methods, not just drugs. Then I took up transcendental meditation and yoga. Then I got a job in India. I lived in India for seven years. And when I was in India, I was really into yoga and meditation. And at first I thought this is just changing my brain physiology. You don't need to believe there's God out there or anything mysterious out there. It's just inside the body the chemicals affect the brain, the yoga and meditation affect blood flow, etc. So I saw it in a rather materialistic way. But then I got more and more interested in Hindu philosophy and Hindu ideas. And the idea that there's a greater consciousness within which our consciousness is embedded through some psychedelic experiences. We contact other realms of consciousness that aren't just inside our brains through meditation and through prayer that one can actually contact other forms of consciousness bigger than our own. I did all that within a kind of Hindu context. And then I had a Sufi teacher in India as well. So I did Islamic mysticism for a while. But after doing this for several years, I found that actually some of it didn't make sense to me. The part that didn't make sense to me. Well, the Islamic part to be a Sufi in India basically had to be a Muslim. And I didn't really want to get into being a Muslim and sort of fasting in Ramadan and all that. And Hindus, their basic world view, was, and for most of them still is, the idea that we're just trapped in a world where things go on and on rebirth and cycles of life and death. And we're trapped in this world of suffering and delusion. And the way out is through a kind of spiritual vertical takeoff which you do individually through meditation liberate yourself from reincarnation and delusion. And so forth into absorption and the one, the absolute. But it's an individual vertical takeoff. And I was working in an agricultural institute, the main international institute in India, for trying to improve crops for poor farmers. And sometimes my Indian colleagues would say to me, after work, we say, why do you do this? And I'd say, because I want to help these poor people and they haven't gotten enough to eat. It'd be great if they had better farming methods and improved varieties and science can help. And I believe in trying to apply my knowledge to help these people. And he said, it is none of your business. If they are suffering, it is their karma. It is not your business. It is their problem. Not your problem. Your problem is to liberate yourself from this world of illusion. So then I realized actually they have a completely different view. That the poor are suffering because in a sense they deserve to suffer. Because of what they've done in past lives. Nothing I can do about it. Then I realized actually I do care about other people. I do think that a spiritual life is not just about individual liberation. It's to do with collective things. It affects community and how can other people be helped. And as I argued with my Hindu friends, I realized the reason I was saying this is because I'm so deeply embedded in the Christian tradition. Even secular humanism is a kind of secularized Christianity because it's about helping others. That actually I was much more Christian than I actually had ever admitted. So I was confirmed in the Church of South India. And I then found a fantastic ashram where I lived for two years. Father B. Griffiths who was an English Benedictine who had a Christian ashram in South India. Which was exactly to my taste. It was very simple. We did yoga. We did meditation. We had Christian services. But we had sang Indian chants and kirtans and things. It didn't try and deny any of this. And when I first went there we started the Mass with the Gaitri Mantra. Which is a Hindu Mantra asking the son to bless our meditation. The divine splendor of the son to illuminate our meditation. So I said to Father B. When I first went there. How can you have the Gaitri Mantra at the beginning of a Catholic service? And he said precisely because it's Catholic. He said Catholic means universal. If it excludes anything which is a path to God, then it's just sectarian. The word Catholic means universal. Yes, that's fascinating. So I found a way of being Christian. Which didn't deny yoga meditation. But is my wife is a practicing Tibetan Buddhist who follows a zogchen tradition in Tibetan Buddhism. So I found a way of reconnecting with the Christian tradition. Which didn't violate my sense of reason. It didn't conflict with the kind of science that I'm interested in. But I found it liberating to reconnect. And so when I went back to England from India. I was able to go to those great cathedrals that we have in England. Built in the Middle Ages. There's fantastic buildings. Stained glass, wonderful music. Organs playing amazing choirs singing the most beautiful music. And this is not just beautiful. But meaningful is a path to God which I had not seen before. That's fascinating. So in India, the concept of karma being that someone has done something in their past life. That's led them to where they are right now. Yes. That seems real convenient for someone passing by homeless people. Or someone who's poor suffering. It's almost like the numbers of people that they have in India. Because the numbers are so great of a billion people. How much bigger is India than North America? The size of the land is much smaller. The population is now almost a billion. How much smaller is the size of the land? I don't know. But it's crazy. How many times they were dominated? I'm really fascinated. I wonder if that came about as just a way of just mitigating the pressure of helping people. Like just the idea of karma, you can't help that guy. That's his problem. You got to deal with yourself. Just the sheer numbers. Well, I don't know. At the time of the British, we were ruling India. There were only about 200 million. When I was born, there were about 250 million. What? When you were born? Yes. I was born in 1942. I was a huge, huge increase. It's a vast increase. Wow. Anyway, the thing is about that. Do you think that the karma thing in India you see is it is convenient for centuries India's had a caste system. The untouchables are treated like dirt. I mean, they're considered to be polluting and dirty. Even if the shadow of an untouchable fell on a Brahmin's house, this person could be punished. It's very, very severely. And there was no move within India until the 19th century to reform that. What happened to Christian missionaries went there. They were nice to untouchables and to lower caste and gave them food, education, health care, etc. Some of them became Christians. I mean, why not? If you're at the bottom of the pile, you've not got anything to lose and you've got a lot to gain by becoming a Christian. So Hindu reformers felt that they had to counteract this. So things like the Ramakrishna mission and Sri Orbindo and various Hindu philosophers and Gandhi himself, who was a big influence in India, assimilated many of these ideas from Christianity and said, look, we've got to reform Hinduism. And they created a new kind of Hindu attitude, much influence by Christianity. And so there are now Indian movements to try and help the poor and provide health care for the sake and that kind of thing. That's not being part of their traditional way of doing things and it came about under Western influence. That's really fascinating. So your desire to sort of help these people, help them grow more food and help them live better lives is what led you to become a Christian. You realize that these are Christian ideas? Yes. That they're Christian, they're deeply embedded in our culture. Even for secular humanists. You see, secular humanists are usually atheists who believe in a philosophy of equal rights, equal opportunities in helping the poor and the sick education for those who need for everyone and uplifting people who are suffering, helping third world countries have running water and all that kind of thing. Well, these are things that Christian missionaries have done as well, but you don't have to be a Christian to believe in those things. The fact that they're so deeply embedded in our culture, in our secular culture, is because of the influence, historical influence of Christianity. So secular humanists are basically people who still have Christian ethics but without a belief in God. But that ethical system doesn't just come about automatically. A much more default mode is to say, you know, the strong might is right. The strongest guy gets the girls and runs a kind of harry and then conquer people and have slaves. And that's how humanity's worked for much of human history. Yeah, yeah, most certainly has. So it sounds like you found a very cool sect of Christianity while you were in India. That sounds very unique that you were doing yoga and meditation and then these Indian chants along with this concept of Christianity being like the generosity and helping your brothers and sisters. Yes. That seems to be like that that must have been very convenient to find that sect of Christianity while you were sort of exploring these ideas. It wasn't even a sect. Father B. Griffiths has a Benedictine monk and he was a Roman Catholic. Now, it's true that some people in the Catholic church didn't approve of what he was doing. That's him. Well, here, man, a group of other people. I mean, there was a whole movement in India of Catholics too. It was called incaluation. It was the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s said that what people should do in the Catholic church is put the Christian faith into the terms of that culture. So in India, Catholics who've been converted by Catholic missionaries from Ireland and places. What pairs of shoes? So they could put them on to go to church on Sundays because the missionaries dressed up in Western clothes and wore shoes in church. These Indians would never wear shoes in a temple or a mask or even in their house, but they wore shoes in church because that's what the Catholic missionaries wore. So that kind of thing is ridiculous and so the simplest level, the incaluation movement would say, well, it's the tradition of Indians to take your shoes off in homes and in temples in in marks. So take them off in churches too. And it was the tradition of holy men and women in India to be vegetarian, whereas Catholics and Protestants are all eating lots of beef and stuff because that's what American and British missionaries had. And so they said, no, it's much more natural to be vegetarian. You don't have to be, but it's more natural. So this idea of yoga is a way of learning how to breathe and to try and to be more healthy. Why shouldn't Indian Christians do yoga? So this is part of a movement. Father Beed was part of a wider movement. The last two popes have been rather reactionary and have tried to roll back that movement, but there are still people in India and South America and so on who are following this Vatican, Second Vatican Council reform movement. The new Pope is fairly unique, isn't he? He seems to be a much less polarizing figure. He seems to be much more generous, much more open-minded to the idea of homosexuality, and to a lot of the things that have been criticized in the past. And he also, like, is, he's eschewing the ideas of monetary wealth. He doesn't have that crazy throne anymore. He has a reasonable chair. He's a unique guy. I think it's partner because he comes from South America, you see. And this kind of radical Catholic movement, the Second Vatican Council, liberation theology, which was about the church should be there not to serve the rich, but to help the poor. And this became a huge movement in South America. But the previous Pope John Paul II was against it because they were teaming up with communists and people who were also trying to help the poor for secular reasons, not for Christian reasons. So he said this is wrong because it's communist. But actually, that movement, this radical Catholic movements had a huge influence in South America. And I think the present Pope is somebody who's come out of that world, who's been very much influenced by it. It's so problematic, though, that suppressing a sexuality. Like that, the number one thing that people associate Catholicism with is sexual assault, is sexually molesting children. It's like a huge aspect. I grew up a Catholic. I was only in, I was only a practicing Catholic when I was very young. I went to a Catholic school in New Jersey for first grade and it was a very bad school. It was like really dark and suppressing, just very nasty and mean and the nuns were just horrific people. And it essentially shied me away from all religion at a very young age. Yeah, before that. That's why. Yeah, it was terrible. It was terrible. I have other friends that were also raised Catholic that literally had to fight off the priests sexual attempts. And this is like a standard thing. It's a joke. It's an on running joke in America about puree priests being sexual predators. It's a constant thing. And that this is like a standard thing. It's a joke. It's an on-running joke in America about puree priests being sexual predators. It's a constant thing. That seems to me like one of the number one issues with that particular brand of religion. It's like this idea that you're going to take what is essentially just a natural part of being a human being. You're not doing anything with the reproductive cycle. You're just telling them to ignore it. You have this consistent, constant bodily function. There's your body's reproducing fluids on a regular basis. And you're living backed up all the time. And also, you're not experiencing any romantic interaction with human beings. No affection, no sexual affection, no nothing. No, you're missing out in a huge part of what it is to be a person. And these people grow up and they live cradle to the grave in this sort of weird, non-developed state. They're not like the rest of the people. They can barely even understand. Like I had a friend that went to marriage counseling with a Catholic priest. I'm like, that's hilarious. That's like going to Hitler and asking how to have world peace. It doesn't make any sense. Like how are you going to a guy who not only does not have any sex, has never had a relationship, but is drunk all the time. He had gin blossoms all over his face. And kids run away from him because they're afraid he's going to touch him. And you're going to go to that guy. And he's going to give you marriage advice. I agree. I think that's a terrible thing. And I mean, there are a lot of good priests who don't do this. And I met quite a few when I was in India. And I have Roman Catholic priests as friends. And so I think it's a minority. It may have been quite a big minority in Ireland and in some countries. But I think it was some people are called to a celibate life. And I think that's fine for people to go become monks or nuns if that's what they're called to. But for regular priests, I think it's a serious mistake. And in the Church of England, ever since 1540 or something, and in the Protestant churches in Europe, priests have been able to marry. And rabbis marry in Judaism. And I think it's much, much healthier to have priests as regular guys with love lives and kids and things. So I think that side of Catholicism is a serious mistake. And I think they should, sooner or later, it'll have to be reformed because repression of sexuality leads to all these extremely unhealthy and negative consequences. I agree with you about it. But there are reform movements within Catholicism. And in America, there are breakaway Catholic churches with women priests. For example, there's one in Santa Barbara. Of course, it's in Santa Barbara. I think it freaks up there. Get loaded. So anyway, I agree with you. I think that's a very negative thing. But you see, I think that to reject the entire, some people reject the entire world of religion because of personal bad experiences with one particular brand. I think it's rather like throwing out the baby with bathwater. And everybody's saying, I'm against science because it gave us gas that Hitler used to kill people. And it gave us the atomic bomb that killed people in Hiroshima. So I'm against science. I mean, science, everything human, there are really bad things that have been done by humans in the name of almost anything you care to mention. Nationalism, science, religion, politics, ideology. So when you decided to join this particular group of Christians and become a Christian officially, like, identify, was there resistance from your colleagues? Was there resistance from other scientists? Like, how old were you at the time? Oh, I was, I mean, I was hoping, 33, something like that. Well, not, I was working in India at the time. There's hardly any ACS in India. There's a few. But among my scientific colleagues, I was working with Indian scientists, almost all Indians are Hindu or Muslim. When they went home from work, they'd be regular Hindus or Muslims. They're very few of them were atheists. So among my Indian colleagues, being a practicing Christian, when I came from a Christian family in a Christian country, seemed totally normal. No one thought that was at all weird or strange. When I got back to England, among many of my scientific friends, they thought this was completely weird. And just couldn't understand it, because they assumed that any Christian believes the world's made in 6,000 years ago, and that God intervenes through suspending the laws of nature and miracles that are totally incredible. And they don't believe in the kind of God I don't believe in. But they never actually, very few ever asked, what do you actually think or believe? They just sort of treated it at best as some kind of personal eccentricity or mental feibleness or something. And while retaining a rather narrow, dogmatically atheist view, a lot of my friends are atheists or agnostics. But the problem I have with atheists, some materialists, is that most of them are much more dogmatic than the people I know within the religious world. Well, I have a problem with anybody that's sure. Say hi, yes. When I speak to some atheists, I have this issue where they're aggressively atheist. You know, where I've talked to people who they're not just atheists, but they get upset at anyone who's not. And my question to them is always, have you ever had a psychedelic experience? Whenever I speak to someone who's aggressively atheist? And if they say no, I'm always like, well, what are you waiting for? Because if you really want to question your whole idea of reality, there's no better method than a breakthrough psychedelic experience. If you have a breakthrough psychedelic experience and you're like, that was nothing. Well, then you're a unique person. Because everybody I've ever met that has a breakthrough psychedelic experience like a DMT trip, they have to step back and go, OK, I didn't even know that was possible. I've lived my whole life with this one worldview that, well, I see these people that are religious. And it seems to me that they're following this ridiculous ideology that is based on some ancient information, that people wrote down on animal skins. It's all preposterous. And what they're doing is they're just a bunch of scared children that are afraid of the light. And what I'm doing is basing my life on science and rational thinking and logic. But then you have a psychedelic trip and you're like, there's nothing rational about that. There's nothing logical about that. And how is that so close? It's so nearby. It's like someone telling you, a DMT trip is like someone telling you, hey, I want to show you something. Let's go into this room real quick. And you open that door and there's a new universe there, a completely different universe that's filled with life. It's fractal. It's never ending. And it'll occupy a very small space. But yet it's infinite. And it's filled with conscious beings that can see through you, recognize all your bullshit, recognize all your insecurities and all your incorrect thinking and ego and they try to, and then you shut the door and you go back to regular life. You're like, what the fuck is that room? I call that room. That's the god room. It's right there. If you don't go into that experience, your whole, I think we live our lives based on, we sort of calculate our world view based on the experiences that we've accumulated, what we've learned from these experiences and what we've learned from other people's experiences, what we've read, what we've seen in documentaries and films. But when you have a really intense psychedelic experience particularly, and then for some people yoga and meditation, some people are able to achieve some pretty deep states. But the psychedelic experience in particular is shocking because it's so easy to get to. It's just right there. Four hits of the DMT and boom blast off. And then 15 minutes later, you're left with this new experience that you have to assimilate and figure out a ways to make sense of it. The atheists that I talk to that are super aggressive, they're just like religious people in a lot of ways. It's kind of scientific fundamentalism. Yeah. And it's also morphing. Now, I don't know if you're aware of this in America. It's morphing. There's atheism and then there's an even more aggressive group called atheism plus. Oh, I didn't know about that. Yeah. And what they're doing is they're attaching a bunch of moral and ethical values to religion, essentially creating almost like another religion. And I think with good intentions, I think a lot of his good intentions, a lot of his based on feminism, a lot of his based on the idea of avoiding harassment, avoiding sexual harassment, avoiding that their ethics are to completely define what's acceptable behavior, like no racism, no sexual harassment, no undeniable acceptance of women's rights, undeniable acceptance of, you know, it's interesting. But then of course, once you define that, then you have aggressive members of that group that are attacking people that disagree with any of their propositions or anyone that supports men's rights, of course, now hates women and you get a lot of weirdness in that area because they can only be feminism, there can't be men's rights as well. Men's rights are toxic, whereas women's rights, once they have achieved total equality, then there's no need for men's rights because once feminism has been established, which is a pretty illogical assumption, especially when you consider like the force laws and- Exactly. No, I agree with you. No, I couldn't agree more about DMT and the opening that it can give. I mean, I had the great advantage of taking it for the first time with Terrence McKenna and he was sort of- he said, do you want to check this out? I'm okay. And that's pretty cool on the resume, by the way. First time he did DMT, did it with Terrence McKenna? Yes. I wouldn't say where or when because it could be put down on some record somewhere. That's probably already there. Yes. Don't worry about it. But for me, it corresponded in many ways with what people talk about near-death experiences because I went out through light into a realm of great bliss and beauty. And then I came back and it was like coming back from a million miles away and just coming back into my body and as it were being born again. So it was very much like a death and rebirth experience for me. And it was very, very transformative. Incidentally, I think, you know, I've been trying to understand this American phenomenon as sudden baptists. And one of the things that I think is the key to this is that I think when they talk about being born again originally, baptism was just that. I mean, now you can get this through DMT in five minutes. But at the time of John the Baptist, you could get it in five minutes through being drowned. People were lining up on the bank of the Jordan. They go in. He holds the munder. If he holds the munder just long enough, you could actually induce a near-death experience in a life review at the drowning man sees his life pass before him. You know, hold the munder just long enough and they'd have a near-death experience, almost guaranteed. I mean, occasionally they might have done it too long, but that was before litigation. You know, he might have lost it. You're litigation. Yeah. That's a good theory, actually. And then you see they come back and they say, I've died. I've seen the light. I've been born again. I'm no longer afraid of death. My life has been transformed in five minutes. And the baptists were the people who revived baptism by total immersion in the 16th century. And probably now in America, they don't hold the munder that long because this is post litigation now. You know, when the baptists first got going, this idea of holding people under long enough, all their language is the language that relates to near-death experiences. And I don't think that to start with baptism by total immersion was just symbolic. I think it was drowning. Wow. That is quite fascinating. And it makes sense if you think about ordeal poisoning or deal poisoning being the substitute for psychedelics in certain cultures where they don't have access to psychedelic plants. They would take essentially a poison that didn't kill you. It got you right to the door where you wish you were dead almost. You were in horrible pain. And even in some cultures, they use ant venom like those bullet ants. They use that for these ritualistic coming of age rituals. These coming of age rituals where you take people through these intensely painful moments where they almost want to be dead just to end the suffering. And then when they come through on the other side, they're a better person because of it. Yes. They're more reflective. They're sort of, they appreciate that just the very breath that they're allowed to take. They appreciate the sky. Seems bluer. The grass seems greener. The life has more vibrancy to it because they've gone through this ordeal poison or these toxic venom or what have you. Yes. A rite of passage. Yeah. Almost all rites of passage for adolescence in traditional cultures involve something like a death and rebirth experience. And I think you're right. I think that's what's going on. And actually, I think that why the baptists became so powerful and why for them the conversion experience was so real and why they talk about it so much is that because for many of them, it was real. It wasn't just a symbolic thing. It wasn't signing up to some set of beliefs. And I think that the core of all religions is this direct experience of the divine. And you know, I think that's what they will come from. They come from experience, not theories. It's quite shocking too that Jerusalem scholars like mainstream scholars now are considering that Moses was probably under the influence of DMT. They believe that the burning bush, there's, you know, the guys are not like psychedelically based at all, was quite probably the Akisha bush, which was a very rich in DMT plant. And that's the whole idea of the burning bush. He sees God through a burning bush. I mean, how much clearer does it have to be? There's Akisha trees all over that part of the world. It's a very rich plant as far as the content of DMT in it. And if you experience that, it's very much like, I mean, I don't know if you're experiencing God, but it seems like it seems very divine when you have a DMT trip. Yes. Well, I mean, why not be experiencing God? I mean, it seems, it seems an uneconomical theory to say that divine glass has experienced by mystics that part of the nature of God's mind is bliss. I mean, the Hindu name, one of the names, Satchett and Anda being knowledge bliss as the four in the nature of God. If God's consciousness is kind of bliss consciousness, then if you have this experience that seems like God and is blissful, why have a hypothesis that there's some other bliss consciousness that isn't divine that some kind of duplicate? Why not it be the real thing? I think it makes so much more sense. Yeah, I totally make sense. I mean, it makes as much sense as anything else. These plants are real. I've always wondered if that and, you know, many other people speculate as well. If that's the reason why Hindus don't participate in eating cows too, because of the cilasab and mushrooms growing on cows on a regular basis and that being for a lot of people believe the basis of psalma. I don't know. It's, I don't, Terrence's theory about Strapheria and these mushrooms growing on cowdong is OK as far as it goes. But in England, for example, the magic mushroom, the liberty cap doesn't grow on cowdong. It grows in sort of meds and usually no cows in them, if anything, there's sheep. But I've seen them, they grow wild in whales. And, you know, I've encountered them on location. And it's nothing to do with piles of dong. I mean, there's many different environments in which psychoactive mushrooms grow. Some kinds rely on the cowdong. But I think he rather ever emphasized the cowdong. That's fascinating. What do you think was the source of cattle worship, like Choctal Hill, and all these ancient civilizations that worship cattle and this connection that McKenna made with those, those people worshiping the cattle because the cattle didn't just provide life and food because they had milk and meat, but also that there was this connection with psychedelic mushrooms. I don't know. I find that a bit far-fetched, personally. I mean, in some cultures like in England, there was a horse worship and the Vedic age that was kind of horse worship sacred horses too. And there are many different kinds of sacred animals. Even in India, it's not just cows that are sacred. Elephants are sacred, ganesh, you know, the elephant god. But elephants are sacred. Even rats are sacred in India and monkeys. So there's lots of sacred animals. And I think that probably come, I think, with the ones that are wild, basically wild, like elephants and rats and monkeys, this probably comes out of kind of shamanic roots. But I think when people started domesticating animals, then how do you relate to domesticated animals? Are they like slaves? Or are they, the cow is seen by most Hindus as the divine mother, the provider of milk. And do you regard them as sacred? Or do you just regard them as cogs in a factory farming machine? Well, that's the way they're regarded now in feed lots and so on in the United States and Europe. But I think in a religious culture, when you domesticate animals, there's a sense in which they take on a religious significance. And for the Jewish people, then goats and sheep were the main ones that took on a religious significance. Jesus, Lamb of God, that takes us to a sense of the world, the Agnes Day. This is a sacrificial lamb, which is a sort of sacred lamb. And so there's a sacredization of sheep in the Judea Christian and the Islamic tradition. It completely makes sense that people would worship cows and even horses because they need the horses for transportation. And a lot of cultures, they even used horses to stay alive. Like they drank the blood of the horses. That was a big thing with the Mongols. It's one of the reasons why they brought, like each man had many horses that they would carry with them. And they would mix it with milk and it would be a way to stay alive. They would take the blood of certain horses, the milk of other ones. And all that makes sense. What I've always wondered though is how did they lose the meaning of soma? Like how is that such an open thing, open to interpretation? I mean, what happened a lot? If it was such an amazing thing, I mean, you read the descriptions of soma, how fantastic it is and how huge a part of it was in their culture and their connection to the divine, how do they lose what it means? Well, I agree. I think as a mystery, and it's similar in Greece, the Aleusinian mysteries, this cave where they went in for these psychedelic rites of passage that played her and people did. It was a big part of life in ancient Greece. What was that? And the most common theory is that once people see it as amanita muscari, the flyergaric, I've never found those particularly plausible because whenever I've taken flyergaric, when he wants all tries, all it did was give me a headache. And it's maybe they had different varieties of it. But I don't know anyone who's had a totally amazing flyergaric trip. I've only spoken to people online on that. I've only had it once and I felt the same way it didn't do anything for me. I don't know if it enhanced, but I did it. And then we did it for a couple hours and it didn't seem to have any effect. And then we took Silasibin after that and had a huge effect. It was just a monster trip. And I wonder if it was some sort of a combinatorie experience. Possibly. But that was another thing that McKenna speculated about, whether it was very bull genetically, very bull seasonally variables, far as geographically. And whether it's transformed by the rain deer, where they drink the urine of rain deer after the rain deer have eaten it and stuff. Right. And the lapse in people. Well, it's also all the different connections to the Siberian shamans and the whole Christmas thing, the whole connection to Christmas and the the amanita mascara mushroom. It's very, very bizarre that elves are connected with this particular mushroom, which is connected with Christmas and gifts and symbiotic relationship to carnivorous trees, like the whole deal. It is. It's mysterious. But now I've never found that aspect area of speculation particularly satisfying. I mean, if the evidence pointed towards Trafaria, Cubensis or Cyloside B. Semilansilata, the Liberty Capo, our native psychedelic mushroom in England, then it might be more convincing. Right. I mean, the fact is we don't know. And it's really a matter of speculation. Yeah. I wonder if it's like he'd eaten he'd eaten he'd eaten he'd eaten he'd eaten he'd eaten he'd eaten he'd ate other so delicious, they're fantastic. They're sweet. They're so rich and dark. Or you can get one of these creepy tomatoes that they grow that live like I'm they last like a month on a shelf and they're pale and they're hard and they just taste like shit. I mean, there's nothing to them. Like you see they look different. They taste different. I wonder if that somehow or another happened to the amanita where it lost its psychedelic properties. Unlikely because it's never been cultivated and you know, it grows in the wild. It'd be maybe just the temperature variations like that maybe you have to have it in that incredible cold environment of Siberia for it to be that it's geographically genetically variable. Or what you said makes the most sense to me that it was mixed with something else. It's like in I wasker if you just took one of the components of the brew. If the historical data pointed towards this being there, you'd say, OK, this is what it was. But actually neither of the components would work on their own. So it may well have been that it was part of a mixture. That does kind of make sense for psalma, right? Because psalma actually was described as some sort of a mixture. And so was the Aleusinian mysteries. Do you still know what the Aleusinian mysteries are, huh? Is there any speculation as for what that was? Well, Graham Hancock has speculations, of course. But I don't know. The ones I've seen would include Aopium and cannabis as part of the mix. I mean, cannabis is widely known in the ancient world. And after all, hemp ropes were used for thousands of years. People were growing hemp. Aopium has been known for an awfully long time. So what else might have been in there? We don't know. Well, that's the other thing, too. The consumption, the eating of cannabis, eating of hash, has produced incredible psychedelic experiences for people. They've eaten large enough quantities, where it's been very mushroom-like. Much more psychedelic when eaten, yes. And it's traditional to take it by mouth in India, as well as to smoke it. I mean, it's a normal thing that the festival of holy H-O-L-I, it's a major Hindu festival. When I was living in India, I was renting a wing of a crumbling palace in Hyderabad from a family of impoverished rajas. And they were very respectable, though impoverished. And on holy this festival day, the rajas wife, the rani, came to me and she said, Dr. Saab, you must take our special drink. She said, this is our special drink for holy and stuff. And I said, what is it? She said, oh, I will tell you later. She said, she said. She's like the joy dee as of India. Don't you up? So I should drink this. There's bang. And she said, have some more. And so I say, very stoned with this bang, this drink, this cannabis containing drink. And then everyone was rushing around throwing colored water at each other. But I mean, this was a highly respectable, conservative, Brahmin family. And this was just part of their traditional way of life. And in the non-spo-in-the-drunk form. Wow. And this is a liquid. The edible form. That's quite amazing. I mean, I often wonder how much different our worldview would be if we had those sort of traditions here in America. Because that's traditions and just sort of these cultural norms that we accept. They shape so much of our behavior. They shape so much of how we view the world. And so much of it is just based on momentum. It's just based on what did your grandparents do? What did they teach your parents? And what did your parents teach you? And what is the collective culture of your neighborhood, your community? Yes. Exactly. One thing that's just occurred to me, well, there's two things I'd like to ask you. Well, one thing, let me ask you something. Please, there's, you know, I've done a lot of research on the sense of being stared at. I think that this feeling that almost everyone's experienced of feeling you're being looked at, you turn around someone staring at it, or you can stare at someone and make them turn around. This is something which is very widespread in the population. There's been a kind of scientific taboo for years about it, because it ought not to happen. If your mind's nothing but your brain looking at someone shouldn't affect them, because everything's all inside your head. Whereas if when you look at somebody, the image that you're seeing is projected out, as I suggest it is, when I look at you now, I don't think your, my image of you in three dimensions and full color is inside my head. I think it's where you are. I think I'm projecting out my image of you. Everything I'm seeing in this room is where it seems to be projected out. My mind's extended beyond my brain. Anyway, that is how we experience it. The official theories is all inside the head. And because the official theory says this is just a superstition, people can't really tell when they're being looked at. They're being almost no scientific investigation until I took it up in the 1980s. And now quite a number of people have done this research on the sense of being stared at to find out if people really can tell when they're being stared at from behind. I've done lots of experiments in schools. Kids are particularly sensitive to this, more so than grownups. Really? Yes. And I then, to find out about it, I thought, well, I've done the experiments, but who are the professionals. So I and my research assistant interviewed security guards, stored detectives, the drug squad at Heathrow, police, and private detectives. Have you ever had this experience? Do people know when they're being watched? Almost everyone who watches others for a living set of sure, of course they do. And if you're being trained to be a private detective, trained how to follow somebody, you don't stare at their back because they're likely to turn around and catch your eye. So anyway, I wrote about this in my book, The Sense of Being Stared at about this research and about its implications for the nature of our minds. But I had recently, somebody came to me from a British defense research laboratory. And he said to me, they've got very interest in this, in the army, because there's some generals that worried that British troops in Afghanistan are now so laid and down with kit, you know, GPS systems. I mean, their whole body is covered with electronic kit. And they've found that when they're so top heavy, carrying all this kit, they have to look down at the ground all the time to avoid stumbling because it's harder to walk with all this stuff. And they can easily be picked off by grellifighters behind rocks with rifles. So what they said is, do you think we could train people in threat awareness so they could actually become more sensitive? Now, in the martial arts, I know some martial arts do have threat awareness training so that people when blindfolded have to become more aware of when somebody's looking at and more going to attack them from behind. So my question to you, since this is your world not mine, is how easy do you think it would be part of a train people in threat awareness to become more sensitive to than when they're being looked at? That's very interesting. I have never been a part of any martial art that teaches people threat awareness. The martial arts that I've been involved in have all been about acquiring very specific skills for hand-to-hand combat against other trained adversaries. There's a bunch of different types of martial arts that emphasize what you call self-defense type martial arts. My issue with those guys and the practices of self-defense type martial arts. what you call self-defense type martial arts. My issue with those guys and the practices of self-defense type martial arts is that almost everything that they're teaching would only work against a non-trained opponent. They have all these ideas like if a guy comes at you and throws a punch, you grab his wrist, you do this, you do that. All that stuff only works on someone who doesn't have a fight. And my thinking is always learn what works on trained killers. Learn things that are undeniable against the most skilled martial artists. Those are the things you want to learn. And through this practice of very difficult to pull off techniques, very difficult training, pushing yourself, expanding the boundaries of your willingness to push your body in your mind, that's how you truly learn about yourself. And me and me, I'm not sure if I had this expression that he wrote in the book of five rings that once you understand the way broadly, you will see it in all things. And that way being in his world was the way of sword fighting. And that you would understand this in this most incredible and intense way. And you would see the same sort of path of the true path in calligraphy, in carpentry, and all sorts of expressive art forms. And that this is my opinion, what is the great benefit of martial arts. It's the developing of your human potential through this incredibly difficult endeavor. And I've always found that these guys who like blindfold and look out through, it's all bullshit. There's a tremendous amount of bullshit in martial arts. It's one of the worst. Yeah, much less so now because of the new movement from 1993 on has been the movement of mixed martial arts. And that's because of these things called ultimate fighting championship and mixed martial arts competitions. And what mixed martial arts competitions have done is there was always these ideas that different people have like death touches. And this guy could just hit you in a certain place and use his chi and knock you back. All those guys failed miserably in competition. Now a single one was successful, not one. Every single one was beaten down. And it just showed there's no mysticism when it comes to martial arts. The true mysticism is the conquering of your fears, the ability to understand how to remain calm during these incredibly stressful moments of competition. And through repetition and intelligent development of technique, that's what real martial arts training teaches people. And that any divine feeling you get from a true master, you would get from a pianist as well. You would get from a true, a brilliant painter. You've met Alex Gray, right? Brilliant painter. But you know how that feeling you get when you're around him? He's a master. He has this sense of this... You know you're in the presence of a very unique person. And I have experienced that same feeling when I've been around martial artists. And that same feeling when I've been around, just great minds, great thinkers. What you do is you recognize your recognizing greatness, your recognizing what Musashi said, recognizing someone who understands the way broadly. And I don't believe in a lot of these ideas of self-defense training. You know, I think there's certain techniques that are very effective for soldiers, like disarmament techniques, like how to take someone's pistol away, how to defend against a knife attack, where it's very technique oriented. Crav Magan incorporates a lot of those, which is an Israeli martial art. It takes a lot of the best aspects of many different martial arts, and they train that. There are definitely real techniques involved that have been taught to soldiers and by soldiers when it comes to disarmament, when it comes to how to deal with hand-to-hand combat in certain situations. But I think overall a lot of the quote-unquote self-defense styles are bullshit. And a lot of the... We're going to blindfold you and people are going to kick you. If I blindfold you, you're going to get fucked up. If I blindfold you, there's not a person alive that's going to stop me from punching them in the face of I blindfold them. You're not going to know what's coming. The only thing that you can help is if you have control of a body, like if you're blindfolded you can grapple very well. But I've grappled with my eyes closed before. But the reason being is that if I am holding on to your waist, if I have a hold of you, I know where everything else is. It's just a pattern thing. It's a pattern recognition. I've been in that position so many times that I know where your neck is going to be. I know where your arm's going to be. If I isolate your shoulder, I know where your wrist is going to be. I know how to isolate those joints without having to look at them. So in that sense you could do some things blindfolded, but not striking, not distance. No. Well I think the threat of wearing this stuff was not so much that you could fight blindfolded, but training people to feel from which direction someone was looking at behind. Now it seems to me plausible that you could train that, but it's not my world. And so really this is an issue if they asked my advice on experimental design. What I do for threat awareness is this. I'd have say take a five story building. On one of the five stories selected at random, you'd have, you'd do it at night, have guys hidden behind in offices that can look at people working along corridors. You'd have CCTV cameras and people watching them on that floor. But on the other four floors you'd switch off the TV cameras and be nobody there. And you'd have somebody walk through each floor of this building, and then they'd have to say which one they were being watched in. And one out of five, if they got it right, you know, lots of times. There's a one in five chance of getting it right just by guessing. But if you find results above score, above chance, you could then say, well these people are actually detecting when they're potential threats. And you might be able to train people to get better at it. Well you did, your study correct me if I'm wrong. You had people sit down and then they would they hit a button when they felt someone looking at them. No, what happened was this, well there's two methods. One method I've mainly used is the simplest one that you can do with kids in schools. One person's blindfolded with an airline star blindfold to cut out peripheral vision. The other person sits behind them and then in a random series of trials, the simplest method is tossing a coin, but I have random sheets of instructions. You'd look or you don't look. So if it's a looking trial, the person behind stairs at the back of their neck and thinks about them. If it's not, and then after ten seconds, there's a click. And so they hear a click or a beep, they know the trials begun. And within ten seconds they have to say looking or not looking, who being looked at or not. Yes or no, it's right or wrong. And then the next trial at random would be looking or not looking. And if it's not looking, they look away and think of something else. And people have to guess, we usually do twenty of these, they're only ten seconds each, so it doesn't take long. And this gives results where most people score above chance, 50% chance, but many, if you take an average, it comes out at around 55 to 60%. So it's not a big effect, but over hundreds of thousands of trials, it shows something's going on. So it's basically significant. Yes, very significant. And if you do it through windows to eliminate smell or sound or one-way mirrors, it still works. And in Amsterdam, this has been running in the Science Museum for 20 years. And it's one of the biggest experiments ever conducted. And the interesting thing there is the overall results are extremely positive, highly significant statistically. But what they've shown is what I've already found in my own experience, the most sensitive subjects are children under the age of nine. And I think most of us, when we were older, we go out into the world as crowded streets, lots of people. Look at, we desensitise ourselves, but children are much more sensitive. I wonder if that case, a wonder of really attractive woman would be the worst at it, because really attractive women are used to putting on blindfolds and walking past people staring at them all the time. Yes, well, there is a slight difference in those who've experienced this. More women than many experienced being stared at, and more men than women have experienced turning it up and looking at others and making them turn around. Men are lures. Yes. So attractive women do have to, as you say, they have to. They have to learn to avoid meeting people's gaze. I like this photograph. American Girl in Italy, it's from 1951. It's a fascinating photograph. It's a famous photograph. This American woman is walking down this street next to these animals, these men that are grabbing their crotch and they're stiff. And she has this look in her face like she's not looking at anyone in particular. She's just going straightforward. And that woman would be like a perfect candidate, someone who's used to blocking off all these leering, freaks, they're staring at her. When you, was there anyone that you'd ever done that study on that was like really good at it? Like 75%, 80%. Oh, 100%. 100%. Yes. Someone got 100%. Yes. And that was my oldest son, Murnin. When he was Murnin. Murnin. Is that a son named Murnin? Yes. That's ridiculous. He's a scientist. He's doing a PhD at the moment in Trumpically. Dr. Murnin. Wow. The younger my younger son, he's 24, is a musician. He's a hundred percent. Yes. When Murnin was four years old, I did this experiment with him. You know, blindfolding. He's sitting there. I said, look, I'm going to look at you some of the time, the rest of the time, not in each time you hear this click. You have to say if you think you're being looked at. He got it right to 100% of the time. So I couldn't believe this. He wasn't cheating. I mean, he didn't know about cheating. He was four. He was four. He was four. Wow. He was brilliant. And he said, Daddy, you've done it. Can we do it the other way around? Can you tell when I'm looking at you? So I said, OK, we'll try that. And we did it the other way around. And I, you know, out of 20 trials, I got sort of 11 out of 20. It was above chance, but I was wrong quite a lot of the time. Then he got the idea, well, you can be wrong. And I was wrong. And sort of doubt entered his mind. And after that, when I tested him, it was still fairly high, and he was 75%, but he never got 100% again after the first two trials. Wow. That's interesting. And what were the numbers? Like how many times did you do it? Well, the first two times were 20 times. 20 times. So normally I do these trials with 20 trials, and most people would get, say, 11 out of 20. And he was getting 20 out of 20. That's insane. Which is hugely significant, of course. And anyway, the thing is that young children are very, very sensitive to this. And how are you? Four and six of the younger children? Oh, well, you see, you changed up with your young children. I'm going to. I'm going to. I've already got my plans for tonight. Don't want to go on the way home. I'm going to pick up some blindfold. Yeah, that's brilliant. That's really interesting. The idea that you introduced the possibility of failure, and then he was like, oh, and then he doubt crept in. Exactly. And the problem with the kinds of tests I do test on the sense of being stared at to leopard theory. I'm doing a lot on telephon telepathy. Can you tell who's calling? The problem with these kinds of experiments is that you have to set them up so that people can be right or wrong. And no one's very few people are right all the time. But as soon as dark creeps in, the mind interferes people think, oh, maybe I guess one way last time it's statistical they should be the other way this time. And they start as soon as that kind of thing goes on, people lose it. Boy, that is life in a nutshell, isn't it? Like as soon as you have doubt, your whole world is just a mess. And unfortunately, these experiments that I do introduced doubt into the vet, because I have to do statistical experiments that would be credible to skeptics. So there's a kind of skepticism built into the experiments. I haven't yet found a way of doing these. I'm always literally the holy grail would be to find ways of doing these tests where people don't realize that they're being tested and that there could be that there's doubt. How could that be done though? Well, I'm thinking of one kind of test that would be incorporated in a video game, where say you have to choose between going through one door or another door. And one door you go through it's absolutely awful and the other door you escape and you're on to sort of next stage. You could have it where when people choose, it hasn't been decided. You'd have a random event thing that would determine which door you go through after you've made the choice to go through it. This is then called pre-sentiment or pre-cognitioners like knowing the future. And so if people were right more often than they were wrong, you'd know, because it purely chances should be 50-50. If some people were coming out 60-40, you wouldn't say this is a psychological test. You would say, you know, how lucky are you? And can you be consistently lucky in this? And it would be more like luck. It would still involve an element of doubt because you might start thinking, oh, I'm not very lucky today. But it wouldn't be framed as a scientific experiment. It would be framed as a way of training your ability to be lucky. Well, training your ability to be lucky. That intuition is a very strange thing. And some people believe in it and some people don't. Some people believe that you make good choices. You'll hear people that are successful that are confident in that, hey, I've always been lucky. I've got great instincts. But there is something to instincts. There's something to trusting certain folks and not trusting certain folks based on just immediately the feeling that you get when you meet them. Some things just don't seem right. And I think a lot of it is probably pattern recognition. A lot of it is, you know, I've been around guys like this before. I know what they're about. This guy's just got a little bit of bullshit and I'm not going to get out of here. Well, I think intuition just means direct knowing. And some of it can be telepathic. Some of it can be unconscious pattern recognition. There's lots of components. But some of them, I think, are what you could call parapsychological. You know, feeling the future or picking up things telepathically. And you know, these recent experiments of Darryl Bem at Cornell on feeling the future. I don't know if you've looked into those. Let me just keep an eye on the time. It's one o'clock. Okay. Well, you have a pocket watch. Old school. Look at you with a chain on it. Yes. Wow. I don't like wearing wristroaches. Let me check that out. What do you have it connected to your belt or something? Yes. Yes. Save for the trousers. Wow. Pretty slick. So where's a pocket watch? Well, you know, you need to know the time sometimes. Do you not like watches? No. I don't like being mannocled to time. Oh, man. An anacled. Yeah. Did you carry a cell phone? No. Oh, you want to those guys? Yeah. How come? I hate being interrupted. Oh, no. You know, I don't like the phone. No, Tom, I don't use phones much. I make use email. That's fine. You know, you can always just show your phone off. I know, but I do have one. Because I'm doing experiments on cell phones, on telephonetilepities. My friend Steve was talking about from London. Same thing. He's having a phone. Drives his wife crazy. Yes. Well, that's a good reason for not having one. I don't want to be interrupted all the time. And if I go for a walk or if I'm working or something, I find it really annoying if the phone rings. Anyway, the pocket watch means I can know the time when I need to know. I'm going to have to go fairly soon, but not quite yet. Where were we? Telepathy tests. And intuition. Sometimes it's in two of Darrel-Bem's experiments. A very simple. And it's called Feeling the Future. And there's this phenomenon that Dean Radin at the Institute of Nanatic Sciences has done a lot of research on where it turns out that we can respond a few seconds before an emotionally arousing event. Our body starts preparing for it before it happens. This would be very relevant to far sports, ping-pong, tennis, cricket, downhill skiing, and probably martial arts as well. And this research seems to me pretty convincing. I've been a subject in some of these experiments myself. And the Dean Radin version of it is this. You sit there in front of a computer screen. You're wearing electrodes that measure emotional arousal. You know, adrenaline causes sweating and emotional arousal, like a light detector. So it's a standard way of measuring emotional arousal. When you're ready, you press a button. And ten seconds later, a picture appears on the screen. Most of the pictures are neutral. You know, landscapes, you know, bowl of flowers or something like that. And vaguely pleasant. Some of them are scenes that are emotionally arousing. Hardcore pornography or scenes of extreme violence. Now, almost everybody when they see hardcore pornography or scenes of violence is emotionally aroused. Even they don't want to be. They are. And the light detector thing shows a huge emotional arousal. The interesting thing in these experiments is the emotional arousal begins about five seconds before the picture appears on the screen. Five seconds. Five seconds. It's a long time. And so the body, the heart-steats beating fast to the fight or flight response. You know, the adrenaline kind of response kicks in. So when the stimulus occurs, the body is already sort of revved up with this emotional response. Now, this is work that Dean Radin's done. He's repeated it. And it's been replicated elsewhere. It's called pre-centimally. And it's been replicated elsewhere. It's called pre-centimally feeling and advance. And the decision as to which picture appears on the screen is made by the computer, a millisecond before it actually appears. There's no one in the world knows what picture's going to appear. Now, this is really interesting, you see, because it shows there's a kind of feeding back of emotion. Now, Darryl Barmen Cornell, who is a very respected professor of psychology, has been doing a different kind of experiment which doesn't involve the lie detector. His experiments have you sit in front of a computer screen and there's two curtains there. Behind one of those curtains, there's a blank wall, an image of a blank wall. Behind the other one, there's a pornographic image. Now, most people, even if they don't normally watch pornography, are more interested in certain things. And so, there's a lot of people who are not interested in this. And so, there's a lot of images that are not used to the same image. Now, most people, even if they don't normally watch pornography, are more interested in seeing a pornographic image than a blank wall. And before you do the test, you do it as a simple questionnaire. You gaze straight, et cetera. So, people who gaze gay born the graphic images. So, those are emotionally arousing. So, what happens? You sit down at the computer and you click on one of those two curtains, which are the two. It's random whether you'll get the wall or the pornographic image. So, you click on one, and most people would hope that they're going to see the pornographic image a different one each time. And the computer makes the decision which one to roll back, which curtain to roll back, after you've made the click, people don't know that this decision is only made by the computer after they've decided. They think it's already there. So, most people don't know that they're doing a pre-sentiment test. So, what happens is in these experiments, about 53 or 54% of the time people get the pornographic image, whereas by pure chance, they would be 50%. And if instead of a pornographic image, you have a sort of mildly pleasant landscape or something that's not emotionally arousing, it's done to 50%. So, this is telling us that something about emotional arousal can work back in time. And when you think about fast sports, imagine, you know, tennis, people are serving at 90 miles a year. There's not time for the eye to take in the angle of the ball to process it in the brain through clunky brain processing, to send messages along nerves, to muscles, to get the whole body ready, or in a penalty shootout. The goalie has to, in a foot, basakomatch. They have to react very quickly. And in ping pong, you have to react quickly and cricket, people of Australian fast bowlers, both at 100 miles an hour in cricket. There's not long enough. And in downhill skiing, you come around a corner. It's too fast. So, I think that part of the way we're reacting, I think this comes out most in sports, is it would also come out driving a car. If you got the five seconds in a trance warning, some accidents about to happen, you could concentrate and perhaps avoid it better. And this is a fascinating field of research, which is not yet being picked up by sports psychologists, or by, I've told several people in the military about it, because I think it would be really interesting. I don't think it's going to do any harm if they know this. But say, for example, you had your physiology of being monitored. You're in a flight simulator or a driving simulator. And say you had it so that when you got an otherwise inexplicable emotional arousal going on, you'd be unconscious of it to start with. Say it was wired up so a red light went on in the cockpit of the flight simulator. It might sometimes be a false alarm, but every time that light went on, the message would be concentrate hard or something bad might happen. This could be a useful technological gadget. So I think there's a lot of potential in this kind of research, which is only just being begun to be explored. And the reason I've encouraged people in the British Defence Research, establishment to do this is because they're more likely to take it up than people in universities, because in universities, you know, there's this kind of dogmatic skepticism that means people know it's rubbish, it's woo, it's due day science, et cetera. I mean, stupid reactions really. The most interesting answer, yes, this is really interesting. Can we find out more and can we apply it? That's incredibly fascinating. Do you think that these things like this precognitionability or this instincts or these ability to recognize these patterns? Do you think this is possibly some emerging thing in human beings, emerging aspect of the development of humans? I mean, obviously, if you believe in evolution, we were one thing now, we are this. We are what we are now, which is radically different from the pre-human hominids of 2 million plus years ago. We're very, very different. If you just extrapolate a million years now, we're going to be very different from what we are now. Do you think that this aspect of human beings, of human life, is a developing thing? This precognitionability, this ability to communicate with each other? Do you think maybe that's what's manifesting itself when you think about someone and also the phone rings and it's them, like instantaneously? Well, I think that it's something in traditional societies that's actually better developed than in modern ones, where people don't talk about it on the whole. There's no training for it and stuff. In traditional societies, people take these things for granted and they rely on them. Now, the phone is an interesting case because this is a modern technology. But I think that telepathy, as a means of communication between people who know each other well, is actually, it's always been going on, animals have it. I've been doing research on telepathy and dogs. I wrote a book called Dogs That They When They're In Is A Coming Home. I tried lots of experiments on our dogs picking it up just by routine or car signs. The answer is no. We film them. We have people come at random times in unfamiliar vehicles. The dogs still know. But why have people have such a hard time replicating those? Well, they have been replicating. The dog ones being replicated. It was replicated by a skeptic who then pretended he hadn't replicated it. But it's now generally agreed that his results agreed perfectly with my own. And millions of people have dogs that do this. I don't think it's hard to replicate. It's just that if you do this in a university, it's likely to end your career. Yes, that's what it is because I've read online. People that have disagreed with you saying that no one has ever replicated your results. Oh, yes. Well, that's the skeptics' disinformation. It's been replicated by one of the leading skeptics in Britain who then pretended falsely that he hadn't replicated. And who is Richard Weisman. And online on my website, you can see his data plotted on graphs, showing exactly the same effect as I found. Is it statistically significant or is it 100% of... Is it statistically significant? His data and mine. What is your data? How often do they know and how often were they unaware? About 80% of the time we did a series of 100 trials with one dog. And on 80 of those occasions, the dog started waiting when the person was... Inroads of... About to come home. It was actually before she got in the car to come home or the taxi. It picked up her intention. And this was at random times. On 20 occasions out of 100, it didn't. On three or four of those, the dog was sick. And on the other occasions, it was when there was a bitch on heat in the next department, which showed the dog could be distracted. But even if you include all 100 events, including the ones where the dog was... And do the statistics, it's still massively significant. That's fascinating. So you think that much like what you were talking about with your son, who was able to recognize 100% of the time when someone was staring at him, that dogs, because they don't have like a cultural context, they don't have all this doubt in their head. That's right. They do it. And they have an emotional investment too. It's not like a boring parapsychology experiment. And for a dog, it's immensely emotionally exciting when the owner comes home. That there's an emotional chart. They do it over and over again. They never get bored of their owners coming home. So this is the telephone phenomenon, which I can briefly summarize, is one I do in my tests, people who say this happens to them in real life. Give me the names and numbers of four people it might happen with. They sit at home being filmed, so we know they're not getting other phone calls or text messages or something. And they are a landline phone with no caller ID display. We pick one of the four callers at random. And call them out and say, if you were doing it, say, please ring Joe now. And they think about it, they ring you your phone rings. And before you pick it up, you have to say who you think it is. I think it's John, and you pick it up, say, hi John. You'll write you who are wrong. You can't know from the normal patterns of life because it's randomly chosen. And so by chance, you'd be right one time in four, 25%. In these experiments, the average score in our film tests is 45%. And it massively significance statistically. And this has now been replicated in other universities, even one of Britain's leading skeptics, checked this out, and he's getting positive results, much to his dismay. And so this is a, I've now got an automated test. I'm about to launch it in the US, but it's already launched in Britain, where people can do this on cell phones with their friends. You don't have to be in a lab. I think telephone telephoned telephoned is real. And I think what's happening is that when you want to call someone, if I wanted to call you, I'd form the intention to call you. I've got a motive to call you. I'd be thinking about Joe. And then I'd get my phone out, I'd dial a number or press your memory thing for you. When I form the intention to call you, I think you could, in some cases, pick up that intention. You might start thinking about me for no apparent reason. And then the call comes through. And you say it's funny, I was just talking, thinking about you. So I think this is a genuinely telepathic phenomenon in many cases. Sometimes it can be coincidence. But on average, it seems to be a real effect. And I think this is an example of where telepathy really is evolving, along with technology. It happens with emails and text messages as well. Until recently, the only way you could get in touch with someone at a distance was telepathically, if you wanted a quick response. Now you can do it by phone. I've also done research on what I think is... You could get in touch with someone's distance who is telepathically if you wanted a quick response. Now you can do it by phone. I've also done research on what I think is one of the basic biological forms of this, which mothers and babies. Many nursing mothers find that when they're away from their baby, for no apparent reason, their milk lets down, their breasts start squeezing out milk. Normally that happens when the baby cries and they feel they're breast-tinkle. Say there was a nursing mother here now and there's no baby crying here and she felt her milk let down. Most nursing mothers think my baby needs me and until recently they just went home to the baby. Now they call home on a cell phone but I've done studies on nursing mothers in London 20 of them over two month period each and we found that it was very, very highly significant. It wasn't just synchronised rhythms. They were responding when their baby needed them and before telephones were invented any mother that could pick up when her baby needed her and went to the baby would have a mother, a baby that survived better than a mother that didn't pick it up. So I think telephones in a way give us a technological way of doing something that in the past happened more under-reliably by telepathy. So do you think that these telephones connecting to telepathy is somehow or another related to this this morphic field that is seemingly undefined. We don't we know or you brother you believe that this is a real phenomenon that it exists but we don't know exactly what the mechanism is. Yeah I think what happens with social groups any social group is that the field as a whole has a the group as a whole has a field. Like a magnetic field will arrange iron filings which are within its field of influence if you have a flock of birds like starlings that are flying together. There's a kind of field that coordinates their movements so they can change direction rapidly without bumping into each other. If you have a school of fish you've got the same kind of thing. If you have a pack of wolves and they leave the young the cubs are left behind in the den with a babysitter while the adults go hunting to bring food back for the young. The field that links them isn't broken its stretches like an invisible elastic band. I think that's the basis of telepathy. I think it's to do with social bonds through social fields and a mother and the baby are very closely linked and it's as if there's this invisible elastic band between them. And so when you look at telephone telepathy it typically only happens with people you know well. It happens between mothers and children, husbands and wives, lovers, partners, therapists and clients if there's a kind of emotional charge, best trends. It doesn't happen with insurance salesmen and people to whom you're not emotionally connected. It depends on social bonds. And so I think morphic field of the social group is something that applies to any social group. A family is a kind of has a morphic field. A football team has one. Michael Murphy who founded the Eslin Institute did a fascinating book called The Psych Excited Sports. And he describes these interviews with football players and many of them turned quite mystical when they were interviewed in private. They wouldn't talk about it in the locker room for fear of being thought weird. But many of them like soccer players, they said when the game's going well it's as if they can just feel where other people are on the field. It was like an instinct even. They just somehow they were working like a single organism. And I think that's an example of a morphic field of a social group. And I think that's why team sports are so interesting to watch because it's not just about guys being brilliant. It's about guys working together. And in a way that's highly coordinated and more effectively the team works together, the more effective it is. That's fascinating stuff. It's really interesting to consider how much of a factor that does play. What exactly it is too. It's amazing. You're out of time. Rupert Sheldrake.org is your website Rupert Sheldrake.org. Oh Sheldrake.org. I'm sorry. Just Sheldrake.org. And Rupert Sheldrake is your Twitter handle. Correct. Do you handle all that stuff? I don't know. Actually I don't really use Twitter. So no forget that. I do have one, but I don't use it. Someone said it out for me and I never learned. Your last tweet was September 13th. I posted a new photo of the Facebook. Oh so you use Facebook. I use Facebook. And it automatically posted Twitter. It works for me today. Okay. Thank you very much man. Really appreciate this. It was really cool to have a conversation with you after listening to you in the trial logs. I really appreciate it. And we could do this anytime here in town. Okay. What is it? You fun for me too. I've really enjoyed it. How often you in LA? The last time it was 27 years ago. So you're not there. That's so real. Well, I got lucky. I got lucky. All right. Thank you very much. I really, really appreciate it. Rupert Sheldrake ladies and gentlemen. I will see you Thursday with Graham Hancock. Until then, Much Love, Big Kiss. Muah. This podcast was brought to you by blue apron. Go to blue apron.com forward slash rogan for your first two meals for free. That's blue apron.com forward slash rogan. We're also brought to you by stamps.com. Go to stamps.com. Enter the code word J R E and get your $110 bonus offer, which includes a digital scale and up to $55 in free postage. And last but not least, we are brought to you by connet.com that is O N N I T. Use the code word rogan and you will save 10% off any in all several weeks.