the general good experience. It's a great idea to talk to you and take in your advice as completely changing his life and now he feels infinitely better. I mean he did a lot of the work himself. Well he had do, but you had to tell him what to do, but luckily he listened. Yeah, I mean I think I think giving my life expectancy just validated it for him and just really put it in his face. And you know because that's something you can calculate. He's like okay well I'm 53 now. 63 doesn't seem that far off. Right, you know. A lot of like high stress individuals that don't take care of themselves. They're ticker checks out around 67. Yeah. Pretty standard. It just takes its toll. I mean and the funny thing is you know when you go back and you look at the pictures of him prior to. Oh yeah. He does kind of look like he was about to pop. It's not good. Yeah he had a big old moon face and he was you know. He ends up on the forehead and the veins out of the side of the neck. Okay. What was like first of all how did he meet you? How did this come about and like how did the conversation start? So we have a mutual friend named Carrie Kasem. If you remember Casey Kasem. Yeah I know you can't talk for me. I worked with her back in the day in the early you have seen. Okay. So you know I recently met Carrie and she had kind of a life changing experience as well. You know if you know anything about her journey with Lyme disease and chronic viral infection. I mean she really she really struggled and ended up healing herself. And she took the same test that the Dana White did. It was life changing for her and she was like what is this test? It's a genetic test. It looks at genetic methylation pathways. So methylation pathways. methylation pathways. So think about it like this. You know we pull crude oil out of the ground. But you can't put crude oil into your gas tank. Right because the car doesn't understand that fuel source. So what happens is crude oil has to be refined into gasoline and then the car can run. Okay so in human beings there's a similar process called methylation. There's not a single compound known to mankind. Not one. There's no vitamin no mineral no amino acid no nutrient no protein. No nutrient of any kind that enters the human body and is used in the format that we put it in. Without a single exception everything we put into our bodies has to be refined into the usable form. If you can't make this conversion you have a deficiency. It's this deficiency that leads to the most common ailments that we suffer from. So that process is called methylation. And there are several genes that govern it. This is where a lot of the misconception about genetically inherited disease comes from. Right we'll say, well Joe you know your father-in-law has not your father-in-law. Your father on your mom's side had hypertension. Your grandfather had hypertension. Now you have hypertension. So you have genetically inherited hypertension. Or you have familial hypertension. Well, the hypertension is commonly known as high blood pressure. High blood pressure. Yeah high blood pressure. But 85% of all high blood pressure is what we call idiopathic. Right it's a unknown origin. So we say that things are genetically inherited because they run in families. But it's rarely the disease that's passed from generation to generation. Well we pass from generation to generation. Is the inability to refine a raw material. Which causes a deficiency. Which leads to that disease. And what generally leads to hypertension. So if you look at a Dana White case, right, is a perfectly common case. In fact the Journal of Hypertension published an article in November 19th of 2017. If you want to look at that article up. And essentially linking an amino acid in the bloodstream called homocysteine. To hypertension. And the reason for this is you got homocysteine in your blood. I've got it in my blood. Everybody listening to this podcast has homocysteine. But if you have an imperative ability to break homocysteine down. Right to take that amino acid. Homocysteine. And convert it into a harmless amino acid called methionine. If you can't make this conversion. Homocysteine rises. Causes something called hyper homocysteine. It's anemia high. Homocysteine in the blood. When homocysteine rises. It becomes one of the more inflammatory compounds in the human body. As it's cruising by the inside lining of the artery. It starts to irritate the artery. It actually reduces the arteries elasticity. And can even cause it to constrict. So think about this. You've got 63,000 miles of blood vessel. Roughly in your body. It doesn't take much narrowing. To drive pressure up. Think about it. 85% of all hypertensive diagnosis. Diagnosis of high blood pressure. Primary hypertension or essential hypertension. Our idiopathic. Right. Unknown origin. Only 15% of them are secondary hypertension. Of where we know the exact cause. And so what we do is we take people that have high blood pressure. We run a bunch of tests on them. EKG. It's normal. EEG. It's normal. Heart and lung sounds. Cardiacath. We do all of these cardiovascular tests in the all come out normal. Yet the person still has high blood pressure. And that's largely because the high levels of homocysteine are causing vascular narrowing. I mean this is a fixed system. Right. So if I make the pipes smaller in a fixed system, pressure goes up. So in Dana's case specifically, and he's thrown his blood work out on the internet. So, you know, we can talk about his labs. But in his cases, he had one of the highest levels of homocysteine that I'd personally ever seen. And our clinical team at seeing. EKG. So when you say high blood pressure, could you define like, I'm not good at that. Whenever I get my blood pressure, they tell me the number and they say it's good. I go, okay. So what's a good number? EKG. So 120 over 70. 120 over 80. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. EKG. one of the silent killers in cardiovascular disease. All right? In fact, one of the first primary symptoms is sudden death. Right? So we often put people on hypertensive medication before we actually look at whether or not they have high levels of home assisting or whether or not they might have a gene mutation specifically called MTR. And you could test for it or MTRR. And what this gene codes for is it codes for the enzymes that break down home assisting and turn it into an amino acid called methionine. And so if this conversion is impaired and this home assisting starts to rise and your vascular system constricts, it can drive your pressure up. And it drives your pressure up without anything being wrong with the heart. So then we start standing on the heart, which is what happened in Dana's case, beta blockers, calcium, chanoblockers, diuretics, all of these things. His blood pressure was still through the roof. That goes his number. I think he was 160 over 110. I want to say it was very high. And it was consistently high. We were actually, our clinical team was taking his blood pressure two or three times a day, seven days a week. And it was consistently very elevated, even though he was on blood pressure medication. Really? So statins, so statins, what do you do on cholesterol? Like a repath or anything. So there's trinium. What's a hypertension? They're called beta blockers, like enderol, calcium chanoblockers. We call it ACE inhibitors. Sometimes we use diuretics. And so he was still jacked up even though he was on those. Oh, he was still jacked up even though he was on medication. And what are the other factors? What are other things cause hypertension? Well, I mean, cardiovascular disease, and there are certain direct genetic links to cardiovascular disease, but they're very rare. But diet, atherosclerosis, narrowing of the arteries or arterial sclerosis, hardening of the arteries, calcifications, and the arterial wall can cause pressure to go up. Regurgitations in heart valves can cause pressure to increase. But when you think about the heart as a muscle, right? And all four chambers are circulating blood normally. And it's got a good vascular supply, but it's beating into constricted pipes. Think about what happens. That pressure is gonna back up, right? And so we rarely go outside the heart to diagnose whether or not, and for the record, I am not a physician. I'm not licensed to practice medicine. I'm a human biologist. I didn't, you know, learn my trade in medical school. I took eight years of undergrad and postgraduate education in human biology. But for 20 years, I was a mortality expert in the insurance industry and I just read medical records for a living. So the vast amount of what I've come to understand about modern medicine is just come from reading thousands and thousands and thousands of medical records. And you can see very often that when people were being diagnosed with high blood pressure, they were always looking at the heart. They never looked outside the heart to say, well, could it possibly be beating into a dysfunctional arterial system? And so in Dana's case, and I should have brought the numbers because I had the week over week numbers, it was astounding. You know, we just put them on a simple amino acid called trimethylglyce. You know, amino acid, you can get off the shelf. And what it did was it made up for this genetic deficiency, this lack of code to break down homocysteine and his body started to methylate to break homocysteine down. And is this amino acid that pretty much everybody should be taking? It's amino acid that everybody with hypertension should consider if they have high homocysteine. And say the word again, what is it with the amino acid called? Trimethylglyceine, TMG. Is that the capital T, capital N? Similar to regular glycine. No, this is trimethylglyceine. It's a little bit different than the amino acid glycine. So trimethylglyceine will actually help to metabolize to help give the body the raw material it needs. I guess I'm right, that shit's down. I'm right down. Trimethylglyceine tomorrow. Why just want to keep track of all these different things you're saying and oftentimes I do forget. So trimethylglyceine. Trimethylglyceine, just put capital TMG. That's what it'll say on the bottle. TMG. OK. And so, you know, sometimes I use the analogy that when I was getting my second human biology degree, I was in grad school, my human biology degree. I had to take all these plant botany courses, which I hated. But you have to take them. Morphology, ethylophytes, and all these crazy courses about plants. But the one thing that really stood out to me by taking all these plant biology courses is that if there's anything wrong when the leaves of a plant, like the tree, the trunk leaves or the branches, and you call a true arborist or true botanist out to your house, they won't even touch the leaves or the branches of the trunk of the tree. The first thing they'll do is they'll quartess the soil. And they'll go, you know what? This soil's deficient in nitrogen. And then they'll add nitrogen to the soil and the leaf will heal. But we don't think about human beings like this anymore. I feel like there's such a positive understanding of deep human physiology and a lot of the medical community, not all the medical community. And we don't actually have faith in mankind and humanity and the body's ability to heal itself. And whether or not they might, someone might be deficient in a raw material, not pathological disease. So for example, in Dana White's case, he was diagnosed with idiopathic hypertension, which essentially did not have. He was being medicated for it. He had been medicated for it for 15 years. And he did really have hypertension. There was nothing really wrong with him. It's that his body couldn't break down homocysteine. It was deficient in the amino acids needed to break this homocysteine down. As soon as we put those back in his body, it started to function normally. And where would you generally get those amino acids if you weren't taking them? I mean, you can get them online. I mean, there's lots of great things. No, no, if you weren't taking them, is it they in food? Oh, yeah. They're in foods. That's why if you look at certain diets, like high folate diets, like carnivore diets, diets that are high in dietary folate, leafy greens, grass-fed meats, eggs, dairy, you'll find that they have lower incidences of cancer, diets, and high dietary folate. So this is a raw material that we can get from our food. But very often, our food is just so nutrient deficient. We update the macros on the back of a lot of labels. But if you look at the micros, like how much spinach, how much iron is in spinach or calcium is in spinach, or how much nutrients are on the label of most foods, I mean, it's a fraction of what's actually listed there. And so we're nutrient deficient. Human beings are not as sick as we have been led to believe we are. The majority, in my opinion, of pathology and disease as we know it today, are nutrient deficiencies, missing raw material in the human body. And we just accept all these things as a consequence of aging, weight gain, water retention, lack of sleep, poor focus in concentration, lack of waking energy, hormone imbalance. And we think that the body has all of these different pathologies and diseases. But the truth is it's usually nutrient deficient. It is astounding what happens to human beings when you give their body the raw material that it needs to do its job. I mean, it really is. And so if you're just supplementing for the sake of supplementing, then there's only a marginal chance that you're getting what you need. If you're supplementing for deficiency, that's when magic happens in the human body.