Thank you very much for joining us. So... But son, I owe this to him. Well, this is a remarkable story. So we were connected by someone we both know. I had followed this casually in the media. I didn't know what to make of it. Your son died in November. You commissioned an examination by a forensic pathologist independent forensic pathologist called Dr. Dune Shrau. I have it right here, accompanied by photographs that you took. And I don't think any honest person looking at this would conclude this was a suicide. There's an awful lot of evidence that it wasn't. I was actually shocked by it. So I want to get into the details of what may have happened. But I'd like to start, if you don't mind, by hearing about your son who was he. How old was he? What did he do? What was he like? Sure. So she was a prodigy. From birth, we knew he was gifted. And for leaving, he studied his master's bachelor's in computer science from UC Berkeley. The top school, he had four daughter GPA throughout. As soon as he graduated, he started working in OpenAI. As a researcher, AI researcher, his first project was WebGPT, for which a fresh graduate, he took the lead role. And that WebGPT turned out into BCHAP, GPT, an application. Yes. And this was a publication of four people. One of them is Suchir. Following this, he worked at OpenAI for pre-drining data. That means he was scooping up all the internet data, feeding to GPT's AI model. Following this, he worked. Which is the fuel that it runs on. It needs massive amounts of data in order to become what it is, right? That's the... Yes, it's an AI model. And to the AI model, they need to be data fed. And this data is what everybody is saying is copyright data. That's what all the lawsuits are against. Yes. He was involved in fueling that data. He was directly involved in that part of the business. Yes. He knows inside out. Yes. Following that, he worked directly on the GPT application team itself. And a John Schleman. In this team, he was vital. His former boss, John, claims that his role was vital in GPT team. And he did some kind of tuning and optimization. Made it very efficient. It's a significant contribution. But the irony is he was never acknowledged by OpenAI. And even after he left OpenAI, he's after his death, also no one has acknowledged him. Prior to joining OpenAI, he was so qualified. He was National Champion in 2016 for Computing Columbia. That means he was a top programmer of 2016. Following that, he took a gap here. At 17, he said he doesn't need a degree. Right after 12, he said, I don't need a degree. I don't need to go to college. He took a job in Cora software engineer. He was hired with $25,000 sign on bonus. And a pay equivalent to a master's at a bachelor's holder. He worked there for a year. And then he joined UC Berkeley after taking a gap here. It took a lot of effort and patience into, persevered him to go back to college for which he was grateful throughout. In UC Berkeley, he represented UC Berkeley for ACM, ICPC, Inter-College Programming Contest. The World Contest, he went to China along with his team. It was in 2017. 2018, he won $100,000 award for a DSC competition. This is for passengers, screening algorithm, which TSC has implemented today. He was shining all throughout his life. Prior to this, at the age of 11, he got 680 in a city. And then at 14, the paper he wrote like makes me believe he's a prodigy. That science paper is about quantum computing. Optimizing a CPU. And like he talks about realer side design, that my friends claim they studied in their masters and electronics and communications. All these things make me believe he's a prodigy and he's demonstrated he had exceptional abilities. And it sounds like he did. So it's, but it sounds like from reading about it, that he ran into trouble only when he began to question whether or not the data that was being fed to opening eye was copyrighted. He never raised the voice when he was within opening eye. Because he had concerns that management will not approach. And he started to question all these when a chat GPT became profit-making. As long as it was nonprofit, it was okay. He explains in his publication on Sochi.net, what his views are and why he believes this is copyright violation. And when he started after the statement of Sam Altman in 2023, November, November 21, was the day he got reinstated. I know it's so well because it was the switchy spur day that day. He got reinstated and after that, switchy started thinking about the copyright violation and he did discuss with me. It's very unethical and he feels awful about it. And I said yes, it's unethical. I agree with you. What's an ethical is using copyrighted material material owned by other people for your business, which? Yeah. Artists work will be lost. That means of living will be impacted. Yes. And also he did research and he published like, how the stack overflow and then few other like maybe core off your other websites, the traffic is reducing. And he also made a publication in which he explains that the answer given by chat GPT versus the answer given by stack overflow, how unsigned if we can inaccurate the answer is. Interesting. Yeah. When did he leave open AI? He left in August of 2024. Yes. Third week of August. Third. So recently. Very recently. When did he write his now famous paper about what the management of open AI was doing with copyright material? He next day, he already had made up his mind prior living to, living open AI. In fact, in July, he discussed with his UC Berkeley colleague that he wanted to do a startup and his friend expressed interest, his name is Tyler. So next day after living open AI, he went on interview with Kennedy and news media. We didn't know anything about it. Yeah. We just found out was based on his call logs. He spoke to someone for 40 minutes after he's passing. We called him and found out he was too little. And it was next day after his last day at work. Who did he speak to? I'll get back to you and then he spoke to a report. Kennedy and me, media. That's so good. Kennedy and news media. Kennedy and news media. That's so open AI. Interesting. On October 23rd, his interview was published in New York Times, where he makes a very, very open statement. And he calls open AI violates copyright data. On October 23rd, he was quoted in the New York Times saying that open AI violates copyright law. Yes. It's stealing other people's material. Yeah. Okay. And what did he die? I'm sorry. What did he die? Twenty, September, but we found a body or not, not twenty six November. So he, he was quoted saying that open AI was committing crimes and a month later he was dead. That's not just it. On November 18th, New York Times named my son as custodian witness. custodian witness is very, very important. He had the documents against opening eye. That was on 18th, 22nd. He just came back from vacation from LA and Catalina, I learned the save night. They have attacked him and killed him. Tell us about what the New York Times wrote on November 18th. He had these documents. What were the documents? We need to get the documents from New York Times. It's a sealed document and it's not open for public. But we need to become like the state administrator. My husband will be the state administrator end of this month. Then they will go and acquire the data. What documents they were at the moment. We don't have information. But you know because you read it in New York Times that your son had given journalists papers that he says implicated open AI and crime. Yes. And also on December 2nd, so she had an interview plan with associated press Matt Oberyn. On December 2nd, so she did not attend third. They called on his phone. By then we had his phone. My husband took phone call. And he found out that so she wanted to take legal action against open AI. He wanted to give the witness. By then, this news was not out yet. So she was a custodian witness. But we got it. Then all we did was hurrying up the second autopsy, private autopsy moment. We heard that this was his initiative and he didn't make it to do that. So to bottom line it, it sounds like your son who's your only child, by the way. And I'm really sorry about that. Your son was in a position to threaten really threaten open AI. Well, it's not his intent was not to threaten. He just cared about people. He cared about humanity. He writes in his article in New York Times as well as the publication. He believes the way the AI is currently without any regulation is a harm to him. He's too dubbed for a cause and he lost his life for a cause, his emeritus. Obviously, his emeritus and he never hesitated. He took his life at risk. So the official cause of death is suicide. You're as mother clearly spoke to him a lot. Did you get any indication that he was depressed? No, he just came back from vacation. He had a very active lifestyle. When he happened, we had his memorial service. Many of his friends came and they gave the details of when they met him and how many times they met him after he left. He was visiting family. We were going out for dinner lunch. He was fine. And more than anything else, he had concrete career plans. Yes. An interview scheduled and he had things on his to-do list. Did he ever suggest to you say to you that he felt his life was threatened? Was he worried? He had concrete plans. He wanted to do some work for humanity. That's the last day when we spoke. Last conversation with Suchir in person was that he had a nonprofit in mind. And he didn't take the salary for his work. He said, Mom, I have enough resources. I don't even need to get paid. I want to serve humanity. And he wanted to work in neuroscience and machine learning combination. Using that, I think a scene on his desktop, one of the projects for future of doctor visit. Since we haven't unlocked his email and laptop yet, we have to discover that. But we know he discussed with me. He's a one-year plan. He said, give me a one-year time. You know everything. Did he ever talk to you about Sam Altman? Did you ever talk to your son about Sam Altman? No. We refused. We refused to talk to Sam Altman. But did your son ever talk to you about Sam Altman? Did he ever say anything about Altman? Not to me, but to his friends a lot. When he was in Catalina, I learned he spoke a lot against him. He literally didn't like him. In fact, I've seen his chat log saying that he wanted to work with Annie helped many in her nonprofit work. And that would be Sam's sister who was accused of sexual abuse. Really? He wrote that down. Yes. So he knew what personality Sam Altman had. And his main concerns were the lies. The lies? The lies? The lies? Yeah. He was lying a lot. And my son was very ethical and he couldn't stand it. So the time, if we could go to the timeline around your son's death. So he goes to Catalina Island with friends to backpack to camp. Back in. Yes. November 16 to November 22. They were five guys who went and my son was one of them. All these are his middle school and high school classmates. Some of them are his best buddies. We spoke to every one of them when they came back. Every one gave an image like he's upbeat. He was very happy. He celebrated his 26th birthday on 21st November, the day before he died. What mood do we need to give an account of his happy mood? Exactly. And if you, you know, to certain age, you know, people who've killed themselves. And typically, you know, the suicide follows a morose period of isolation. The person sitting alone in his apartment drinking. He died the night he came back from a camping trip with his high school and college friends. Yes. Yeah. Our attorney, he came to his apartment with us. And moment he inspected his apartment, he said he had fresh supplies ordered here. So many pockets and open. This doesn't look suicidal at all. So, and the photographs that you took which we'll get to in a minute. You know, I just want to say this is not the first time I've been contacted by a family saying, you know, our child. It's ruled a suicide, but we think it was a murder. I mean, many people have claimed that. I've never seen anything like this before. This is, I think, again, to any fair person suggests that he was murdered. But let's get to that. So what do you know he came back from Catalina? And if you don't mind telling us what you know about what happened then. He comes back that evening to San Francisco. He came around like 11 o'clock. He texted me. He's flight is taking off. That was in 22nd. And then 454 he texted saying that it's pouring its entrances. And when he got off Uber, losing off his manager, he has apparently seen sushi coming off with big suitcase and other things. And then sushi said he is some coming back from LA. He was somewhere between 1 to 2 p.m. that day. And then he spoke to dad at 7.15 p.m. He was very happy. And Balaji said, like, she'll be go to CSI. He years in Las Vegas in January because it was raining here. Dad brought up the concept that, you know, whether it will be great in January and so she said yes. And dad gave him a birthday gift. But they gave because 21st was his birthday. He said he'll send him a cash just a token of power. And so she's accepted it. And that's the night he died. The day he died. So his last conversation with his father was what time? Roughly. That's the last conversation. That was the last conversation. I called the next day 12.15 p.m. phone rang once and it went to voicemail. When did you learn that your son was dead? That was on 26. 25th I went to his apartment and knocked on the door. No one opened. I called the dispatch. And fortunately took a day. Yes, effort for us to get his apartment open. 25th they went and didn't even call me back. What happened apparently they have gone and knocked on the door. They didn't bother to open the door. They just said, okay, nobody's opening the door and they went back. Security guard from the apartment complex says he saw the fire truck and the ambulance and the police. And they went back. 5.30 I waited, waited and waited and 5.30 p.m. when I called on Monday 25th. They said, man, unless you're here, we cannot open the door. Next morning, unions. I went to Union City Police Station. That's where we live. And filed a missing person complaint. I waited for one one and a half hours, but both the parents mean. when we started calling all the hospitals in San Francisco area to see if he may have had an accident. Why he's not responding to us. What happened to him? Moment we found that he was not in any of the hospitals. We took a deep breath. Okay, he's safe. But when we went to his apartment one o'clock, I went to San Francisco and the dispatch came at 109 until 4 o'clock. We were not told anything. And then you got a call from from the city. No, that was not how it went. 109 two people, two officers came and they went with the leasing office manager, leasing manager and I'm waiting outside. They didn't allow me inside the premises and waiting outside the complex. Then one one three there has seen apparently. That's what the report says. They've seen the body within five, 10 minutes. They came out and they told me no, we didn't enter. We're waiting for two more officers. We have a security protocol. We cannot go inside around two o'clock, two more officers came. But they knew your son was dead and they lied to you. They didn't tell that for a moment. Two o'clock, they have a protocol. I don't blame them. Two o'clock, two officers came. Dave in the inside 20 minutes they came back and said, we're waiting for two more officers. We have security protocol. We can't go inside. And they said at two o'clock, they said, ma'am, you can go back home. We will inform you in five to six hours. I said, I'm not going anywhere. They told me it's going to take some time for the next two officers to come. I said, let it be. Please give me the phone number. I'll contact them and find out if there's any way we can expedite it. My son's safety is in question. I cannot wait any longer. And then at 320, I saw a big white van coming and my heart sang. So they knew as they were speaking to you that your son was dead, but didn't tell you? Didn't tell. That's disgusting. That's inhuman. Sorry. It is. And you know what? They're asking me to go home. And how are you most nervous dead is looking at the white van. At that moment, I knew ambulance didn't come. And instead of even then, I was optimistic. Maybe ambulance wasn't available. They sent another van. And when I just saw a stretcher that came out, I went and spoke to the officers who are the medical examiners. That's it. We have a dead person in the apartment. That's how I came to know. We first did a deal with Black Rifle Coffee Evan, the CEO sent us like a case of coffee beans. And honestly, I have not had any coffee since then in the past eight months. It's not made by Black Rifle. We are obsessed. And it's not just coffee. They've got high performance energy drinks, tons of merch. That's very cool. It is the best. And we can say that as daily obsessive users of the product. Black Rifle Coffee is awesome. And by the way, Black Rifle itself is awesome. The company has filled with special forces, veterans. Working there, bringing you the best products on the market. Black Rifle has always been more than just about must have offerings. They're committed to supporting veterans for responders, law enforcement. Every purchase provides funding to those groups. And gear, the people who are protecting us who are the heart of this country. From premium coffee roast, ready to drink cans to American gear, every item designed to give you a sense of this country. Black Rifle Coffee, BlackRifle Coffee.com, use the code Tucker for 30% off on your first order, or simply grab one of their items off your grocery shelves in your town. We drink it. We recommend it. I'm so sorry. That is really, I mean, that is, I didn't know things like that happened. That is awful. It's a great community. He had a gun with him to protect himself. What more can we expect in America than the slip? It's a very refuted apartment. Complex not that it's cheap or something. They have four or five units. Four or five buildings, I mean to say. Did the officers at the scene give you any indication of how they thought your son died? At four o'clock, they came to the leasing office and then medical examiner said he shot himself. He killed himself with a suicide. At that moment, I raised to them, look, my son went into New York Times, he's a whistleblower. And he said that doesn't look so sad to me. They just didn't want to listen. He bought a gun. It belongs to him. Nobody went into the complex. Nobody came out. He was all by himself. And he's a suicide. And how long it took, can you believe it? 40 minutes to investigate. 40 minutes to determine the date caused up death. And at four o'clock, they give me the keys for the apartment. And they say you can collect the body to model. Like, right from that moment, I see fall playing. Proper formalities were not followed. And then next day, they released the body. Within 24 hours without doing the complete autopsy. They removed the bullet. They did the CT scan. This returned the body to us. Then we just checked with the funeral home and we discussed with them. And then they also said, looks like it doesn't seem normal. There's something very unusual here. You should do a second private autopsy. The funeral home suggested that. Yes. And even we were thinking both of us were also thinking funeral home also suggested. We were shattered obviously. We were completely shattered. We just didn't know what's going on and seeing us. Sun like that. And they said, like, his eyes are gone with the gun wound. Don't see his face. We couldn't see him. But the fact that the funeral home, which of course sees dead bodies every day, said to you, this doesn't look right. Doesn't look like a suicide. We recommend that you get a second autopsy, a real autopsy. That's amazing. Actually, the way it's, they didn't look at the body. They didn't look at any evidence. But the way the information was given to us and the way the procedures and policies need to be followed. And norms were not followed according to them. Before they received the body itself, they said this doesn't look normal. And we addressed the concern that it could be some fall play here. And we knew from the very moment we heard the news, we know it's not so sad. Next day in the death news and I'm shattered by calling police, calling medical examiner, Corona's office, homicide unit. We've done everything we can. So tell me what you know about what's been proven from the CCTV, from the surveillance footage about your son's last moments. Is there any evidence anyone came in or out of the apartment? No. Actually, even when our attorney concluded it's a suicide, even at that moment, I mentioned that the attorney looked at three entrances to this building. One of them is cated, has CCTV. Other two entrances don't have CCTV. And why are we ignoring that nobody came in, nobody went out? And also what we just recently discovered is his packages are missing. His roommate or no, his neighbor in the apartment complex, he mentioned that they have a shade package room. They have a shade bin or basket or something. He'd seen switches packet until December 31st. He reached out to me through Twitter on the X platform when I tweeted. He found out on switches mom and he said, have you picked up switches packages? I don't see that after January 1st. Those packages are missing. When we talked to that neighbor, he said like it's very common that packages get lost. In September, they received a notification that if you see so and so man, then let us know. That tells us a lot about the security. And you know, like it's a compromise of key. There's a compromise of entrance. All of these need to be investigated, obviously, when there is a murder. So let's get to the reason that I am anxious to do this interview, which is this report that you commissioned Dr. Janesh Rao. And it contains his analysis of the condition of your son's body based on autopsy. I believe in it. And it critically contains seven crime scene photographs that you took in your son's apartment. Is that correct? That's right. There are seven evidences that were very critical, which has not been picked up by the authorities. Within 40 minutes they concluded they haven't even picked up critical things like a bag with blood. That has my son's saliva in it. They haven't picked that up. And how could they miss his falling all over from the wig? Right. So that's what I want to get to. So the two things that jump out to me, the first thing that jumps out in its very obvious from the photographs that you took, is that there's blood all over the apartment. So the official explanation is that your son shot him, and I'm sorry to, I know this is hard. But I think it's important to go through this. The official explanation is your son shot himself once in the head, and the bullet enter the brain stem, and extinguish life immediately. Can I say something there? Yes. It didn't touch his brain stem at all. It didn't even touch his brain, and the angle is downwards. Yes. Well, I'm saying the official explanation is he shot himself once the head he died. Yes. But these photographs show that that's not at all what happened, because there's blood all over the apartment. There's blood on the door, on the floor, in the bathroom. There's blood everywhere. So that right there, just employing common sense, tells you that the person from whom that blood came, your son presumably did not have a fatal brain injury. At least when he was bleeding. I mean, this is something that's going on in the apartment. Right? Yes. The second thing that jumps out is that there is a tuft of hair that's not hair. It's from a wig. It's from a wig. And it's the clip scene. It's okay. So tell us what that is for people who don't know. It's a part of a clip-in wig. Like there's some kind of plastic band or something that puts feet away on the head. We can see that coming out behind the door. Yes. And that's obvious evidence that no crime scene investigators are police-kindness. They just ignored everything that showed murder and they picked up everything that showed a cover-up suicide. But how could they ignore? So your son did not mean he was a 26-year-old man with short hair from pictures. He's not wearing a wig. Correct. No, no, no. He's not. And these hairs are not his. This investigators analysis looked at the head from the autopsy pictures, but my son's hair. And this hair, this is not his hair. And the portion of the wig, the clip-in wig, has blood on it. Yes. Okay. So as a non-ferencing investigator myself, I look at that and I'm saying, that's a-that's a-where did this come from? And there's blood all over the apartment. Um, right there. I would say this is, you know, maybe it's a suicide, but you're going to have to tell me how. Because that-you know, what is that? It's not a suicide. It's a homicide, obviously. We have enough reasons to believe that. One is coming from the private autopsy. It's not a suicidal angle at all. So you said that and let me let you explain. It's not a suicidal angle. So you had the crime scene, your son's body was taken away. It was evaluated in some way by the authorities. They say, this is a suicide. You have an art like a real autopsy done by Professor Rao. And he says, what about the bullet angle? Will you explain that? The autopsy was done by Dr. Joseph Cohen. Okay. And he says two things. One of them is the bullet angle is going downward about 30 to 45 degrees downward. It's been shot here. It's Mr. Brain. Second thing is, there's a head injury on the left side of the head. In fact, I spoke to medical examiner's office, executive director. I told him there's a head injury. The sign of struggle in the bathroom. He just declared that I'm the decision-making authority of state of California. I decide the cause of death. And when I brought up, we'll have federal investigation. There was a momentary setback in his voice on the phone, but still they're holding onto to the side. So Dr. Cohen's autopsy, and this is Grizzly, I'm sorry, but shows demonstrates proves. back in his voice on the phone, but still they're holding onto to the side. So Dr. Cohen's autopsy, and this is grizzly, I'm sorry, but shows demonstrates proves that the bullet was fired at what angle? Yeah, it's downward angle. That someone cannot shoot themselves. Right. So in other words, if this were a suicide, your son would have had to have held the gun to his forehead coming down. From the top. He was made to say, if you look at this same thing, like, so it's the victim was sitting down. He was made to say someone's standing, he shot him down. In fact, like, biology and Ima has been and I are going to create a virtual reality. Once we get all the evidence, we'll create a virtual reality video and present it to code. What exactly happened to him on that moment? You also said, if I heard you correctly, that he had another head injury not caused by a bullet. Yes. Can you tell us about that? Actually, it appeared to us that from his fallen toothbait and toothpick and blood in the sink and all that, it appeared around tenish because ten, ten is his last browser history on the desktop. He was brushing his teeth before going to bed. He was attacked from behind on the head. That's why this fallen dustbin is fallen toothpick. And his ear bud has fallen in two different directions because of the head impact. And we believe after that he was either electrocuted or he was, you know, like he was paralyzed from the head injury. And then he just held him up, peremced and shot him. But also, we know that that we're waiting for further report, but that may not be the cause of death. The gunshot wound is not the cause of death. And probably they might have suffocated him. We don't have any details of that cruelty, but we're waiting for further report from the CT scan. Why do you believe the gunshot was not the cause of death? Because it's not touched the brain. It only causes, makes him unconscious. So the autopsy show that the bullet did not touch his brain. Yes. And also since I called her apartment on 12 on 23rd at 12 15 p.m., it rang once and it went to voicemail. That makes me believe the killer was still there in the apartment. Again, we need to verify all that. We can do something called geofencing through that we can figure out who was there, who was visiting the complex and all that information. That's exactly why we need thorough investigation. You certainly do. You said your son's last browser record is from 10 p.m.ish? 10 p.m. And what was he looking at, you know? I think he was looking at a black cat or something because last time in Suchir and I met, a cat was going in front of me and then I told him it's a superstition and then he was looking at neuro-sign-stoppics. And he logged into a website for the start-up or something like that. He logged into a website and he was doing some research. So he wasn't looking up, how do I kill myself? That's the first thing that we look for actually. Of course. Of course. Of course. I mean, killing yourself is a profound decision people, their signs. And can I say something? Yeah. It doesn't add up if he's so brave to go to a news media to go be a witness. He's so courageous. How does someone so courageous and do a covertly act? It doesn't add up at all. Well, it doesn't add up as there's blood all over the apartment and there's a piece of a wig on the ground covered in blood that's not his wig. And, you know, you don't need to be a detective to imagine that if someone's going to commit a murder, he might be wearing a wig as he goes into the apartment. So that right there, considering your son didn't wear a wig, is a 26 year old male. His would not his. That's also another thing. What weren't his? His would not his hair. We have the picture of his hair. His hair is fallen down in the bathroom sink. That is different from the wig in the head and the wig. His original hair have been found on the floor. They might have strangled him by his hair or something. His hair has fallen down. That hair versus the wig hair or different. Did anybody hear anything in the apartment? Did anyone hear the gunshot? No. No one heard anything. And two entrances into the complex have no surveillance cameras. Yes. Wow. It makes the hair and your arms go up. Do you know how it's a lot? Yeah. Again, I've been involved in many stories like this more than five and I've never seen one like this. This is a suit. What's unbelievable. So what's unbelievable is it's so obviously not a clean cut story. I mean, you wouldn't walk into an apartment with blood splattered everywhere and see a man on the floor with a gun in his hand and say, oh, was a suicide. Well, how did the blood get in the bathroom? He shot himself in the head like that doesn't even make sense. It was a cover up, right? Sounds like that. So they pick up what they want to pick up. We don't know if they have been instructed to do this beforehand. So, okay. Let's thank you for describing all that. And I'm sorry. I know it's awful. Yeah. But tell me how the authorities responded if you don't mind. Our authorities have been very indifferent. In fact, we hired an attorney, a senior attorney. He wrote to Chief of Police City Administrator Chief Medical Examiner, Executive Director of Medical Examiner. He wrote very clearly a couple of points. One of them is he was not suicidal before making a decision of suicide. They need to take his mental state into account. He's has happy pictures. They shared the pictures. He just came back and he said, talk to four of his friends who accompanied him. And he also said the autopsy information in the letter. The autopsy report says that this is the angle of gunshot. It doesn't look suicide at all. A doctor described this as a typical abnormal worrisome angle. We wrote all of this to them. We just had them to reconsider it and do the investigation. Chief of Police apparently has agreed to do investigation. But Medical Examiner stopped it. He said, no, this is suicide. And the attorney came back and said what they said was, oh yeah, the angle looks different. So what? It's a suicide. I mean, shooting himself in the forehead from a downward. No. Yeah. Okay. I'm not even sure that's possible. But we're going to demonstrate that. We just ordered a dummy gun. We're going to create a dummy of his size. And we're going to demonstrate using the VR out of the video. We're going to demonstrate to people it's not possible. Who is the Medical Examiner? Who refuses to reconsider a pretty obviously silly explanation for this? His name is David Helman. David Helman is the San Francisco Medical Examiner. But he has been covered by David Swell, who's executive director every time we call. It's him. And even the news report is given by David Swell. There's no possible. There's no possible. And who is David Swell? He's the executive director of Medical Examiner's office. He is the one who's holding on to suicide despite of seeing all the evidences. He wants to declare it only suicide, nothing else. What does he make of the bloody wig and the blood splattered in the bathroom when your son was not found in the bathroom? Like how does he explain that? He didn't want to listen to it. He didn't want to pay attention to any other things that we were saying. And you know the worst struggle here is the first attorney he was reluctant to help us when he said suicide. When Medical Examiner's office said suicide, he didn't want to fight because they have been threatened obviously and we hired a second attorney. He got a crime scene investigator. And our attorney said, we'll give you explanation of every bloodmark. And he came back this Monday and he gave explanation. And none of that explanation he gave corroborates to what happened in the apartment based on what we see. That means even the crime scene investigator was bought. He gave inaccurate results. If both the attorneys are like this, then where do we go? We definitely need some serious help here from the authorities. Okay, so the authorities would begin with the mayor of San Francisco. Mayor of San Francisco, actually Sam Altman is on the transition committee for the new governor. He's afraid. The new mayor. The new mayor. Sam Altman is a friend of the new mayor. Yes. Okay. So let's move up. Then you go to the governor of California and Kevin Newsom. We're trying to. We are first trying to meet the district attorney of San Francisco. The AF San Francisco. We probably are going to get an appointment sometime next week or later this week. It's mid January. Your son was killed in November. We have not been getting any appointment. We wrote to everyone. We wrote to Rob Bonte. We wrote to D.A. Like we didn't get any appointment from any of them. Five weeks were wasted by a first attorney. He does nothing. He just key prolonging, prolonging, prolonging, he wasted five weeks. Then we hired a second attorney. It's been almost two weeks since we hired. But now like we just didn't trust any of these people. We got a report from someone else. And now we're coming to media because these people like none. Neither the authorities nor the attorneys are helping us. This needs to go to the Department of Justice, I think, in the Trump administration. I did right. You did. Yeah. You haven't heard yet because it's only been a few days. We did right to them. In general, possessions are overrated. But there are some things you really would not want stolen. And to me, family shotguns, including a whole bunch of them I got from my father are at the top of that list. So I keep my dad shotguns in a liberty safe. Because it's safe. And it's also really attractive. Liberty safe just creates something really cool. It's a limited addition safe that commemorates the inauguration of Donald Trump America's 47th president. The original design celebrates Trump and his swearing in will up holding Liberty's agreement to building their safe right here in the United States. And they went all out on this one. It's the special 47 edition. It features a one-of-a-kind artwork that pays homage to the president. It's very, very cool. Not all safe are created equal. They're plenty out there. And a lot of the manufacturers slap an American sending name on the label. But they are not made here. They're from China or other foreign markets. Liberty's safes are made in the United States. For over 30 years, Liberty has made its safes right here. And that matters. Because when you buy Liberty's safe for supporting American workers and American workers and American values, their products are more than just a place to protect your dead shotguns. For example, they are a symbol of this country. So celebrate the historic moment. Secure the things that you want to keep forever in a Liberty safe. Is it LibertySafe.com or find a Liberty dealer, a retailer near you to order your limited addition safe today. Liberty Safe made in America has anybody in a position of authority in the state of California said to you, boy, this needs more investigation. It doesn't look right. Everybody is suppressed. No one has come in our favor. In fact, even our attorneys, tomb be hired, have been made to tell us. So it's like to ask every day from every different angle. It is a push for us. That is a suicide. But we parents, we know and we want to fight for justice for our beloved son. But I don't understand on what basis. So your son had just come back that day from hanging out with his buddies. Okay. So which is like a happy thing. It's no evidence that he was suicidal whatsoever. And tons of forensic evidence that he was murdered. So on what grounds are they saying it's very likely he killed himself. Okay. That's because of the cover. I remember like there was a gun near him. He owned a gun and they put a shell casing and four bullets near it. They made it look like it. So there are both the evidences, right? For the medical examiner to pick up. He picked up the one that looks suicidal. He ignored the one that looks like homicide. That's what it is. So now to Sam Altman, what contact with Sam Altman have you had since your son died? We contacted HR for 401k planned details until then. No one from open AI ever contacted us. They gave the PR reporter their supporting the family how. So she had obviously put parents in his emergency contact, right? They got the dead news on December 13. They made no attempt to contact us. And when we reshow to HR, Sam Altman said he wants to talk to us. By then we already knew, so she was, you know, his presence or his living would have been a threat to AI industrial engineer. I wouldn't want to name one company. But eventually it's going to expose everything, right? So we didn't want to talk to Sam Altman. And then they said we provide employee assistance program. Though he was a former employee, we said we have medical insurance. We don't need it. Then they pushed us saying we want to get you on a Zoom call ASAP to go over his talk options. Then our response to that is why are you in a hurry? We're not. We've lost our son. We're grieving. Money is not important to us. Please talk to a provider. Tani and we had a provider. Tani talk to the HR. This is our own. They wanted to talk about his stock options. Yeah. That's why they wanted to get us on a Zoom call. Do you think, do you believe you can't know I guess, but do you think that Sam Altman was involved in your son's death? We don't know. We need to investigate it. We can't, you know, we can't say anything at this time. But one thing I know for sure is if he was deposed, there are few organizations who could have been impacted. For that matter, like there are a lot of AI companies which violate copyright law. And we don't know what open AI wanted to hide when my son deposed. What was your wrong doing that he would have brought up not just a copyright law? That's exactly we need if we are to investigate thoroughly. Was there any criminal activity? Was there any illegal activity? We don't know, right? Why? Why would this silence him? What would he have spoken? If it's just a copyright law, do you think these big organizations like Microsoft and Open AI care? No, they don't care about it, right? Because they have money and power. What else was involved in the deposition in the testimony that took my son's life? We need thorough investigation. So you haven't seen those documents. You don't know. Okay, there are two things here. One is the custodial documentation, right? The second thing is his own statement. His own statement we heard from few former employees of Open AI. There are certain wrongdoings there. Like what? We can't say something that someone shared, right? So I would want to keep it more, you know, just overview that something like that. So that is the reason they're hiding. And you know what? If we come until openly our life could be at risk, but we are taking the risk on coming out and telling publicly that the reason our son was killed. Because he knew something that was going on, keeping in mind, he was feeding the data, right? Pre-training data. So to be clear, you think this is not simply about Open AI stealing, you know, copyright material. There's more than that. More than that. 100% sure. Because copyright data, obviously my friends and I were all talking, these companies, they get many lawsuits like this, right? Sure. Do they really care about it? No. What is the kind of thing they do care about? What kind of crimes do you think they would kill someone over? I was stealing some data that against that could cause a violation, possibly. They might be stealing some data. From the US government, from other government. Any half. Something like that. Maybe government is involved. We don't know. We're speculating. That's just a remarkable story. Do you think that we will find out, like how will the rest of us find out what your son testified to? That's exactly why we call out to President Trump to do a thorough investigation. We want an FBI director to be assigned to investigate this. This is not just about copyright. This is about a lot of other things that are going on. That could cause harm to society potentially, not just my son's death. There's something harmful that need to be evaluated and thoroughly investigated. That's exactly why they're covering up a suicide. Why do you think medical examiners' executive director would come and tell? Why do you think nobody gives us appointment? Because there's some kind of foul play and a strong power behind a medical examiner. So you're saying that AI itself poses a threat to the world and that your son understood this? Yes, he understood it. But he was keeping in mind that's one aspect. The other aspect is he knew everything open AI does. Yes. And he might have actually felt overwhelmed by what kind of activity he got involved in. We know that he spoke to a copyright attorney, which is again a cover-up with suspect. And what Matthew Butterick told us on November 29th? Yes, I met with your son. He's a very brave man. So, she told us what opening AI did to him. He didn't say anything beyond that. That day he said, I live in San Francisco, LA. I come to San Francisco quite a few times and I'm going to talk to you next time when I come. And then he's been silenced. He's not telling us anything. We had a retone call. Even then, apparently, he did not say. So if we depose him, he's going to spill out everything. And also we suspect he's a maltsman's friend and he's played against our son and has indirect involvement. We don't know. Wow. There was a moment where Sam Altman left his own company or seemed to leave his own company for a few days. You may remember this. What was that, do you know? Sam Altman was fired. This was because of AI safety issues. The board of directors for opening AI from the nonprofit side, especially one called Ilia Sesto. He and others, excuse me, fired Sam Altman and then all the 700 employees, including my son, wrote a letter or a momentum saying that if they don't reinstitute Sam Altman, they're all going to resign. They brought Sam Altman, the fired Ilia, whose AI safety expert. And to be honest, few days after my son's death was announced December 15, Ilia was seen in a presentation in one of the conferences. He had two security guards with firearms around him. He was so scared of his life. So we're seeing him off. We are behind all these, honestly speaking. What were the safety issues that caused Sam Altman to get fired, do you think? We don't know if it's safety issue or whatever. We don't have the details of it. Even my son doesn't know any of these things. In fact, he supported Sam Altman's reinstitute. Yes, he said that. Yeah. A lot of AI safety people have been living open AI. If you notice the city won't mirror. I don't know her last name. The city will also resign. Many people have been living open AI, not just her researchers. Big why? That's exactly I want to know why. There's so many people to leave. Obviously there is something right that they're not happy about. Only person whose folk against them was my son. Just of them just quietly walked away my son. He couldn't take it. He felt like, you know, he need to stand up and tell the truth. So some harm can be prevented. We need to investigate all this seriously. Did your son ever mention during that period when Sam Altman laughed at a very brief period, there was a report in news media that said, within open AI, AI itself was being worshipped like a god. Did he ever mention anything about that? But that didn't. Such a didn't mention. And do you have any sense of what these harms are? I mean, clearly people are afraid of what AI can do not just by eliminating jobs, which is enough to worry about. But there are other things that people are very concerned about. Do you know what they are? They are in my son's publications. Some of them he's covered. One of them is like less traffic. It means the loss of jobs. That was one of his concerns. I'm proud of him for bringing that up. He gave the graphical representation of how the traffic is reduced to stack overflow and user websites that are a means of living for people. That will be taken away. That's his concern. And also the accuracy, as I mentioned earlier in the interview, the accuracy of data and also he says something called like the modulation index or something. Point five versus one dot O. He delts in his article. If it's point five, the data in and data out are not the same. Most companies including OpenAI use point five. That means the data accuracy is not maintained. That is his biggest concern. He being kind of like an architect inside. He knows in and out of charge. What happens next? If my son were alive, he was planning to bring a competition to OpenAI. He was working on a medical startup. I even checked with him. How do you think it's a competition? Not directly. Mama said in direct competition. He said he would have been a great humanitarian. He would have done a lot of causes for humanity with the concerns he had. We lost a great human being, not just my son who would have made a big difference to the world. Now what we want is we want justice. We want death sentence to the one who killed my son as well as the imprisonment for people who are behind it. We don't know who is. But we want to know and we want to know what my son stood against and take actions. At least in honor of him. At least do something that he stood for. And you know, let his soul be at peace. What happened to the piece of wig found on the floor soaked in blood in your son's apartment? Where is it? It's still there. We didn't pick it up because we want police to go and look at it. It's in the apartment right now. Nobody came to do the investigation. We have the apartment case. Nobody came to do the investigation. We have been requesting police. He's sitting there right now. Yeah. Still there. We didn't pick up anything because it's crime scene evidence. But no one's investigating it as a crime scene. No. In fact, like our attorney said up to December 31st, these people will retain the apartment. In fact, we are paying the rent and we are maintaining the apartment as is because we want someone to command investigate all these things with so much evidence. If medical examiners still calls it suicide, this is an ethical question, the regulator request. It's what you're sitting on the floor right now. Yes. It's the same place. We didn't touch any of that. This is a really crazy story. It is reality. It's not a story. It's how gruesome it is. And like you see all the bloodshot. Like there was a fight. And my son has been tortured. He didn't die immediately. And where? Where can we go with? Where is peace of mind for us? We can't. We just don't have any peace of mind. Our life is not normal at all. The only thing that could make a difference after the loss of our son is getting just this. Punished around us. Protect AI. Did you know that California was this corrupt? Yeah. We know it's very corrupt. That's exactly why we're requesting FBI thorough investigation. We didn't speak to an agent at thin class Friday. We're waiting for that agent to get someone assigned. If you know special agent or something. And we also know that there's a transition period in the government. Some may be moved transferred. Some may be leaving. So we just start. Okay. Let's wait. Meanwhile, we did all the ground work that we needed to do. We have the evidence. We are here in the media. We're telling the media. Now we want the new oncoming federal government to intervene because new some. We know Trump himself makes a lot of statements against new some. We don't we wrote to Rokana. You talked to Rokana. Congressman from Silicon Valley. We wrote to him no response from many people. No response from Rokana. Yes. Many people try to reach out to him not one. Many people. No response from him because they're all inside. Right. All this take clubbing. Okay. I'm going to you know what? I'm a tax rokana right now. Please do. I'm going to and I'm going to send him this right here. And. I wrote. Rokana has not responded to you. Yes. Okay. I sent out. I filled in a form in his website. I gave my phone number. I gave all the details on his website. Many people from whom we know have tried to contact Rokana. They took my email address and they said Rokana will reach. it's been two weeks. Isn't reached us initially. We thought it's holiday is time. So he's a little busy. But even it's 14th January today. No response yet. Okay. I'm. I'm going to I just texted him right now. And I just sent him. Pictures of the relevant information and I hope that you'll try again. Well, I mean Rokana is this is the Silicon Valley member Congress. And we don't believe in state government at all. We know how corrupt it is, especially in San Francisco Bay area. It's very, very corrupt. We don't believe in the system. Unless, you know, we change the Ghana. We won't believe anything will happen here. We need to go to federal and we also found out that he's protected the visual browser act as well. We can find out what I'm sorry. This is a federal aspect as well. You have just a story. Yes. There are two things here. One is wrong. You have a federal blower. The visual blower comes in the federal because the lawsuit was filed in New York. And he was a custodian witness. So we have a backing from federal government in moment. If you just the state, corrupt state would fight against it. Since it is federal, they can overtake the federal aspects. We are writing to federal trade commission now today or tomorrow. And we want them to do a quiet investigation of the case. We have a top autonomy and visual blowers that's helping us. For one of mine's contingency basis. We report with him and bring the truth out. I mean, your son was born in this country. You can't murder American citizens because they're standing in the way of your business. That is not allowed in this country. You can't do that. Imagine we are immigrants here and we came here. We raised our son. We were so proud of him. We don't expect this to happen in this country. And I'm America. No, that's right. We don't expect this to happen. The sense of security has been lost for me ever since. Do you worry about your safety? Potentially now that like we've gone so public, they may not target us. Yes. But there might be some kind of, you know, threatening terms of accidents or something like that can put initially indirectly. They could harm us that they cannot be caught. We suspect that. And I don't go out alone anywhere because I'm more vocal. So I don't go out alone for walk or anywhere. I always take my husband along and we make sure if we go somewhere, we inform our friends where we are. We just keep letting people know. In fact, like I don't want my family from India to visit me because it's a big risk for them. Has the New York Times called you to do this story? We call New York Times. Two days after we got his body and we told, I think his name was, I don't remember his name. So we told him many times. They haven't even interviewed. They ignored it completely. And he said he'll get back. He will say he'll let us know what he can do. And he doesn't even take our call. What about the television networks CNN, NBC, Fox, is anyone? Nobody. ABC just relayed the visual kind of light. The visual kind of light. What about the television networks CNN and BC Fox is anyone? Nobody ABC just related the visual kind of light visual that we had for so children will petas 1.5 minutes they relate of the visual information ABC news local now that we just received this evidence today morning we probably might reach out through some of the news media now that we have this evidence news media will talk to us we want to take it much forward. Yeah I don't for the third time I just want to say this again I don't think anybody any honest person could look at this and say oh yeah that's the suicide I mean I just you know we were hesitant because like they can try to manipulate the evidence or something like that we were very hesitant you know like they can even attack the apartment remove everything clean up you know like something crazy things like they might cause a fire and then let them you know what a sprinklers go on it will destroy the evidence or something right that's why we were very quiet we didn't go to media until we got this authoritative report it's very scary. Well I'm grateful that you're making you know as much noise about this as you are and you're as aggressive as you are thank you for doing that and I'm gonna. Visual blower's lives matter we cannot lose honestly I was talking to my son I express concerns about his whistleblower activity but what I was thinking was he won't get another job because he's going against employer right he kept asshooting me here's his own plastata plans but taking his life is something that I never expected this is not the first time two visual blowers from Boeing were founded last year one of them exactly same way another one died in the hospital they dragged him. This is America yeah thank you for this we need to protect them most visual blowers we were talking to the visual blower attorneys most of them they don't even know that he's support there's not enough awareness going forward we want to create awareness and help others then not just that there should be some kind of regulation protection and I'm sure we're going to talk to New York Times at some point of time and said how did you put his life first was if he was a custodian witness why didn't you give him protection why was he left alone right what kind of protection did you have for speaking truth casting his life well I think most Americans like you would not even consider the possibility you'd be murdered over something like this you know the penalty you would assume would be you know having trouble getting another job but getting killed in your apartment and your son I know I've asked you so I'm totally clear he never mentioned being followed or feeling threatened or anything like that actually I do have some observation after New York Times article came he didn't want us to visit he would come home and avoid me going there and he would also come during the week they're not the weekend I won't investigate why was he already under some kind of someone was following him with something I was aboard to demand him an answer but he's no more like slowly you know like with an adult and like how much can we push him each time he visit I just made sure like he's eating well and he's healthy and he has strong plans he's has hobbies all of those things but this kind of information why are you coming in the weekdays I was didn't get a chance to push him he was going to come for thanks giving and that's when I would question him I thought he wasn't even alive till then we didn't have enough time thank you for telling us this story thank you for hosting us and we want Americans to know what happened and why has the mean covered by news media why no one is talking about it why they want to repeat like parents what medical examiner is saying why they don't want to stand up for truth why he always so sold out for these tech lobbying is there any regulation on the amount of money they can spend for lobbying right it's indirect bribe right so if they're also sold out can't we do anything I'm in American citizen too this is totally disappointing they look a reporter came home he took the pictures he wrote the article and when I mentioned open ayes name there was so much fear in him he was scared so the tech companies that controlling and they're turning out to be mafia controlling the gun when controlling the news media what more harm do we want from them do we public do we need to live in safety or do we need to live in fear what what are we doing why are we quiet now that in innocent life is gone we're seeing so much going on why are we quiet why can't we start justice for such a moment why can't we do rallies why can't we go on a non-stop-able moment until we get the justice until we get the punishment I'm calling out to all Americans to stand with me we want to do rallies all over America we want to do visual all over America and we want to enforce a via investigation and finish the culprit I hope this helps so it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level that's not surprising that's what they do but on another level it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now google has decided you should have less information rather than more and that is totally wrong it's a moral what can you do about well we could wind about it that's a waste of time we're not in charge of google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true not intentionally deceptive the way to do that on YouTube we think it's to subscribe to our channel subscribe hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video that way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information so we hope that you'll do that