Jimmy Dore, thank you for doing this. My pleasure, thanks for having me. So, it seemed to me, so much is happening, it's hard to get perspective on any of it, but it does feel like Thomas Massie's loss in the primary in Kentucky two weeks ago was like a kind of pivot point in American politics. What was your response to it? Well, my response to it was how dare we, you know, tell preach democracy around the world and tell people that the people in China are oppressed when we obviously don't have democracy here, right? This is the come a complete we just gave up. And and so now it's the oligarchs, as I was telling you before, you know it just proof that we don't live in a democracy. You know, they did that Princeton study 2015 about how it doesn't the 90 percent of people their wishes never are expressed in legislation and it's only the top 10 percent of the wealthy people and There's a direct correlation at 50 percent of The wealthy people want something 50 percent at the time It happens, you know, and so but the bottom doesn't matter You're your vote that literally doesn't and we're living in that and so, you Know I was telling before in in in China the government sits above capital. Yes, and So the economy works for the people But in the United States, capital is above the government. And so the economy doesn't work for the people. It works for a handful of international globalist billionaires, which is why we have homelessness everywhere. We have the biggest prison population in the world. And, you know, we still get go bankrupt just to get educated. You get bankrupt when you get sick. And like I say is that we're like, and we live in a surveillance state. And so we were like China, except we have more street crime and slower trains. No! And we get lectured constantly in the most self-righteous way by the worst people. Um, it, it's a hard jump for your average right-winger, me, for example, to accept the fact that corporations are even more malicious than government. Way more. You know, I, I think that's, I'm coming around to that just because the evidence is overwhelming, but I do think there's like a training that takes place. Where you just have someone point to Soviet Poland and you're like, that's the option to what we have. And you're, like, I don't want that. I don't like potatoes. You know what I mean? Bad architecture, grim weather. But I kind of believe that. Uh, you believe that that's the opposite? That was the option. So either you have like Google runs everything and they do it in Technicolor and it's like free and it' great or the state runs everything and it is Soviet Poland. And so like I do think the average right winger, or again I'll speak for myself. It's like hard to accept that you wanna live in a system where billionaires don't control everything. Like that's not good. That's not good. Look around, this is the system we're living in, and you know, corporations, there's no long-term planning, right? At least in China they have long- term planning, which is why they get to have flying cars and great infrastructure and beautiful bridges that make their own waterfalls and own rainbows, stuff like that. It's just amazing. Because Because they don't. And corporations only care about quarterly profits, so they don't care if the whole company crashes as long as they can show a profit in the quarter. I think that's right. And that's the problem. There's no long-term planning in America, and that's why and you know, I also have a firm belief that Like in California, they spent 24 billion dollars to try to fix homelessness and none of it. It just got worse and You know, i think you've talked about this that it seems planned because it probably is that they want us To live in this kind of hellscape So we beg for authoritarian solutions to these problems and that's right. That's what they're doing, right? So, you know it all started with 9-eleven. They had the Patriot Act already written before 9-11, right So they they and and and as Edward Snowden revealed that you know, they're collecting Every text every phone call every email you make anyway, so we live in her since and then it's just getting more flock cameras It's like what you said to Kevin O'Leary. It's liked that. Oh, they were there to help find crime Really? It's crime rates going down. Are they? No, no, so yeah, this is what happens and Thomas Massey I mean a guy who won almost unanimously and then he his positions didn't change but then all of a sudden he loses and loses big right lost by 10 points so and it just and it was all propaganda and lies and who knows if they also Fiddled with the vote, you know, I why would you put that past them? Why of course they would the people who slaughter people for profit, which is what been the last 25 years Since 9-eleven just slaughtering people for prophet. They wouldn't rig an election. Of course, they would of course If it's important enough to murder people, it's important enough to take over electronic voting machines, of course. And by the way, that's the one thing you're not allowed to say. So that's always a tip. Before 2020, the Democrats used to scream about the... Will I remember? But I have video after video I show on my show about the Democrats saying how Easily hacked these electronic voting machines are and then there was a day you can't say it anymore Right just like you used to be able to criticize big pharma And then there is a day. You got you can do it anymore, right remember and so Yeah, of course those people would would rig elections. I mean they The people who did building seven wouldn't wouldn't rig it No, it's just, you're total, people risk their lives to rob liquor stores. So right, a lot's at stake. But I kind of wonder like, why do we have electronic voting machines that are not faster? You don't get to vote faster. Right? Takes forever. It takes forever. So what is the purpose? What's the utility? Why do we still have them? Why not just, I don't know, give a thumb print like they do in civilized countries like Malawi. Control why I mean that's the obvious right the easiest answer right it's easier to control the vote I anyway it's a we don't again we don't live in a democracy none there's always the people who say well Jimmy we don't live in a mind we live in an constitutional republic right the people will say that which is true of course Uh, but that is, that is a form of democracy. So I always have to tell people that as a form of democracy, you don't have direct democracy because majority rules, uh, is a bad thing. You have to have a constitution which protects the right of the minority in case when you have a, you know, tyranny of the majority, which is what we had during COVID. Yeah. Good point. But in both a direct democracy and a constitutional republic, the core idea is the same, which is the people rule. It's their country. It belongs to them. Yeah. Good. And if you believe that I've got a vaccine, I'd like to sell you. So now, I guess my- I mean, right now we're having a governor's race in California. And so they have what's called a jungle primary. Do you know what that is, right? Sort of. Tell me. So instead of Democrats and Republicans having their own primary, they have one big primary. Everybody's in it, including independents, including no-party preference people. And the top two vote-getters then face off in- And so that's to make sure that it's just Democrats. So that's what that is, because we have one party rule in California, and if you think that's good, go to California and see how it's working out. And so they have a jungle primary, and so Democrats are so unpopular now, even in California, that they're afraid that a Republican or two Republicans might, because the Democrats might split the vote, and then two Republicans sneak in, and they asked Governor Newsom, And they said, what if that happens? And he said, well, we have a plan. We have a break the glass plan, meaning, you know, an emergency break the glass. So he's like, he's literally saying, don't worry, that we're not going to allow democracy to work. We're not going to if the vote doesn't go the way we want, we have a Break the Glass moment and we're going to fix that. He said that out loud. He said out loud and, you know, just like when he pays no price for this, just like when, he said. So in California, like I said, they Spent 24 billion dollars to fix homelessness. Homelessness got worse. And so, unanimously, the legislature passed a bill saying, hey, let's have transparency on how that money was spent. Passed unanimously, Gavin Newsom vetoed it. He'd paid no political price for that. Nobody even brings it up. And so that's what we're, and again, the one-party rule is, again, it's like we're in California, we're like China, but with more street crime and slower trains. Will it change? I hate to be a pessimist, but no, I don't see it changing. You know, you talk to people, my friend lives in the Pacific Palisades, her house did not burn down, and they're having a vote for mayor, and she was asking this guy who was standing there in a burned out property, and then, who are you gonna vote for for mayor? And he's like, you know, whoever the Democrats say, that was almost a direct quote. And so they don't. You know, just like when the fires happen, I talk to my neighbors, they go, well, Jimmy, there's nothing they can do. And then of course there's a million things they could do. There's nothing that they could. And I go, did you know that there was a reservoir above the Pacific Palisades that holds 113 million gallons of water? They drained it before the fire. Did you know? They go, yeah, but that wouldn't have helped. Like, this is just a direct quote. I guess she didn't go to firefighting school because water is like the number one thing. Hahahaha And so that's their mentality. So this whole idea, you know, half the country thinks, oh, their party is better than the other party. And it's like, oh, there's one party that's obviously better than other party, really? I wonder if this is a trap. How could this be used against us? And that's exactly what it is, right? Just like George Carlin said, you get 40 different brands of cereal, breakfast cereal, you get two political parties. And it's used against it, at least in China, people can hold their politicians accountable because they've got no other party to blame, so when something goes wrong. And if you look at the polls, they're way more happy with their government in China than we are in our country. Everyone senses that young people in this country struggle with loneliness, but few people understand the cause of it. Here it is. The population has been trained to look for peace in places where there is no peace. Career success, social media validation, political victories, money. None of that brings fulfillment. Faith and family bring fulfillment. This month, HAL was launching the Heart of Jesus Challenge. It's a 12-day journey into something the ruling class would never put on a TED Talk. It's about the love of God. This challenge is about an actual encounter with an actual God who knows your name, has seen your worst moments, and has never looked away. Managing anxiousness is a low bar for peace. Overcoming anxiousness should be the true goal, and there is no better way, in fact, there is not other way, than a relationship with God. Hallow takes you into scripture to help you strengthen your faith. 12 days, each of which you will love. Get three free months of Hallow at Hallow.com slash Tucker. It does seem like the reason I asked, will it change? Cause it does seem like it can't continue like this. So it's. Well, the only, so what I said after Thomas Massey was that, you know, the last time that the establishment was this unresponsive to its citizens, George Washington picked up a gun and started shooting people. Well, that's right. And I'm not advocating violence, obviously. But what we need to do, and the truckers in Canada during COVID laid a template for which is why they overreacted to them so hard, because they knew they didn't want them, just like when Joe Biden crushed that railroad strike, they had to do that because that would have showed everybody the power of workers, because the railroad is the backbone of capitalism, and if you shut that down, it shuts down, and the oligarchs get hurt, right? And so they had stop that, they made it illegal for them to go on strike. And so what I said is that after Thomas Massey is that, We need to have, what if all the railroad workers just didn't show up for work for a week or so? What if the port workers didn't show up? What of all the truck drivers didn't show up and then they went and they occupied Wall Street, which is why Occupy Wall Street scared the hell out of them. And because that was the left and the right, so you had the Tea Party upset about the banks. You had the left progressives upset about the banks, they had a common interest. Because that's the thing they don't want you to know, is that we actually have a common interests. They want you keep turning against your neighbor, like your neighbor's the problem. And your neighbor is not your problem, your neighbor suffering under the same oligarchy that you're suffering under. And they don't want you realize that you have shared interests, and that we can work on the other stuff later, but we gotta come together to stop these WEF globalist billionaires that actually run and dictate our lives. And so that's what I'm saying is that we need to have, you know, for the grocery store workers, all the UPS, all the Amazon, if they and if a couple of them did it together, it would show the power of the workers that we actually can take and that you have to have a protest when you have a protest, you have have a demand. So that's why you know those uh... No king's marches right or protest those are cyops and worse how do you know they're sad because there's no demand You have to have a demand, a concrete demand. And so if the workers shut down, if the railroad workers, port workers, truck drivers, if they shut down they have a demands. Demand is no outside money in elections. We have publicly funded elections. We have an election cycle that's six weeks instead of two years. And you can't have corporate money, you can have any of that stuff. It has to be publicly funded. And people say, who's gonna pay for that? Well, it costs us trillions of dollars every year because we have corporations funding our elections. It would save us trillions of dollars and we'd have a more responsive democracy if we had publicly funded elections So that would be my demand That's so you gotta have, you can have a protest, you gotta to have a demand. And when you see a protest without a demand, that's how you know it's a PSYOP. That's how, you know, it's to bring people back into the two party duopoly and hating each other. It seems like if you're going to try to compel someone to do something he doesn't want to do, you have to do something he really doesn't want you to do. So like the Occupy Wall Street, which I, especially in retrospect, we needed that. But the tactic was like have a protest. They don't care about your protest. What they do care about is money. Why has no one ever organized millions of Americans to say stop paying their credit card bills or stop paying your student loans? Why are people paying student loans, I don't understand that. It seems like that might get the attention of the people in charge. Yeah, well, that's that certainly would. And you know how they, you know, Michael Prenti, who died recently, and he was he was a real friend of the working man. And he said, you know, the the the oligarchs, they don't care about if you have health care. They don't care about it if you can afford a house. They don't care if you have to go bankrupt getting an education. The only thing they actually do care about is what you think. That's actually what they care about. That's it. That's smart. And that's why they spend all this money on propaganda. That's why the own the media. That's what they constantly keep you propagandized and the best propaganda is the stuff you don't realize that is a propaganda. You just internalize it and you think that's just the way things are. So that's the, actually- They care what you think. That's so interesting. That's the only thing they care about. That's a deep insight, because sometimes it feels like they don't care what you think, but of course they do, because the propaganda is just relentless. And Michael, anybody who could go watch his speeches on YouTube, they're all over the place, and he's got a great sense of humor, and he was what Noam Chomsky people pretend he is. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, he was the real deal. FRAWN You know how you could tell that So Michael parenti Got kicked out of academia right in the 70s and he couldn't get a job and he was blacklisted He was because he spoke up against the Vietnam War stuff like that. And that's how you know, he's the real deal No, Chomsky had a job forever at MIT. I know. No problem. And his job was never threatened. And so he was what Chomski taught me, that there's the over 10 win there. There's as far left as you can go, right? So they'll have on people on the cable news shows that talk about war. It's never, hey, we shouldn't have a war. It's always like, well, how much war should we have? And then you have those discussions. And so Chomske was there to go, you can't go any farther than him. So if you go farther left than him, then you're a crazy nut your conspiracy theorists and he was the one You know who said doesn't who cares who killed? President Kennedy, that's what Chomsky said. Who cares, who overthrew our government, who did a coup on our government? Who cares? So that's the CIA talking about. Same thing, you know, he just repeated back that 9-11 happened exactly the way George Bush said it did to Dick Cheney, who, by the way, when they were asked about it, testified in secret behind closed doors, not under oath and together. So, so yeah, so I am- He affirmed the official story of 9-11? Yeah. So, um, that's why you should advocate. That's a radical. That's our radical. And I always tell people, you know, uh, what woke me up to it was like, I'm not an engineer, but I saw building seven, first of all, it was broadcast 20 minutes that have had fallen down by BBC before it ever fell, they go ahead and um, and then you're like, wait a minute, this building that wasn't hit by a plane, a plane hit a building 200 yards away from it. Very far away. And then it fell into its own footprint like out of sympathy for the other buildings. And so that's when I knew something was up. And I started my first comedy podcast in 2007 with Todd Glass and my wife Steph. And I talked about that and people were like, Jimmy, there's a crazy conspiracy there. I'm like, what? And then even people like Rosie O'Donnell would bring it up on The View. I don't know if you remember that. No. Yeah. She was like building seven and I'm like, I know I'm onto something, right? And so, you know, whenever you're not allowed to question something, that's when you know they're up to something. Of course. And I experienced that with Seth Rich. So Seth Rich, by the way, still not solved. Nobody knows who killed him. And a robbery in which nothing was too was about It was a botched robbery where they didn't take his watch, they didn't t take his wallet, they didn t take its phone. And I was just asking normal questions about the Seth. So the theory was that when WikiLeaks published the emails, right, they said it was Russia hacked into the DNC server. But the theory is that this guy was upset that they had rigged the primary against Bernie Sanders. He was a real patriot and so he had downloaded those onto a thumbnail and he gave them some through an intermediary gave it to WikiLeaks. And Julian Assange all but confirmed it, right? He did all, all, but confirm it. He didn't strictly speaking, confirm it, but he basically confirmed. Basically confirmed it, right? He was like, we don't give away our sources, you know, and... But I'm very concerned about Seth Rich's murder, which is, by the way, still on YouTube and worth watching because Julian Assange is maybe the smartest person I've ever met. Yeah, yeah, and really and really a smart person. And talk about guts. I think people who, on the left for years, people were free, Julian Assange. I didn't pay that much attention and then I got to know Julian Ass ange and I realized Julian Assage is way more of a hero even than people pretended he was. Yes, very much. And I was very flattered his family came to see me when I was in Australia. Really? Yeah, when Iwas in Melbourne, they showed up. So it was a very wonderful man. Anyway, but he basically confirmed the Seth Rich story, the crazed conspiracy theory. So Seth Rich, there's all these questions about his murder, right? Like, where was he when he left the bar to the time he got murdered? There's hours, where he was, what was he doing? Nobody, and so there's this all this stuff and how come there's no video of this? There's no this? Where's his computer? How come we can't see it? And so I was covered. I was at the Young Turks at the time when I was covering it. And then the Washington Post put me in a hit piece, right, that I was a crazy conspiracy theorist. And they put me on a hitpiece. This is when legacy media was afraid of YouTube taking away their viewers. And so they would run these hit pieces on YouTubers, and I was one of them, and they put me in with like, look at all these, there's Nazis on YouTube, there's white supremacists on YouTube. There's all this, hey, your kids are going down rabbit holes. They're being radicalized on YouTube and they'd put me there and they would put about Seth Rich, right? And so, and I don't even want, I don't even want to mention the guy who did it, but the guy that did it works for the Washington Post And, uh, he was. He's the guy, he did pro-war rallies for the Iraq war, right? When he was in college, yeah. And of course, that's the guys, Jeff Bezos taps to go cover progressive politics, that is the guy. And so anyway, he puts me in this hit piece and nobody really had my back on it. And I remember I was on a panel one day on the Young Turks with Cenk Uygur and. Ben Mankiewicz, other people, and I said to them, can you remember the last time a reporter wasn't allowed to ask questions about an unsolved murder? And they're like, well, no, they didn't know. And I'm like, of course, this is crazy. And so people would slander me, Jimmy Dorsett, Seth Rich conspiracy theorist, right? And the big thing was, you're not supposed to ask questions because it hurts the family, and it's upsetting their family. Really, I've been watching John F. Kennedy get his head blown off since I was a kid. What about his family? Nobody seems to care. So that's how you know that was so then was all of us have a right to justice for all American citizens Like that's our country's promise. So it's not about I mean, I respect the family I feel obviously bad for them. Their son was murdered. You don't want to offend people unnecessarily, but it's about a family It's about the nation, right? Yeah, do we have a country where murders are solved or do we the country in which investigations into murders are thwarted for political reasons? You can't have that country Yeah, I don't remember Jackie O coming on saying stop looking into this stop she didn't say that America's 250th birthday is this year. Have you thought about how you're gonna celebrate? Well, here's a great idea the entire family can enjoy angel studios and wonder project have made something genuinely rare a film about George Washington before he became president before the myth was created a young man navigating failure and war and near-death Being forged into leader who would eventually found this nation. What makes it worth seeing isn't just the story Which is amazing It's that the filmmakers are not embarrassed by the story, so there's no revisionism, no cynicism, just a bold, unapologetically American film about courage and sacrifice and what it really took to preserve this nation at its most fragile moment. Americans should fill the theaters for this one. Right now, Angel is running a special deal tied to the 250th birthday, offering a premium membership for $15 a month. They could see two tickets to Young Washington. Full access to Angel's streaming library, and tickets to every future Angel theatrical release. Young Washington stars Andy Serkis, Ben Kingsley, and Kelsey Grammer, and is directed by John O'Rourke. So it's a theatrical event of the first water. Go to angel.com slash TC to become a member today. Did anybody back you up on this when you asked questions about- So, no. So in fact, YouTubers did hit piece after hit piece on me along after the Washington Post put me in their article, and that's when I'm like, okay, I'm on to something. And so then people wanted to see the contents of the Seth Rich's laptop. Yeah. And at first, the FBI said, well, we don't have it. And then they're like, Okay, we have it, but we can't get the information out. Okay. They're like okay, we got the information. But we can release it because of the ongoing investigation. And so they lied three times. And then the judge, there was a judge that ordered them to release the contents. They ignored it. A second judge said, you got to release it. They still, they still haven't released it. So it's been now 10 or 11 years since he got murdered. We still don't know the contents, so that's how, you know, they're up to something and you know there was something to that. And we'd know for a fact that Russia did not hack into the DNC server. I brought Bill Binney on my show was the number one code breaker for the NSA for decades. And he immediately I brought him on my show in 2016 to debunk this and he said, yeah, if this if they did this if this was an outside source, he said there would be all these telltale signs that they did it there and I'm you know, I'm not a code breaker, but he will go and there's none of them are there. So this was local. So this meaning it was downloaded onto a thumb drive. It wasn't exactly and that's how I knew Russia gate was a scam. And Russiagate served many purposes. One of them was to keep Trump from being the populist he ran on the first time. And the second part was to get people ready for the war in Ukraine, because they had that in the chamber for over a decade. And so it propagated. I remember when George Bush said he met Putin and I looked into his eyes and he was, I saw he's a good man. Yeah, I'll never forget it. And then they were like, Hey, we got it. What are you doing? We got to stop that. Right. They would, they would go fishing together on Kenny Look for it and stuff. And so Putin was our friend. And then they're like, no, no we gotta have a war because you know, Black Rock, Vanguard and State Street, they wanted to Balkanize Russia. They wanna split it up and sell it off for parts, which is what they do, right? And they thought they were gonna be able to do that with the Ukraine war. And as Angela Merkel revealed that when they had the peace agreements in Ukraine, that that wasn't really for peace. That was just so the Ukraine had the time to build up their military to get ready for this war that they provoked from Putin. And so, but people don't know that in the United. People don't do anything because the people who want that war own the media. And then people like me who know that, and I tell that story, I'm called considered borderline content on YouTube and they call me a conspiracy theorist on Wikipedia, even though I was right about it and just like I was right about the Syrian gas attacks, which now the old PCW admits that they suppressed the whistleblowers. Um, but they, I mean, literally they had, you go to Wikipedia and it I would say Jimmy Dore is a conspiracy theorist because CNN says that the the gas attacks happen the way that and i'm like yeah that's all garbage and so anyway um They're smart They just like Michael Peretti said, they only care about what you think, which is why they control the media so they can control what you think. Right. And you don't get a thirty five million dollar contract for debunking Russiagate. You get a 35 million dollar contract like Rachel Maddow got for pushing Russiogate. In fact, when the war started in Iran, I watched a video of hers. She's still blaming Putin. She's saying he's doing the bidding of as if Putin wanted that to happen because now he gets to sell oil at a higher price. Yeah, that was an unintended consequence of this war. Trump had to take the sanctions off of Russia. And, uh, so anyway. But if you're racial meta, why not just come out against the war in Iran? I mean, that was a pure Trump thing and BB everybody in your audience hates Trump and BB. So why wouldn't you just say that? Why blame Putin? That's insane. Because they have to keep that war going, I guess, and she's a puppet of the military-industrial... Again, you don't get a $35 million contract, this is what she got, for telling the truth. You know, Tucker, I use you as an example all the time, you know, you don't gets fired for lying. He got fired when he started to tell the truth about the neocons and the military industrial complex, the Syrian war, which is when you and I first connected, because we were the two people telling the true... You were the only other person. And I thought, am I going insane? There's no evidence that this happened. I don't even know Assad. I didn't have strong feelings about Assad. He's certainly better than what we have now in Syria. But I was just like, this just seems as like a reporting matter, like a lie. And you were the the only person saying that. The only other. I remember doing a video and I said, boy, if it comes down to me and Tucker telling the truth about this, we're screwed. And of course we are screwed because now Al-Qaeda runs Syria. Exactly. Exactly as I predicted, exactly as Tulsi Gabbard predicted. I know. That if you get rid of Assad, who's going to take over Al- Qaeda or ISIS, by the way, which we're funding and probably created. So isn't it interesting that ISIS and Al-qaeda, the sworn enemies of Israel never attack Israel? Isn't that interesting? It is kinda weird. Yeah, it's kind of, it was almost like they invented them for a purpose. People don't care. I talk about this, people don't care, especially my, you know, my ex friends in Hollywood. They have no idea about any of this stuff. They don't know that the... So they see a guy who's running Syria now and he's got a blue Brooks Brothers suit on and he is meeting with the president and he has been with Petraeus. He's over at Downing Street and they're like, yeah, he's our guy. You know, he is the former head chopper from Syria, from al-Qaeda, right? Like, huh? What? They all look like Dash Patel, I don't know what the hell is going on, you know? So, uh... It's funny, even the Gulf Arabs, um, when he took, when Jalani took over Syria, they were, they were more uncomfortable than our state department. Our state department was like, yeah, okay, it's totally fine. Cause the Israelis wanted it. But even the gulf Arabs were like, Ooh, this guy's pretty scary. Like really we going with this? And Qadhafi predicted all this and that's why they had to kill him too. Oh yeah, he gave a speech at the Arab League where he talked about, you know, you don't think they're going to come for you next, they're coming for you. And they did, and they came for him because, well, he was a threat to the petrodollar because he was going to create the denar, right? And the most successful country in all of Africa, and he was gonna unite Africa, and they can't have that because they want to go in there, you know, as Michael Peretti says, it's not a poor continent, it is a very rich continent, and they just keep the people poor so we can extract all their resources, which is what they do. And so he was going to he was gonna unite the people of Africa and they can't have that because that would be a threat to the euro and be a threat to The US dollar and so that's why he had to go plus he said if you get rid of me, they're gonna flood Western Europe he thought he was safe because if they got rid of him then all the refugees Would go flood but it turns out that's exactly what they wanted of Exactly, and why do they want that? They want that for the because they again, they want you hating your neighbor. They want you to be afraid of your neighbor and fighting. So just like in the United States, why did they have open borders? And, um, I'm, you know, I've very pro immigrant, you know, um the, but the reason why they want to flood the country with is for it to, but by the way, Bernie Sanders used to be a, uh, against, against open borders and he would say it's a Coke, it's a Coke brother scam. And of course lower wages lower wages and then keeping poor workers fighting against even poor more desperate people Instead of coming together realizing your common interests and fighting against the oligarchy And what I tell people is if you find yourself angry at someone lower on the economic ladder than you pretty good chance You're being manipulated by someone higher on the economical ladder than new and so that's why I say you don't blame the immigrant Because you would do exactly what they're doing Really? I agree completely. I would do I would whatever I could to get into United States percent Yeah, I would lie cheat and steal I'd walk from Tegucigalpa any day That's right to give my kids a better life and myself and so that's what they did in Europe So you go there and it's to dilute the culture And get people Fighting amongst each other so you don't come together and fight the man I think but Gaddafi thought that and he thought that they didn't want that. I didn't realize that they wanted that And as soon as they realized that they wanted it, he was gone. So there was many reasons to get rid of him. And of course, you know, Hillary Clinton famously said, we came, we saw he died and she giggled about it because they're blood soaked psychopaths. I don't think that's an overstatement. It's not an over statement at all. You kidding me? They they're all for the Iraq war. They killed a million people right in the Iraq War. And look what they did to Libya. The most now it's got open slave market still to this day. Then nobody cares. They they used Plutonium tip bombs. So Gaddafi took desert and turned it into farmland. He created a water system, which is considered like the eighth wonder of the world. And they bombed it. They bombed with depleted uranium tip bombs to make it a failed state. And so now the water is polluted with uranium. And- Was that NATO? Yeah, that's the good guys. Yeah, the Defensive Alliance. Yeah, The Defensive Alliances, right? UK, France, and the United States. We were the good guy. That's what people think. Just, I never forget when Tulsi was running for president and she went on Stephen Colbert. Who's one of the biggest disappointments ever to comedy and he said what she was telling the truth about Syria, right? And she was saying, you know, we shouldn't be doing this regime change wars and stuff and he leaned over He said I see America as a force for good in the world with a straight face with a straightforward That's a grown-up man who's been in comedy his whole life. You think America's a force do you have you looked around the world? We have a thousand military bases. What has that gotten anybody? Did you see what we did to Iraq? You see we did so Libya. Do you see where we're currently doing the Syria didn't It's all, again, that's why you get those jobs, because that's what you're gonna say. If they said something like I was gonna say, I wouldn't get that job. People like me don't get on TV like that. Now a lot of people hesitate before getting traditional therapies for cholesterol health. They don't want to wind up stuck on capsules for the rest of their lives. Pills, they'd rather feel like they have some say in how they take care of their own bodies. And that's why more Americans are turning to more gentle alternatives with ingredients they recognize. Ingredients like ginger and pomegranate. One of those alternatives is a dose for cholesterol. Dose for cholesterol is a clinically backed cholesterol support supplement that targets triglycerides, LDL, HDL, and total cholesterol levels. We know a bunch of people use it and the results have been overwhelming. They no longer fear having blood work done because at last the results are good and they're not on some kind of weird chemical cocktail. It actually works. We wouldn't partner with them if it didn't work. Dose is easy to use. It's a daily two ounce liquid shot that tastes like mango. Ooh, no capsules, no powders. It's seamless to use, visit dosedaly.co slash Tucker, use code Tucker for 35% off. That's dosdaily.co slash Tucker, code Tucker for 35% off. It's worth it. So, not to sidebar here, but what about Colbert, who I always thought was talent? Extremely. He did the best show ever. I liked his show way better than The Daily Show when he did The Gold Bear Report. And then he became that guy. How? Why? Who knows? I'm not a psychiatrist, but he became the thing he used to lampoon. He became that guys. And he just repeats military-industrial complex talking points. You know, he's... He helped to build up the the momentum for their ukraine war and they and they let you know I said it about john stewart too You know john steward who can supremely talented these people are really talented But he'll never tell his audience the truth about the ukraine War just like he'll ever tell people why he hung a medal on a nazi at disney world right, uh and He told the truth About the the virus the covet virus on colbert I remember that. Which Colbert kept trying to stop him and take the legs out from underneath his comedy bit, which was brilliant. He had to literally get off the couch and walk towards the camera so he could finish his comedy bid about where the COVID virus came from. Do you remember this? Very well. Yes. And so he paid a big social price for that, John Stewart. He did? Yeah. And he talked about, boy, I found out that I didn't know that certain medicines were political. He was talking about ivermectin and there's a right-wing medicine. He talked about this. And then to make up for that he had to give a tongue-bath to Hillary Clinton and Condoleezza Rice I don't know if you remember that no, yeah Which we that's penance that is penance and then he had hang a medal on a Nazi at Disney World Which he'll never go anywhere anybody will ask and got buddy I'm a big fan of Jon Stewart's and but I just don't you know Chris Hedges told told me when the first time he came on my show was that I'm like, Jon Stewart's great, he takes down both sides. He's like, he'll never challenge the establishment, Jimmy, which is why he's there. And I'm, like, in a meaningful way, and that's true. And that's why he is allowed to go on those TV shows and have a TV show. I mean, same thing with Bill Maher, right? If they were really a threat, they wouldn't be there. They're not a threat. I mean, Bill Maher, I don't want to be mean, but not a talented guy. I remember going to his house and he has this amazing house. And it's like, wow, you've really, on the basis of very little native talent. I mean literally, I know comedians no one's ever heard of who were like kind of geniuses, not the case for Bill Mahr. This was 25, almost 30 years ago I first thought this. And I was like, wow, this guy, how did he get so successful? So... Remember when he did tell the truth when he had that charm? I'll never forget it. Yeah, so he told the truth about well the the hijackers on 9-eleven weren't cowards He said you could say whatever you want about them But they you know, they give up their own life for a cause and that's the opposite and boy Oh boy, did he pay a price friend? He got his mind right immediately And so they canceled him and the story I've heard was that his management company also represented The sopranos right and so HBO wanted The Sopranos bad. And so they said, okay, we'll give The Sipranos, but you have to give Bill Maher a show. And that's how he got his show on HBO. And just like George Costanza said on Seinfeld when they were pitching a TV show on that sitcom, that they asked George Costanzo, why would anybody want to watch this? And he goes, because it's on TV. And that why people watch Bill Mahr, because he's on T.V. And he gets big name guests, right? Which I'm jealous of, no doubt about it. But... He won't bring on people every time he brings on someone that's to his left He gets schooled and he gets embarrassed like Glenn Greenwald and Glenn Greenwold has schooled him hard I've showed that video many times Glenn's amazing and I can't believe he had glana on. That was back in 2011 or 2010 and he's never had him on again. Of course not. Yeah, so anytime he has someone To his left people don't like to you know people who consider themselves liberal The last thing you want to do is be challenged from their left and so he'll never bring but Bill Maher That's why he's he's loves to have beef friends with like Ann Coulter and people like that but he's not gonna do that the other way and So yeah, that's what that's over left with and that's how we got that job and that's why and nobody knows the ratings of HBO right? They don't release them a subscription but and you know I'll say fully that I'm jealous of the influence he gets to have on the culture and I'm I would and I am jealous that he has that show. But it's waning for sure. Nobody likes him that's the weird thing right? No. You know and my wife always says can we at least have somebody who's fun to look at if he's going to be wrong about everything? I do think, though, the Gaza tragedy has forced people into sunlight, kind of, because, like, if you're defending that, you don't have to hate Israel or, you know, have any kind of wacky views, but, like how could you defend that? How could a normal person defend that, if you are not a normal if you defending that? I think. Tucker, you do not think Israel has a right to defend itself? I think everybody has a way to defend themselves, I just like, that's genocide, that's murdering children. And so, and I think a person who's. Like likes Israel, loves Israel even could say, yeah, I love Israel, but like I love America, but I'm not gonna defend the grotesque things that our country has done. Why would I defend that? I degrade myself and I lie when I do that. So why couldn't you say, yeah, I really love Israel? But that's disgusting. What, they're starving people who didn't do anything wrong, like how could you defend that. And people don't know that there's a thing called the Greater Israel Project, which I didn't know. I didn- I didn't know most of this stuff until October 7th, right? Yeah. I- I- mean, I had covered- when Israel would go in and mow the lawn, you know, I would cover how horrible that was. But I didn't really understand the genesis of it, I didn't understand what was going on. But after October 7th, I did. Now I understand. I understand that, you know, that Israel was founded by terrorist organizations and there was a thing called the Nakba and that they say it was invented because of the Holocaust, and that's not why, because Zionism has been around since the early 1800s, so it has nothing to do with that. That was always a problem and they couldn't get, you know, they couldn't get people to move to the middle of the debt and nobody wanted to, the Jews didn't wanna go there. So they had to make a deal with Hitler and to get people, so it's, I know all that stuff now and I know that it's a, you why a two state solution isn't the solution and you have to have a one state solution, which Bernie Sanders' video just went around of him. Uh... Saying that he doesn't support a one-state solution because then israel wouldn't be a jewish state what it was a nice support israel he said this is it this is our this is our you know progressive lefty leader i was shocked by that video, is that real? That's real. Yeah. But he was, you know, he was also two years earlier to that video. He was talking to Ezra Klein and he said, yeah, open borders are that's a that's a Koch brothers. So it just it's amazing that the real view. But he's always been a warmonger. He was, you know Bernie Sanders, he was he was for Kosovo and all that stuff. He was? Yeah. It's sad. Bernie Sanders, I saw one Bernie Sanders speech in person and it was in Iowa when he was running in 16 and it all about oligarchy is bad. And at the time I had pretty conventional views but I've never been for oligarchy. Why would I be for that? It's the enemy of democracy. So I was like, you know, and I know a lot of billionaires and some are nice but most are like gravely overrated. And like, I kind of liked his speech. You know, it was pure economic populism. See ya. And then, so I thought, yeah, I get it. And by the way, the audience was not all like, I don't know, people playing hacky sack or hippies or whatever, it was like normal people. And that really kind of shocked me. When he was on the Anti-Oligarch Tour? Totally. Isn't it amazing that he didn't do any of those anti-oligarch tours when Joe Biden was president? I know. Kind of amazing. All of a sudden oligarchy is a problem now. Kamala Harris and Joe Biden had more billionaire donors than Trump did, but somehow now it's a problem and what else they didn't show you was that there were pro-Palestinian protesters that they had kicked out of those rallies. Actually, yeah, so I missed so much of the detail because it's that's not my world and I didn't expect to feel that way about it Anyway, what I don't understand So I went to the 2016. I was a big Bernie Sanders. Yeah. Yeah, and just for the record I'm pretty sure he did oppose the Iraq war so I don't want people going he was okay, but you know, he played into the propaganda for the Ukraine war and And a certain and anyway, he won't call it a genocide. Anyway, so in Gaza, so But I was a big birdie guys a bit and I believed in him right and which is a hard lesson don't believe in politicians Amen. Oh, I've learned that lesson. Yes. Oh boy. It's a tough one and So I went to the democratic convention in Philadelphia, right Liberty Bell And, uh, it was great. You walked into the convention and half the place was filled with Bernie supporters who wanted to overthrow the establishment, get money out of politics, overthrow the, uh the corporatists inside the party and give it back to the people. It was amazing. Then it was real. It was a ruckus. It was a real ruck. I was there. I remember. And they turned the lights out on people that you sound can all kinds of stuff, right? I was there. You were there. Yeah. Oh, it was, it was invigorated. I'm like, this is it. They we got them the next time we're going to have a convention. They can't stop this. This is a trick. Well, what they did was they got Bernie Sanders. So Bernie Sanders tucks his tail. He endorses Hillary Clinton and he extracts not one concession for doing so. Nothing. He didn't ask for anything for him, for his supporters to vote for Hillary Clinton. And. Because because Trump right which you know the Democrats they say they hate Trump, but they love them because they're there There's their biggest fundraiser is Donald Trump Donald Trump goes away How they gonna so they have to make another so not only did he do that? But he did nothing with his movement, right? So we had half the people who voted in the Democratic primary on his side probably more because he got cheated so he Did nothing he didn't ask just like brock obama when he got elected He disbanded his followers right his young people same thing with bryce sanderson. He didn't say All right. What we're gonna do is we're going to shut it down. We're gonna have a protest here We're going have a protests there. We've got to go occupy walter. We are going to occupy the dnc We're, gonna make sure they get corporate. He, didn't, ask them to do anything Anything and that's how you know? And that he was Corrupted and co-opted put it that way And so uh same thing happened in 2020 they all got together cheated him uh... It in a in a different way this time and uh... He'd again he disendorsed joe biden without asking any kids and nothing we didn't get a public option we didn get a raise a minimum wage we didn't get nothing and um... So and he didn't ask his followers to do anything and he still won't ask the followers to anything just like a l c they won't say get in the street they want to go protest here go protest there they're playing along the good boys What's AOC's game? What do you think she actually believes? She's a narcissist who's using politics for celebrity. She could easily be an actress in Hollywood. 100 percent. Yeah. But she went this way. Does she have a shot at the nomination, do you think? You know, of course, I think. Why wouldn't she? I mean, she got up there and she lied at the DN. So let me get back to that. So they didn't have a convention in 2020, right? Because of COVID. So 2016, they have this convention. It looks like. The people are going to take over the Democratic Party and return it back to the workers. That's what I thought. I thought there's no way they can stop this. This is a trade that can't be stopped. So then they don't have a convention in 2020. Bertie capitulates, asks for nothing again. And then the next time they have a conventional was 2024. I went to that one in Chicago and you walk in and I'm sure I told you it was like I was at a Stepford Wives Convention. Nobody can go. I would interview people and I would say. How do you feel about them not having a primary and just appointing Kamala Harris? They're like, yeah, but we have a process. That's what they would say to a person. No, we had, she followed the process and we have a process I'm like, that process doesn't involve voting. Does that bother you? Didn't bother anybody. Seth Rich was. Part of the process. Yeah, haha, and they you know was this one billionaire after another billionaire giving speeches at the Democratic Convention and to show you how how failed Bernie Sanders and his movement is Our revolution which was the political organization He founded is now and you know who they're endorsing in the governor's race in California who's Tom Steyer a bill Not in there really yes a billionaire made his money in private prisons So that's how bad it's gotten So there's I hate to say this but You know and unless workers rise up in a real way their life So if so, that's why I think Trump knows he kind of has to end this war because if gas prices go to $10 a gallon Which they could easily go to Oh, easily. Um that uh, it will people are like hey, I can't afford to do any I can afford to go anywhere I can' afford to even drive to work So that would be that the paid would be so great at that moment maybe people would rise up in unison and um So we'll see well, but that's what it takes. That's what's gonna take So yeah, so 24 convention. It was just like a step and I was like, oh, so it's all they got it It's all over and then and then you know, the aoc goes on stage and says Kamala Harris is working tirelessly to end the to get a peace deal. They weren't doing anything Right. She even said i'm not gonna I wouldn't change anything that Joe biden did she said that on what she would have the view. I wouldn't change anything so um A woman who the first time she ran for president could get a vote. She had to drop out She's like the first one to drop Never forget it. And then she becomes the vice president and then she becomes a nominee and still nobody voted for her. So and because I criticize Democrats, because I was a Democrat my whole life until 2016. Um, people immediately go, well, if you're not, if you're going to criticize the Democrats, you must be a Republican. You must be at Trumper. You must beat it. I'm like, no, no. I, I, the Republicans never asked for my vote. Uh, Democrats did, and they, I got tricked by them. I got trick by Bernie Sanders. I got tripped by AOC hard. I was the first TV show she came on. Well, I wouldn't call it a TV show, but I was the first show she come on. And she tweeted it out. I was on Jimmy Dore show today and all that stuff. And then as soon as she got elected, she never returned a phone call, never. No way. No, no way. In fact, when I held her to her campaign promise with force to vote, which was trying to get them to extract something from Nancy Pelosi for their vote as her first speaker when there was only eight. So they, it was called forced to vote and it was a watershed moment because. It proved that no matter how many progressives you elect inside the Democratic Party, they're not going to do what you want them to do. They're not even going to do what they campaigned on. Very much like Trump, they're going to go along with the establishment. They wouldn't oppose Nancy Pelosi. They would not extract anything. Everybody agreed in the Democratic party for decades, including Nancy Pelosi, that we need to have a vote for Medicare for all on the floor of the house. Not that it would pass, but that it would expose the people who were fakers saying they were for it. And it would start a national conversation about it, and people would get informed about what it actually is, and it would help build the movement for it. And they wouldn't do that. They all ran on it. It was at the DSA Handbook from 2019. They opposed it. They posed and she ran on and she said we can't even get a vote for medicare Think about that. She said at a campaign rally think about that We can't be gonna vote for Medicare for all on the house floor She said that so i'm like boom this is the thing to do and so when I started the force to vote and I got a big coalition of people behind it And uh, she said I was committing Stochastic violence against her No way! I've never really understood what that term means. It means that you're exposing them for being hypocrites and so they have to try to discredit you some way. That's what that means. So you're a terrorist for- So I'm using, so I'm inciting violence against them with words, that's what they're trying to say. And because I said FAOC, and she used that as a, because that's not politics, that's stochastic violence. Okay. So what about Newsom? I think he's fantastic. Don't you think he is great? I think it cares about the people. I think its great. I think, he's going to make the country look as pretty as his hair. That's what I think. Does he I mean it feels like he's the nominee We'll see I mean he's gotta get he's got the gift of the gab. Oh, he's unbelievable. He really he really knows how to To you know, it's like Obama like I would feel better after you after Obama gave me I feel good And I know he's full of it and I would be better even it's weird He has that and he'll say literally anything literally anything and he's fun to talk to Like he's a very, uh, he's very charming. Like I will say, yeah, yeah. He does all those movements all the time and he's got the hand thing. And but is he in any sense, like different from Chuck Schumer or Pelosi or anybody like that? No, they're all. No, you don't get to be there if you are you you're not allowed to be the nominee if you are if you don't go along and play along you know you don you know that's why um in 2016 you know just like brexit uh that they democracy happened and they were like well well we we got to make sure this doesn't happen when trump got uh the nomination they're like we can't let this happen again right and same thing with brexit we can and so it's all the crackdown free speech and anti-democratic stuff and They did Russiagate, which, again, already told you served dual purposes. And then they got, and Trump got his mind right, and now Trump is one of them. And the people that he used to call out, people, he got elected for calling out neocons. Oh, yeah. That was his thing. People are like, yes, finally there's a guy. Now he's the chief neo con And people say, and I have to push back on this, a lot of people, you know, I have, I still have friends in Hollywood that I go to dinner with and they're good people because they, you know, they have the right intentions, but they don't realize they're propagandized. And their whole thing is all these idiots who voted for, how did you not know he's the biggest con man in the world? And I go, well, he did have a first term, his first term he didn't start any new wars. So he was the first president in decades that didn't start a new war. Everybody gets two wars, right? And Clinton, Bush, Barack Obama, he expanded the Afghanistan war, and he got to do Syria. Plus, he did the drone wars, which killed 90% innocent people. And, um, and he dropped more bombs than George Bush. People don't know that the Barack Obama dropped more bombs than george bush. And so, and then Trump got in and he didn't do it. You're like, what? And then he, you know, he wanted to pull troops out of Syria. And we find out that the military lied to him and said they did, and they didn't, right? You know, about that story. And so it was like, so we had a track record and I did not, nobody saw that, so people say they saw it coming that he was always a con man. Um, yeah, what politician isn't a con man. Yes, I agree. And, but his, his particular presidential campaign was the biggest con I've seen since Nigerian princes learned how to email. It was amazing. And people even more clever than any Nigerian prince I've ever been emailed by. He got people way smarter than me, uh, convinced. And, you know, and, uh I didn't vote for Trump. I never voted for Republican. I voted for Dave Chappelle. I wrote him in and, um, but, uh but people think that people who think that people think I did campaign rallies for Donald Trump didn't campaign. Well, I actually did. I know. A number of them. Yeah. Yeah, um, then to wake up and substantively he's no different from Chuck Schumer on economics and foreign policy or Lindsey Graham or Lindsey or Lindsey Graham. Um, and you're like, but Chuck Schumar is like from for the, for the Republican brain as like, you know, evil. Yeah. And it's like, where do Trump and Chuck Schummer disagree on the biggest issues and they don't. And so They both want to keep you away from health care, they both want to do foreign wars, they both support Israel unconditionally and what they're doing. They both want to crush a workers' strike, so that was why it was so important for Biden and the Democrats to crush that railroad strike, because that would have set the template and an example. Just like the truckers in Canada, they'd had to stop that immediately, call them Nazis and white supremacists, and they had to debank them and shut down, and they had do that because they didn't want that catching on. And just like Michael Prenty said, they only care about what you think, and if you see that and you start to think different thoughts than the media wants you, they got a problem. And so that's why they crush that railroad worker strike immediately. And so that again, this is what we need we need workers to realize that we have any and you know There's this thing now what aoc wouldn't join with marjorie taylor green To oppose the genocide in in gaza and she's like, well, she's white supreme Whatever is, you know this whole thing and you, know, that's not how you organize, right? And I I experienced that when we had the anti right after the ukraine war started We had an anti-war rally in washington dc and code pink wouldn't wouldn't joined in code pink Their whole thing is to be against war. And they wouldn't join it because there were certain speakers on the lineup that they didn't feel, uh, agreed with their views on LGBTQ. And I'm like, and I'm like, so that reveals, and I love Madea Benjamin. Yeah, I do too. Uh, but that organization just proved themselves to be a bunch of cosplaying women. Fraud because that's not how you or everybody knows that right? It's not it's like well I'd like to stop a nuclear war but not with those people. You know, I mean That's it. So it's like that's that's what gives it power when you are able to join with people who you don't agree with on other things and vehemently disagree on other thing and you come around a single idea That's what it gives it the power if it's just people that agree with you on everything They can dismiss you and say all those are those crazy lefties. But if you have these Right-wingers who don't agree with you. That's what gives it power and it's like I talk up You know, I wasn't been in unions all my life and what? Here's how we you don't organize a union. You don't go to the shop floor and say hey who's here? It's a gun nut. All right, you're out who here doesn't who here? Doesn't agree what the trans agenda? All right You're out. Who here is who doesn't agree? Medicare for okay, you route who doesn' agree on the war. Okay, you are all right now I'm gonna organize who's left. That' not how it works And Christian Smalls proved that when he organized a bunch of right-wingers on Staten Island, a bunch Trump voters, to go against Jeff Bezos and the oligarchy. That's not how you go, hey, we have a common interest, and our common interest is against the man. And so we can forget about those other issues, and we can work on those later, but right now we have bigger issue, and the bigger issue is to oppose this guy, so we get decent working conditions, we can get health care, we get a decent wage. That helps lift everybody's vote. And so that's what they don't want you to know. That's the thing that, again, that's the only thing that scares people. And I have, you know, my audience is made up of, so I meet them when I go out and tour the country. I was just in Raleigh. I was in Atlanta. I was, you now, I was I was Houston. I was Dallas. I was an Albuquerque. I go everywhere. And I disaffected Democrats and disaffecting Republicans. And the people, the disaffECTed MAGA people, they feel so betrayed. And, you know, that's the thing about, oh, they're such idiots at such a convent. It's like, so if I, if, it's like I tell him, at least he had a track record and at least he would give lip service to the things that they wouldn't even give lip service to it. Kamala Harris wouldn't give you lip service. But he was also being persecuted, literally persecuted by the establishment. So the idea that he would join with the establishment against his own voters seemed like crazy. That could never happen. They're trying to send him to prison for life. So you're like, those were his bona fides, his suffering at the hands of the establishment, you never thought he would them. At least that's- That's my own thinking. That's exactly right. In January 6, which we now know is an FBI Psy op, and Clay Higgins exposed that, on your show even. But even before that, he was questioning the FBI director, and how many FBI assets did you have inside the Capitol before the riot started? I can't tell you that. What? The answer should be none. You You would think. Yeah, so of course that and so they did the same playbook in Brazil, by the way. So again, you don't have to be a Trump fan or Bolsonaro fan to realize that if they could do it to those people, they'll do it's anybody, which is what I tried to tell Cornel West when he came on my show and he wouldn't listen to it. You know, if you don't think if they can do this to Donald Trump, that they're not going to do it. To you, if ever become a threat or they'll do it, to Bernie Sanders, if he ever becomes a threat or Jill Stein or anybody, anybody becomes a They used the exact same playbook on January 6th. They did it to Bolsonaro They had a fake insurgency that overtook the capital and they made it illegal for him to run for president get the same thing They were trying to do to Donald Trump, but they couldn't think because he didn't cross that line He didn't tell people to go in either. So anyway Uh, that, and people don't, still til to this day, people don't realize that, that it was, uh, the, the FBI did that. The FBI is not your friend. The FBI, it's amazing what the, what Trump did to the left. Trump got the left to go along with the FBI. All of a sudden they're the good guys at the CIA. They're the guys. It's amazing. We know that the FBI infiltrates every lefty organization and we, we know, and, and this idea that, um, it's we have to worry about right-wing terrorists inside the United States. Well, nine out of ten, if not 99 out of 100 of those terrorist happenings are invented by the FBI, just like the Whitmers. Exactly. You know, they were going to kidnap her. Turns out nine out of the 13 people in the van were FBI. Of course, I mean, they do this with all they, This is over and over and over again and so. You know, we're a victim of our, and the same thing with Big Pharma. The people who went from protesting GMOs at our food flipped and went for, don't you question Big Phharma over the vaccine? How dare you? Don't you even question vaccines? Don't you are like, what? Cite that don't do your own research, which means don't read. And it's the most anti-intellectual thing, and people just accept it. You know, that's what dictators do, you know, the church didn't want you to read the Bible, you had to go through the priesthood. That's right. That's why they didn't allow slaves to learn how to read, it was illegal. And you got people who consider themselves liberal repeating that, don't do your own research, don't look into things, just trust the government. Trust the government and trust Big Pharma. And now we know they lied about everything, and those people still don't know anything. They still think ivermectin is a horse paste. Actually? Yes! People tell me on social media all the time, you ruined your reputation over ivermectin. I go, did it ever occur to you that you were lied to about ivermekton? Did it ever occurred to you it's won the Nobel Prize for human medicine, that it's on the WHO list of essential medicines? It's been prescribed a billion times for humans, saved billions alive? Did it every occur to that before COVID they were looking at it to cure cancer and now there's credible study after credible study that it does cure cancer? The last one that 80% of the people who took ivermectin for their cancer saw either a complete remission, no growth in their tumor, or recession, I don't know if that's a term, 80%! Uh, so you've been lied to about ivermectin and people well now chris cuomo will admit that he was He goes well, they lied to us. Yeah chris That's why you're supposed to be the journalist and you're not supposed to repeat what they tell you Exactly, you're you're suppose to actually look into it Which would take five seconds for you to look it up on google. What is iver mectin? But of course he didn't do that. He just him and don lehman would just scoff at joe They had to think about this they had to They had to color Joe Rogan's skin green. CNN did that when he got covid to when he got better right away and he did a video. They color to skin green, you know that, right? Of course. Yeah. So that's what a threat. That's a threat to the establishment. And so why would they do that? Why would they lie about ivermectin and say it's horse paste? Why do you think they did that? They did that because it could treat COVID, and then they couldn't get their emergency use authorization for the vaccine. That's why they did. That same thing with hydroxychloroquine. They wouldn't even let doctors prescribe steroids at the beginning of COVID. I know that because my doctor told me and she did it anyway. She gave people and they came to her and they go, Hey, why are you giving, she said, because my patients are living. And your patients are dying. And so I've been lucky to have good doctors. Yeah, and you. Saw it early or I got vaccine injured. Yeah. And that's what, so I wouldn't, I didn't know, I didn't t know that they would lie about a virus. I didn t know they would lie about it. I bought all the stuff about vaccines and everybody. I did that. I didn't that there was never actually a placebo test for any of the vaccines. I never questioned that they give 72 shots to a baby from the time it's a baby to the time it's 18 for vaccines. I never question why did they give the hepatitis B vaccine? The first shot they give to a, you only can catch hepatitis from intravenous drug use or protected sex are there a lot of horror babies running around hospitals is that what's happening So and people don't ever think about that. I was at a Hollywood party and I was talking to a doctor and this is before the election He's where I'm really worried about RFK is gonna take away our vaccines and I said to him Do you know how many vaccines that you have to take now on the schedule? He's what I go 72 and his jaw hit the floor and I go, you know the first one just like I said It's hepatitis B. He's like what why would they do that? I go. What do you think they do? That for money. What? Do you think cuz they can't get people to take it so they just put it on the vaccine schedule That's how that's how it got on there read the Midwestern doctors blog It explains everything. The Midwestern Doctors blog, I just want to plug that. Anyone who hasn't read that unsubstract Midwestern Doctor. Yeah, he's a, I don't think he uses his name. No. Right. He's a kind of a genius and a very decent person. Well, does his own research. He does his own read. He reads. He read. He reads studies. So speaking of, I have to ask you about this, because it's not related to anything we've been talking about, but we're talking at breakfast about Carl Jung, the famous psychoanalyst who is often described as the protege of Sigmund Freud, but a little more complicate. No. Right. Exactly. No, they're completely different. He broke with Freud big time. In fact, Freud disowned him. Yes and hated him and jealous of him. Who was he? Why do you read him? So, Carl Jung, by the way, it's very interesting how it connects to COVID, because he realized that your psyche has a need for the sacred and the religion. And he said, if you don't have that, if don't a connection to that, that you will project it outward. And that's exactly what happened. So, you know, liberals, the people I know in Hollywood, they're not spiritual, religious, and so they turn science into a religion. Yes, and they turn Fauci into their deity And so you can't question it, you can question religion, you're a heretic, so you can't questions science, don't do your own research, don't read the Bible, don't read the, all that, it's the same, and I saw it happen right in front of my face. And so Carl Jung, he was way ahead of his time. And so we share the same birthday, which he would say is a synchronicity. But I had a quote from him on my fridge for years, and i never understood it. But it stayed on your fridge. Because I guess I had a feeling there was something to it, and you say, you know, about enlightenment doesn't come from imagining forms of light, it comes from making the darkness conscious. And until you make the darkness consciousness, it will control your life and you'll call it fate. And so it's all about all the parts of ourselves that are split off and we put into our unconscious or our shadow self, and then we project it. So the things we hate the most and the things that we love the most are really a religious experience, Rejoining so we project a part of ourselves that's in our unconscious onto a thing onto another person And that's why you see the people who were the most animated in their hatred for trump Had trump in their shadow, right? That's the part of them that they yes, you know keith oberman You know people those kind of people, right so they have that and so they project it because that's the Part of themselves. They hate the most right? And so same thing when you love something, like when a male falls in love that, you know, love at first sight, that's you're projecting a thing called your anima. That's your female side that's in your unconscious and you project it onto another person and you feel that like you're being energized from the inside because you are. And And then you get married and then of course the projections fall off and you're like, who's this person? That's what happens to a lot of people right and that's what happened in midlife right a lot guys in mid life They have an anima projection and they feel like I can't live without this person Because it's a connection to their own soul your anima represents your soul And so it's the end you're likely how could I how can I you know disavow my own this this relationship? Because it feels like if I do I'll die and it's their first connection to their own self, a religious rejoining of their conscious mind with their unconscious mind. And so Carl Jung knew we had a soul, knew there's a God, which Freud was totally against all that. Freud was afraid that people would not take them seriously and dismiss them as mystics and whatever. And Jung wasn't. Jung had mystical experiences. He had direct experiences of the divine. And he sobbed the people at the clergy when he was a kid that didn't, he saw that they didn't. He knew he had direct experience. If you read Memories, Dreams, Reflections, he talks about it. That is autobiography. Yeah, he talks about how the clergy, they were just, they're all empty, especially his father. And he would, when he would question it, his father was like, he didn't have answers, and he didn't want him to talk about it. And he could see how empty they were, that they was, there was just dogma that didn't, they didn't have direct experience of the die. And I've had that since I started I'm reading Young, and so I've been going inward, right? So Jung says, he who looks outward dreams, he goes inward, awakens. And so I have a direct connection to the divine. I've had numinous experiences. And what's a numinist experience? It's like a sacred spiritual happening that kind of happens to you against your own will. And it takes you over, Right? If in And that's, I experienced that like when I quit smoking pot, people like, why'd you quit smoking a pot? I'm like, I don't know, I felt like there was some outside force telling me to do it. And it was hard. So people who say that marijuana isn't addictive, it is. I was at least six months before I could sleep and it was horrible. I was in bad shape and I just knew I had to quit. How did you know? Again, like I said, I just had this outside, I felt there was something guiding me to this. And so I did. And, you know, your dreams... Are your psyche, or as Jung would call it, the self with a capital S, meaning, you know, the divine talking to you and speaking to you in symbols. And we share a collective, so you have a personal unconscious, right? The things that you personally split off from your own personality and put in your unconscious and your shadow. And then you have collective unconscious, which Joseph Campbell also talked about. And my first entree into this was Joseph Campbell, He talked about how you know different societies who had no way of connecting with each other Use the same symbolism to explain life and the spiritual Literally, in a way that's spooky, I mean, it's shocking. Jung figured that out that we have a collective unconscious, meaning there's only one consciousness, right? So, there's not your consciousness and then God-conscious. There's just one consciousness and we're part of it. And the fact that you think you're separate from it is a mistake. And so, we're a part of that. And as we evolve our consciousness, we evolve the world's consciousness, right? Because we all share a collective unconscious. And one of the ways he figured it out was that he would have dreams and there'd be symbols in his dreams. And he didn't know what they meant, but he could tell that they were meaningful. And then he was reading about the alchemists. Now, everybody thought the alchemyists were trying to turn lead into gold, but what they were really trying to do was turn psychological lead into a gold. And they had to do it to hide it from the church. So he they had figured out what some of these symbols meant and he saw them right about the symbols that he was seeing In his own dreams and he was like, oh my god, I'd never read this before How would I know about this symbol to show up in my so that's when he started to figure out that we all share A consciousness that there is one consciousness. There's the one and So it's it's pretty heavy glimpses of that, I think, occasionally. People in the course of daily life get just a flash that somehow there's a connection between all peoples. There is only, you know, it's like we're hairs on the human head thinking we're separate, right? They're all, you're all part of the same head, you all part in the same body. It's all, we're all a part of same consciousness. There's only one. And so, and we've, you, know, split ourselves off from it. We split that into our own conscious. And so if you go into your own conscious, and one of the great ways is to go into your dreams and see what they're saying to you and treat it and, you know like Rumi said, what you seek, seeks you. And so the more attention you pay to your unconscious, the more it will rise up to meet you. And so I've had numinous experiences, I've experienced the divine, I've experience my encounters with archetypal figures in my dreams that have guided me. And- How did quitting smoking pot after so many years affect your dreams? Well, they became way more vivid and more often. Really? Oh yeah, yeah. And so I speak with a Jungian psychoanalyst once a week and he used to be the head of the Jung Center in Los Angeles and he's remarked to me often that you're one of the most prolific dreamers that I've ever encountered. And often when I'm telling him about dreams, he'll just go, oh my God. Like he says that a lot. And so it's been a real awakening. And I realized that I'm not separate from the divine. I realize that I am not this body, that I have an eternal soul. And even though this body dies, that I don't die. That death is not the opposite of life. Death is the opposite of birth. Life has no opposite. It's eternal. And so once you realize that, that changes a lot of things. Like what? It changes how I look at everything. I look at the oneness of everything. I look that this isn't permanent. This body is not permanent. That I have an everlasting soul that I have to pay attention to. That I need to get in touch with. And it fills my life with real meaning. And... You know part of it too is this is your most radical position of all the radical things you said since we sat down this is the most counterculture thing you could say Well, people think they need a priest or they need a preacher or a church, which is all good. The community is good, but you don't need them because you already have a connection to the divine within you. And that's where you need to go. And once you realize that, then you don't need them. That's why they don't tell you about that. And Jesus said that, where did he say the kingdom of heaven is, Tucker? The kingdom of Heaven is in you. You are the light of the world. And what I do, you will do and greater. And And and people they don't they don't need you to know that which is why they get rid of the parts of the bible that talk about that kind of thing and uh, so it's it's uh I I I was a you know, I was the sam harris atheist for a while. I was grown up catholic Went to catholic school for 12 years It never spoke to me and the people who seem to be most catholic seem not to really embody it, you know And so I was, I was an atheist. I thought, I thought this was it. This is it. And when you're dead, you're dead. And, and now I realized, no, this is what changed your mind. That's a big change. Well, I had this big dream. Um, it, it usually starts with a big dream, so I had this dream I was kneeling down in front of my house, in front of the bushes, I had a fish hook on a string. And I was drying it through the dirt in front of my bushes. And in my dream, I'm thinking, what am I doing? What am I looking for? And then I saw underneath the dirt, I saw it start moving, like there was an animal underneath there. And I was like, what the heck? And all of a sudden, this black cat emerged and it was all grimy and it had like an oil-like substance on it. And I'm like, how could it be even breathing? How could it under there for so long and not be dead? And then it got up and walked around. I'm, like, well, it's okay. It's alive and willing. And so... So I knew that meant something, I didn't know what, I sought out, I started reading Jung, I sought Rebecca Eigen who helped me understand Jung, I got a Jungian analysis. And so that was, you know, what you seek is seeking you. That was the divine, the unconscious telling me, you're ready. You're ready to go into your darkness. You're already go into your shadow, you're ready to go in to your unconscious. You don't know what you're going to find there. And it's probably going to be scary and you don't want to find it, but it's there and it's ready for you to now take the next step in your conscious evolution. And so here I am and I'm doing it. That's what kind of reaction do you. You get from your friends. Um They don't know really they don't really say, you know, I I don't Really have these kind of conversations very often. I have them on my podcast with people Uh, like there's um, I have a book club where we read carl young and we go through it and we talk about it It's really it's it's my favorite thing to do in the world. If I could just do that. I would just do You would just read Carl Jung and talk about it. Carl Jung and talk about it because that's what it's really all about Yeah, that's so different from the world you've lived in though. Yeah, a hundred percent Yeah, again, I was an atheist. I didn't know. I asked Carl Jung, is there a God? Do you believe in God? He said, I don't believe I know, because he experienced God. From 1913 to 1917, I've described it as he could give himself a psychedelic trip in a way. He could somehow consciously access his unconscious. He could meet the archetypal figures in your unconscious, your anima. If you're a male, Your soul, he would say, is your anima, which is your female, your feeling function. It's real and it's autonomous and it is in your unconscious. And if you're a female, it's your animah, which is the male counterpart. And so he encountered these, these figures in his, and I've encountered some of them, so I had one of those experiences. So, um, you know, it was scary to, it is scary to go into your shadow and the things you hate about yourself that you realize you've been projecting out to other people. Yes. And so, the idea is that we're going to be able to do that. Boy, that's so familiar to anyone who's self-aware. We all do that. So the idea is you make it conscious, this darkness, this part of you that you hate, you make conscious and you integrate. You don't judge it because it's also positive in a sense. And you integrate it into your conscious mind so you don't have to project it on anybody anymore. And your consciousness is raised. So that goal isn't to become a better person, the goal is to become more whole person and not split off from who you are. And so that's a, to me, that's the goal to be, to make the unconscious conscious integrated. And even though you might think it's a bad part of yourself, like, you know, I've been dealing with the unrestrained masculine, right? Which causes fights and me to be extra aggressive when I don't need to be. And, but you need that part. You need to able to set boundaries and to be able to be angry when you need it. But you need to aware that where it's coming from, so it doesn't come out sideways and wreck your life. And even if you think it's negative, it's good in a sense. For instance, right? So the part, look, I always give the example of, so like you have this, you know, you have shit in your uncaused odds. That stuff is smelly and dirty. I don't want to know that it's part of me. But, and what helps a rose grow? You need manure. Yes. And so out of manure comes a beautiful rose. So you just have to know how to use it, right. Just like electricity. I don't know, I'm not an electrician, so if I tried to wire your house, it'd burn down, right? But if somebody knows how to do it, it'll light up the whole house and the whole world, right? So you gotta know how to use it. And so it's that power, so that darkness comes creativity, and it also can help you blossom. And the idea, again, is to become whole. And most people don't do it. It's hard work, because you don't want to see. And a lot of guilt comes with it, right, because because you find out that in your past... You've done things that hurt your own soul and you feel guilty about it. And I've, I've had that right where I've realized through my dreams that I've prioritized career or material possessions over my own soul. And the overwhelming guilt that I felt in my dreams and Jung talks about this, that part of becoming conscious is being able to handle guilt. And I just, I was like, Oh my God. And so it's, it's people don't want to do this work because it's painful. Right. And they don't teach this and they teach, uh, they teach Freud cause it's easier. And it's materialism. They don't get it. They don't teach Jung, Carl Jung was about, you know, your soul and your religious experience, your numinous experience, the encounter with the divine, and if you don't have that, you're going to project it just like people did during COVID. It does seem, I'm not alleging a conspiracy, but there is a concerted, organized effort to eliminate any consideration of the transcendent, the eternal, the divine from people's consciousness. Like it's never mentioned, it's considered a crackpot, even to talk about that, the idea that there's a world that we can't see that's meaningful, that we're connected in any way other than physically. I mean, I don't think there's ever been a society as determined to deny. The Eternal as ours is. Well, there's this guy, his name is Bill Donahue, and he's dead now, but he talked about that everybody says they believe in, you know, spirits and the Lord and the Holy Spirit and angels. And then when they show up, you're like, oh, it's crazy. Right. Exactly. And I was like, yeah, that's exactly what they do. But just don't forget, The kingdom of heaven is inside you. It's not outside you, it's inside you You are the light of the world. When did this come to you? It was right before COVID was right. When COVID started, I had that big dream and then I started to go into my unconscious. Do you notice people around you starting to ask questions have thoughts like this? It does feel like more people are thinking about it. I have noticed, you know, unfortunately, yes, but they have questions, but the answers are in the wrong places, you now, and they go into organized religion. And I think, you again, I'm not here to put down religion. I think people need community. But you know too often, it's about control and that you need to get to God, you need to come through me, which is, you don't. You don't need anybody or anything. You have a connection to the divine and it's inside, it's not external. Everyone feels that on some level. Okay, so I want to end by asking- I'm not an expert on any of this stuff, by the way. Oh, I'm neither. Oh my gosh. I just know what I've experienced. It's just kind of weird speaking of the collective consciousness that a lot of people I know, like more than 10, started having thoughts like this right around or just before COVID. Okay. Almost like people were being prepared for what was coming and gaining a new vocabulary with which to explain it and understand it. People who had never thought about anything like this at all, who were totally wrapped up in material concerns, like the ones you mentioned, accumulating wealth, succeeding at work, just whatever, what we're trained to do. A lot of people I know, all of a sudden, are like, hmm, praying? Maybe that's a real thing. Maybe I should listen to voices whose sources I can't see. Stuff like that. Yeah. Again, you know, Carl Jung realized at a young age that he had thoughts that he didn't think himself that he was placed in his head by God, and he had direct experience with God. And so I've had those experiences and not only. Do I experience God in my dreams? But I realized that everything is a reflection of God. Everything is God in in my conscious life and my unconscious life. God is everywhere, everything. The kingdom of heaven is laid upon the earth, but the eyes of men don't see it. So it's now, you know, now is the time to meet God, to know the divine and to know your true identity. It's scary, you know, to do that. I had this dream. I had several dreams that completely changed my life. One of them, at the beginning, I was scared, you know, of this journey. And I was in the jungle, there was a clearing in the journal and I was sitting there and out from the jungle came this like, it was like half human, half ape, but the head was like a lion. And I like, and it came over to me and it put his hand out and I like oh, it's gonna crush me. You know, I'm afraid it's going to crush me, but it took my hand very gently. And walked me into the jungle. And I'm like, what the hell is this, you know? And a couple of weeks later, I'm reading a book and there was that symbol that the lion face, the half face, I was like what? And it's a Mithraic, that's called a Muthraic God. And so that's part of the collective unconscious. That's like this archetype that we all share in our collective unconscious, we're one consciousness that we share. And I was, oh my God. And so I interpreted that to mean that Um, it's okay. It's going to be safe to go into the jungle of your unconscious and I'll be there with you to help you and guide you. And it, you know, so that was just one thing. I have many things like that. That's one of them. And when I saw that picture, I'm like, Oh my God, that was the thing of my dream. And so that's one those things. I had no knowledge of that. I'd never seen a picture of that before. I never, and, but there wasn't my dream in a meaningful way. That's why it was wild. I know people think you're crazy when you talk about this stuff. No, yeah, on one level for sure it's, it's forbidden. It's way more forbidden than criticizing Israel. I mean, this is the actual, no, it true though. This is the actually third rail, I think, is to admit that you've had experiences with the divine or with a realm that's not physical or people are like, come on now. But everyone knows it's true. Yep. And again, I go back to everybody, you know, believes in the Holy Spirit, everybody believes, but then when it shows up, I'm like, oh, what are you, nuts? You think you talk to spirits and stuff like that? Yeah. Yeah, other countries are different. It's like, yeah, of course, of you do. So let me just ask you about this country or the West more, you know, the liberal democracies that resemble ours, every one of them is coming apart. Every one of the has reached kind of the end of a life cycle. They're not serving their people at all. All of this is, this whole project is being. They've become the fascists that they were supposed to be. They're canceling elections when they don't turn out the way they want. You know, they're doing austerity now in Europe and they're ratcheting up for a war with Russia. Jeffrey Sachs just wrote an open letter to Germany, like, hey, stop this. I know. And they'll ignore him because- And of course they will. Yeah, what a good man he is. Yeah, liberal democracy has turned out to be neither liberal nor democratic. They're illiberal. They're iliberal and undemocratic. Just like they proved during COVID. Yes, exactly. They immediately censorship, shut up, don't ask questions, don't talk against the establishment and take an experimental medical treatment against your own will or you can't go to work, you can travel, you can go to school. That's Nazi stuff. Oh, of course. And again, if it works, you take it. Why do you need me to take it? So the medicine works on you. That never made any sense. It will never make any sense because actually it's not your body or your choice. Well, they stop saying so you stop. You notice that around COVID. They stop saying I'm pro choice and they literally started saying I am pro abortion. I know, I know. That's what I was like, I'm out. Whatever this is, is too dark for me. But, okay, so all of this, I think, thanks in part to your tireless efforts for the past six years, is now pretty obvious to most people who are paying attention that this system is fake, it's not serving its intended beneficiaries, and it's kind of over. So then the question becomes, well, what next? And how do we get there? And the two potential paths are violent revolution, which I'm opposed to, or, somehow using this broken system to improve or replace the broken system. Yeah. And, what. Well, Larry Fink is afraid of a violent revolution. They're all afraid of it. He said that they're going to start drone bombing these data centers. He's afraid of that. Oh, I know. Yeah. Yeah. Cause they, cause they know how hated they are. You know, and they did the and Jeff, Jeff Bezos did this softball interview with CNBC last week or two weeks ago. And he talked about how if I pay more taxes is not going to help the nurse in Queens and all that stuff, you know, because if I do my job right, it's going to help people more than my philanthropy, right? Oh, really? If you do your job right. You know what the turnover rate in an Amazon fulfillment center is? Hundred and fifty percent. Yeah, 100 to 150 percent every year. So that means every eight months. 100% new workers. And so why do one third of your workers, the richest guy in the world, are on government assistance? Why am I subsidizing your employees? That's exactly right. Same thing, you know, same thing you hear about Walmart. This is the country we've devolved into when you have a government for the oligarchs and the workers get screwed. So that's where we're in. And exactly what I said before, the... Oh, bless you. Excuse me. The only way to do this is if people realize that they have a common humanity with their neighbor Don't fall for it that your neighbor is the white supremacist nazi Uh racist that you have to oppose and that they're the enemy No, they're again suffering under the same conditions you're suffering under join with them oppose those people The wef globalists who actually run everything. You know, it's funny people talk about communism. You don't get choice people think back to But capitalism has led us to the same thing. There's three companies that own everything, Vanguard, State Street, and BlackRock. That's the real boss. Trump has a boss. And I try to tell people that the Congress is that they're not doing the bidding. When they have a session of Congress, people go, oh, do you think they have secret meetings where they plan this stuff? Well, yes, actually they do. It's called Davos, it's called the Bilderbergs, now we know that's real, people just think that was crazy. Big time. But I used to say, no it's just a session of Congress. You think when they get together they're doing the bidding of students or workers or the elderly, they're in there doing the bidding of the oligarchs, the donor class, the people who actually run, they are bosses and it ain't you. That's just a fact. That's no longer, I don't think there's a single word you just uttered that could be quibbled with even. It's just, it's all proven now. But because it is proven, that means it can't continue under the current terms. So I don't think given everything you've said, you want violence, but is it inevitable? Like, how do we get out of this? Well, J.M.E. On John F. Kennedy said those who make a peaceful revolution impossible make a violent revolution inevitable, right? Or some version of that? Well, it's certainly true. And so, you know, we have more guns in this country than people. So in a sense that's good because the government is supposed to fear the people that the other way around. When exactly, when you fear your government, that's tyranny. And right now I think people do fear their government. Yes. Again, I'm not calling for a violent revolution, but, uh, I, you know, I think we, if workers come together, you have to shut down the machine and if you can shut down, the machine in a meaningful way. If all the truckers stop trucking, if all the railroad workers stop going to work, the port workers, that's how you gain control of your... But you see, they gave them the port workers. They gave them a nice contract right before Trump got into office. So they see it coming. Right? And so they're, they get there. Oh, we don't want them to get upset. We don't them to. So, or if all the teachers didn't go to work, if all grocery store workers didn't got to work. You know, that's the only way. If you, if, if anybody else has another idea, let me know, I'll be all for it. But to me, that's, the way that that history proves that you can have peaceful revolution. I would just correct you on the no teachers, we actually did have a time for over a year when the teachers didn't go to work and the people in charge really enjoyed it because ignorant kids mean more viable kids. But true critical functions, if they stop working, maybe will force people to pay attention, I guess. I'm really Remember who the essential workers are, right? It's not middle management. No, is it. The consultant class? No, it is not. Oh, it's not? It's not the professional managerial class. What about the private equity people there? No, they are not essential. You couldn't I don't even know if you could have a tax protest now because the government isn't funded through taxes, right? They just print the money exactly Did you see that video where they asked I forget the guy's name, but it was Joe Biden's economic advisor And as someone that said hey if we print our own money, why do we borrow it? And he was like for five minutes. He's like, well, that's good. Well, we print money. We definitely print money We definitely borrow money And he goes, I don't know that's a good question. He couldn't answer the question. You ever see that but I've actually wondered myself. I wonder it too. They just create money, quantitative easing, they just invent it. Of course, they don't give that money to you. No, it gives it to the banks. And so what people don't realize, people fear socialism, because they fear it's going to take money from the haves and give it to the have-nots. But what our version of capitalism has done, this oligarchy, it's an upward transfer of wealth. That's what happened during COVID. How many billionaires got invented? And it's continuing. It's an upward transfer of wealth. From the working class to the oligarchs. That's where we're in right now with three companies that run everything. So again, I don't see that as overstatement. Like I think that's just true what you said. So I don't know, I'm very concerned because I do think the people who are benefiting are so rigid, that's the main thing I notice, how rigid they are. They can't handle any disagreement whatsoever. No, like Teddy Roosevelt rolls in and he's like a product of the ruling class. He is the ruling-class. He becomes president by default. The president's assassinated 1901 And then he becomes resilient, he's like, look. This system will collapse unless we give a little bit. And he was the only president of American history able to make that case. And he kind of did adjust it enough that it continued another, well, 125 years. But I don't see the current rulers as capable of that kind of subtlety or sacrifice or nuance or even just like intelligence. They're too stupid to understand. They're screwing themselves by being this rigid. My view. Well, it's the, you know, um, also FDR saw that there was a revolution of the workers and he was afraid that he told his ruling class, Hey, this is coming here. If you don't give people some of your money, if you don't give them some of their money, they're going to take all of your money. Yes. And so he gave people jobs. He created the jobs program and created social security and CCC. Yes, and things like that. And, uh, but then they also at the same time went on a tear to get rid of the communists, right? And because they were a very force for the so you not that anybody's for communism, but indeed that kind of counterbalance and the economic populace above all. That's right. So Huey Long somehow gets assassinated before the 1936 presidential campaign by his own bodyguards. Kind of weird. Um, sorry, excuse me, but, uh, but I just w but, but either one, either Roosevelt, you know, they're different, but like they had the same impulse, which is this system is out of whack and it's going to get taken down by force unless we adjust it a little bit. And I don't see the current, I don't see Larry Fink is capable of doing that. Do you? Quite the opposite, right. It's more, you know, capitalism always at the end stage devolves into fascism, which is where we are. The surveillance state, these data centers, flock cameras, they built 80 billion dollars for ICE to get the illegal immigrants. By the way, they're not. I know. So what is that police force? It's for you! Right and so when you wake up and so now they're gonna make you a terrorist you're gonna you're going to be an anti Technological terrorist just like they had echo terrorists people who've and so you're Gonna be the terrorists and those prisons are for you because they're not getting they want the illegal immigrants here because they want cheap Labor that's always a joke. They're not get rid of them That's all all that stuff where they're shooting people that's all for show, right? That's not that you are the target And that's what those prisons are for. And, you know, we got their own private Gestapo called ICE. And what could go wrong? You take 50,000 TGI Friday bouncers and give them guns, masks, and unmarked cars and turn them loose. Well, because the truth is that illegal immigrants, you know, the guys like hiring at a day rate out of, you know Home Depot parking lot, you know there's a lot of drunk driving, but in general, not that unruly a group. Correct, those are people looking to work. You know who's unruley is like you, you're unruely. No, I'm serious. You're born here, you have a birthright, you feel totally entitled to demand that your government serve your interests because you own the government, like you're a huge problem. And you and people like you. Well, that's why they tapped into my phone using Pegasus. Actually, yeah, that actually happened. So when I spoke at the UN Security Council, I did it via Zoom. I was in Italy at the time and it was on the anniversary of the Nord Stream pipeline bombing, and so they they asked me to speak Russia. And so I accepted and I gave a speech and I gave it to him, you know, like you're all dupes and idiots if you think that this was done by Russia and the fact that. You know, Germany would bend their knee and let them to wreck their own economy. Now they're paying two and three times higher for air and to go along with this. And you're all morons. And I basically use that language. And so on the plane ride home on my had my laptop. At that time, I used to travel with my laptop, I don't anymore. And it said MacBook, the now controls your iCloud account. And I was like, what, what is this? I don't even know what the heck. So I get off, I call my I.T. Guy. Who is a former military intelligence, right? And his whole job is to try to crack into companies computer system to find vulnerabilities. So I call him and I tell him, I go, hey, did this happen? And he goes, oh my God, Jimmy, even I couldn't do that. And I said, what, what? And so I give him my computer, I give them my phone and he said, that was Pegasus. And I go well, who did this? He goes, it wasn't a person. No. As this was a state after. And I was like, and so it happened immediately after I testified. At the UN UN Security Council, and so that's why I have two phones now, right? So one's the phone. So now they got me Kurt Tucker, by the way, if I ever become a threat they got Me they either have all my compromising material and my icon on my computer on my phone or they planted something Because what it's so they got, me right so I got it So if you you'll know if I'm arrested or if some big scandal comes out It's because I now have become an actual threat No, that's so true. I did an interview with Glenn Greenwald the last summer here and he was tough on the foreign policy questions and tough on Netanyahu literally the next day. That's that's exactly right This tape comes out of a super embarrassing Glenn Greenwald sex tape, which I didn't watch, but I just wanna say how much I love Glenn. Those aren't connected? Of course, I know immediately. By the way, the first person to defend him, the first to defend was Charlie Kirk, which is just incredible. Charlie Kirk. Charlie Kirk, the new Seth Rich, you're not allowed to ask questions about that. Charlie Kirk is an evangelical, pretty darn anti-gay, and then Glenn Greenwald comes out with a gay sex tape, and Charlie Kirk was the first guy to be like, Glenn Greenwold's a good man. Man, I thought that was, ah, makes me emotional thinking about it. Yeah, I mean Charlie had started to have an awakening. Oh, you think he had a lot younger than I had it Yeah, and so that's why they had to kill him and uh, and when I say they I mean multiple There was a conspiracy to kill them. It wasn't some guy Tyler Robinson with his grandpa's rifle Which was never fired, which is why they couldn't find that rifle. You have to swallow so much stuff To believe the story that the establishment is pushing for Charlie Kirk's assassination You have to think that this first of all a 30-06 bullet Didn't take his head clean off or leave a drive-through window into back of his neck somehow He had a miracle he could his miracle bullet. Remember that hey, uh, Can can you give me an explanation of why his head didn't blow off without a miracle? Do you have an actual explanation? No So, but it goes back to, so this guy gets to the campus, he drives three, all of a sudden he wakes up one day and goes, you know what? I'm going to commit the biggest public assassination in the last 60 years. He drives to the canvas. He finds the open stairwell. It's an open. Nobody's there. He brings the gun up, but It's too big. So he has to take it apart and put it in his backpack. Still too big for his backpack, so he has put it down his pant legs, is what they tell. But then if he did, he couldn't jump, go up the steps because he couldn't bend his knees. So I don't know how he got it up there. Nobody will tell me. So he gets up there and then he changes his clothes. He's up on top of that roof for 10 minutes. That's according to the governor. He was up there for eight to 10 minutes, nobody sees him. The cops don't see him. The million dollar security team doesn't see them. Nobody sees them except people in the crowd did see him And they don't tell you that people just like in Butler, Pennsylvania people the crowd saw him Guess who didn't see him the cops the local cops the state cops the secret service people see it So um, and then he like so he puts the gun together He lines up the shot puts a scope on it By the way, if that scope was on and he couldn't fire that gun because of the same anyway So he slides it up takes the shot hits it. Perfect. Perfectly takes the gun apart leaves the screwdriver there puts it under a towel spider-man's his way off the top of the building runs across campus with the gun apparently under towel nobody sees this he runs into the woods puts the gun back together again without the screwdrivers irregular MacGyver this guy and then he hides the gun in the backyard of a house owned by Palantir and if you think anything else besides that you're a crazy Jew-hating conspiracy nut Do you know that they had the gun sniffing dogs, right? Which they can sniff a gun that was fired a week earlier in the rain, right. They were looking all over, they didn't find it. The FBI shows up, a minute later, we got the gun. Did you know? No. Yeah, Baron Coleman's been doing great work on this and he got the police transmitter, all that stuff. He got that, that's available. And so it wasn't until the FBI showed up. Oh, well, we got it. The local police couldn't find it. And the dog sniffers couldn't fight it. They can find it and they couldn't. But then the FBI show up, but they found it in the exact place. So, and now they wouldn't even release that to the defense team. They're still holding on to it. And then of course the, then he decides to text his lover instead of waiting for him to get home. It's only a three hour drive. He's like, you know what? He said, I wanted to take this, I wanted it to take the secret to my grave. First of all, he talks like he's reading a, uh, he's writing a Jane Austen novel, my love! And then he says I wanted to take this secret to my grave, but fuck it I'm just gonna I'm gonna leave it here on a text message to you So the FBI can find it and so what was supposed to happen was he was supposed To go out in a blaze of glory you because the original text messages that they said he wrote said I don't want to go to prison. I'm not gonna go out. I don't want to be dragged through the courts I'm going to go so he was suppose to get shot just like in Butler Crooks and but he was s'posed to get killed He didn't he went and turned himself in which screwed up their plan And so they had to rewrite those text messages. Did you know that there's text messages one and text messages 2.0? So they had the rewrite this. Yeah, that's all. And they said that he confessed on Discord or on Reddit. And of course, now we know for a fact that he was already in custody when they said he did that. So what guy shows up, turns himself in, pleads the fifth, I'm not talking to the cops until my lawyer gets there. But then he goes on the internet and gives a confession. Okay, so this is obviously a setup and you're not allowed to ask questions about it and if you are you are attacking a grieving widow And that's, uh, again, when did Jackie over, say, quit looking in, stop, quit looking into who killed my husband. Never. That's not what happens. And that, so how you grieve, by the way, I remember when my dad died, my mom immediately bought a gold sequined pants outfit, started carrying sparklers around and selling t-shirts. And my friends are like, Jimmy, what's with your mom? I'm like, she's grieving. So, uh I'll just leave that there. And so, you know, Dan Bongino. Um who was who famously said don't ever stop talking about the epstein files He gets in a position of power to do something about it. And now he changes his tune to say Oh, i'm supposed to I was there to do my job, which is to keep custody of the evidence No, you weren't there to keep Custody of the evident you were there to put in custody for the people who are in that evidence you fucking phony Anyway, I get upset You have every reason to. So we're being lied to on a massive scale. The one guy who was credited with stopping the Iran War the first time, they had to get him out of there. And he had realized that he had woken up and his his his organization is a Zionist operation as it was from the beginning. And he woke up to that. He was living in a Truman show. And he called it. He orders an investigation, a Doge style investigation into the accounting. Because there's all if you look into it, Wolves of Finance is a YouTube channel who's really explored all this about all the shady financial stuff that was happening inside TPUSA so they all had motive to come that to not only be a part of it, but to cover it up and And and and so he orders that he turns down their money He turned they they all lie that he said they're gonna kill me the they and Candice Owens It proves that the text messages were there then and by the way, why does the FBI not have control of his phone? Why would they give it to us? This none of this all of it met none of it makes sense. So this is all a big Psyop. It's a Psy it's a Zionist organization. He had realized that he had realized what Zionism was He realized that that the Israel was not in our best interest that they're not our greatest ally and they had to get it So they tried everything they tried and in some reports said they were off from a billion dollars to his organization And he turned it down and if you can turn that down, there's only one thing left to do and that's to kill you And it said And you're just like Seth Rich, you're not allowed to ask questions. And when you're not allowed to ask, hey, if you if Candace Owens is crazy nuts, then keep let her talk. Give her enough rope to hang herself. Keep it going. Just like Brian Harpel did on that CIA guys podcast. He gave him enough rope to hang himself and he hung himself several times on that day. What a used car salesman that Brian Harpels, I spent thousands of dollars. They didn't have drone coverage. He pretends they didn't have drone courage. Well, Frank Turek says they were watching the drone coverage on their own phones as they pulled up to the event. So they're lying back and forth all over the place. They didn't have security watching the roof. They don't have security watches. Well, the local police were supposed to take care of it. How could you get that? OK. So it's a it's it's set up. It's a lie. And just like Seth Rich and Charlie said, just like we learned during Covid, keep asking questions because it's the only thing that keeps us free. And now they've completely flipped his message. Stop. Just stop stop asking questions. That was his whole mo That was this whole motive that was the reason for his raison d'etre was asked questions Exactly, and now you're not supposed to and I tell people you see these social media influencers out there telling you that Candice is evil or demonic and stop it happened exactly the way cash Patel said it did if anybody's telling you That they are corrupted on the take and they're your enemy and do not listen to them Because those people are not there to help you or to help bring you information. They're there to propagandize you and keep you shut up and compliant. The great Jimmy Dore. Wow, you just wound me up. Okay. I'm gonna need to walk around. Thank you. Okay. It's great to see you as always. God bless you. You too.