Will Grant is a professional BMX racer and bodybuilder who sustained some horrific knee and shoulder injuries through his racing career Which crippled him for a very long time. It wasn't until he discovered the use of breathing techniques like Wim Hof meditating fasting and these strategic muscle balancing techniques that we talked about He's not only been able to heal his body 100 percent, but he's back to racing bicycles professionally again So if you are even remotely interested in optimizing your mind and optimizing your body this podcast is definitely for you Talking talking. I'm not very good at it, which is why I started doing this Suck it talking. This is like just like a challenge for me. I think at the same watch. I've given a gold one 12 bucks on Amazon 10 I think you paid two extra because you're just gold dude. Is it the Casio? Hell yeah So all right, so for people out there who don't know who you are just give me sort of like a brief introduction to who is Will Grant I mean still trying to figure that out myself. Yeah Are we all but yeah always who is Will Grant? I mean I could tell you a little backstory. I guess I was born in Washington state I moved here when I was like eight nine years old with my mom my brother a couple dogs bunch of cats like dude in this tiny little U-Haul truck I was five day drive and we got here and I mean I don't see my mom was like addicted to hell it drugs like that Really dude like do that that's a huge reason of what got us to Florida because like in 99 to 01 that's when Florida was getting in all that trouble for like like pill mills like they were just giving out like oxycoat and all those Yeah, from the doctors like yeah, so Florida's famous for yeah, and We lived out in the middle of the woods like it took us probably half-hour to get to the closest gas station and so my mom broke her back and then she had some family here from Brooklyn and Plus like she knew about the care here. Yeah, yeah, we end up moving a Florida then and Started racing BMX when I was like I think 10 or 11 years old my brother actually got me into it He was stealing everybody's bikes around the whole neighborhood like bringing all their bikes taken apart spray paint them and then Like selling them back to people and like he was talking about getting an erasing and I was just three years younger Wanting to do it my big brother did and that's awesome But except I had a dad he didn't really have a dad my dad bought me a bike for Christmas and you guys what step brothers half brothers yeah, so we're half brothers like I got two but we don't call each other half brothers My mom told us from a young age like hey your full brothers. There's no such fucking thing as half brothers Yeah, so we were raised thinking like we're all we got Yeah, I'm saying for sure so yeah, and then I ended up getting a bike actually was for my birthday and then so yeah I was living with my mom and then when I was like 10 my dad said that I can move in with him and Pursue BMX like full time is like a 10 year old, you know, so like I Did I left the trailer park I moved in with my dad who I thought I had all this money all this opportunity and we traveled around the world really racing BMX and then when I was 15 Dude, I mean it was tough living there man. It really was there was actually a lot tougher living there than my mom's house and 15 I ran away. I just a piece see you later and just ran away. Yeah, yeah Why I I feel like I could do it better on my own. Yeah. Yeah honestly like dude. I mean at 15 dude at 15 years old like I Moved in with my dad to race BMX, you know for this like opportunity to like yeah really race BMX That's all I cared about, you know, I was young and crazy anyways and then I mean it He like I was getting in so much trouble all the time like he was so strict with everything to where like he would get home And there was like crumbs on the table for me making a sandwich. I get the ship he died of me You know like dude, he would check my homework every single night and if I had like a Letter that was a little slanted to the left he'd make me rewrite my homework 25 times And then he'd find another letter that was messed up and then I would be right in the alphabet for hours every night Like he would walk up and if my shoes weren't tied tight enough He would flip me over so what's wrong? You can't tie your shoes little boy You know what I mean and then like it just kept like small Small things where I couldn't do anything like it felt like I was living in prison, you know like all I was really allowed to do was train for BMX and then when Something so he was kind of like was he was he really pushing you hard on BMX or was it kind of like you? He was just supporting what you wanted to do or do you think that was coming a lot from him kind of pushing you to do BMX I mean it was I mean I wanted to do BMX for sure you know what I mean But he had the mindset as if I didn't Do everything as best as I possibly could for that then he wasn't gonna take me to the races You know so he would come home and make sure my bike was clean like everything around my whole life was perfect, you know So so I focused on that But then after when I was like 15 like I kept something small something stupid He just said you're not racing anymore and then I mean it wasn't a good healthy relationship And then once I realized I wasn't racing like I just left like I mean BMX was everything that was important to me And then I was supposed to go live with my mom, but I knew I wasn't going back to that trailer park Like so I just left I crashed. I mean I had friends I slept on the floors. I slept on couches. I slept Slop outside, you know what I mean? And then when I turned 16 Actually, there was a family in BMX after eight months of after running away He heard about my situation and he said yeah, I own a business My kid races BMX and I'll let you live in my house if you just train my kid to race BMX Because I was only 15 16 then but I was like national champion, you know, I like bond everything so a lot of people I guess look are a lot of even kids younger than me looked up to me at that age and then Yes, I moved into his house. He gave me two rules just respect his house and stay away from his daughter and Yeah, I ended up getting engaged to his daughter. Oh my god. I Yeah, that's a whole different story and then And then yeah, then I was like I'm going pro 16 years old and I Turned pro at 16 and then I end up tearing my ACL MCO PCO miniscus everything like three months in the turning pro When you were 16 years old so like I turn pro now 16 and then like my My birthday was like the next month so then like a month after being 17 Yeah, it's where my ACL for everything. So you just exploded your fucking knee. Yeah exploded I want one of my first pro races to And then and then it took me a year to get that healed and then my first race back Didn't even crash put my foot down retore everything like oh Well, yeah, because I was a minor, you know with three entrance comes free doctors Yeah, free doctors comes some guy that's just rushing and hacking up your body. You know, so I mean I didn't even crash I just you know I did physical therapy perfect and everything But I just put my foot down and it retore everything and then at that time off I became a personal trainer, you know like I wasn't able to race So I you know and I had this passion for fitness. I had this passing that's when you were like a bodybuilder, right? Yeah, when I was yeah during that two and a half to three years that I was injured I just started training my upper body as much as I could You know and I was still keeping my legs fit as much as I could because I was doing like I'm trying to strengthen my leg and doing my own like physical therapy for the knee But that's hard to do leg training when you have a fucked up knee right well Yeah, so so when I became a personal trainer like the first surgery I got I got because I was a minor so I got the free insurance, but then after that I was I was 18 and The only way I could get individual inch or really The insurance to get my knee fixed was I had to have a job that offered the insurance So I became a personal trainer out of gym. I did their three four months So I can get their insurance and then and then I found the best doctor I could But then at that time I was a personal trainer. I thought I knew everything. I was the shit I don't need no physical therapy, you know So I started doing my own like training for my legs to build up my Strength and I thought I knew what I was doing and I ended up building up a lot of bad habits of moving To where like I had all these in balances, you know, so so when you have a surgery or when you have any trauma to your body There's muscles that Extremely tight to protect and there's muscles that turn off And then physical therapy is really meant to rebalance Okay hustles to turn on those muscles and to relax the muscles that are too tight Why do you think your muscles were so out of balance? Was it because of the body building or because of the BMX? so So after that second surgery on my ACL, I did all my own physical therapy And I didn't know what I was doing. You know honestly like like I just went right back into training instead of fixing the issue Right, you know, it's like any problem that you have like if you just try to mask the symptom It's gonna cause bigger different issues later on. Yeah, you know, and that's what happened was like I never Kind of relearned how to move properly so then like just every little movement that I was doing Like I just wasn't using my body properly, you know, but and that's something that Almost everybody's doing right, you know Like almost everybody is using their body and properly because we're a sitting culture We sit down all day which brings our chest our quads our hip flexors everything too tight while our glutes and our back Just don't know how to activate So then we have all these imbalances in our body and and you know depending on who you are is what's gonna hurt first So it's your knees if it's your back if it's your shoulders or whatever it is but it just comes from the imbalances and then What happened to me was what would it normally happen to me if I was 40 years old It happened really quick because I was an athlete getting injuries, right You know, but like I said if you talked to the the normal 45-year-old his back hurts his knees hurt You know his shoulder hurts and it's just from bodies being in balance from whatever they're doing I just went to the chiropractor for the first time in my life like two weeks ago Like because I have my lower back started really fucking hurting. I don't know why there is no trauma There is nothing to really explain it and Other than the fact, you know, I like go to the gym just like anybody else. I do you know cardio I try to balance my workouts with everybody they found out and my yoga instructor actually pointed out that my like My IT band and my hamstrings were like unusually tight and that's what was contributing to my lower back being so much pain So now I've been like using like what do you call it tennis ball? Like roll out my legs a lot more like focusing on that. That's really it's helped a lot. Yeah. Yeah Really good stuff. Yeah just in bounces what all those pains are and you know and it's the way we're living really you know like with the way We're moving and using our body and even like the way we're moving and using our mind It's just not really balanced with the way it should be so it's causing like chipping or pain in some way At what point when I saw it last night like I said earlier the last time I saw you was at Josh's wedding And I asked you what you've been doing and you said that you don't work you like I don't work out my upper body anymore I was too legs all I do is legs and it just the rest of us works itself out Like I work out my legs and it makes my arms strong like what were you doing at that point? So then I was just training like full athlete for BMX. Okay, and like and Yeah, I really wasn't training my upper body like going into the gym and doing bench I mean dude if you're doing like compound movements like deadlifts like power cleans No front squats like you're bracing you're using your body using every part of your body Yeah, yeah, okay, you're using your body the way it's supposed to has one full moving piece Not necessarily targeting your chest or targeting your back and then I still had that muscle tone when you seen me because From like 16 to 22 I was lifting my upper body like a bodybuilder trying to get jacked for the honeys, you know, right? Yeah, but then yeah, and then when I was just racing for those From pretty much when I got back to like 21 to 25. Yeah, I mean I was training hard not necessarily the smartest way to train You know like I I should have had a coach You know what I mean you know like I should have hired somebody who was smarter than me But it's hard to learn when you know everything You know what I mean of course, and I was in that mindset of like dude I was the shit I knew everything, you know what I mean? Like you know I spent my whole life like building up my ego and to make myself seem as great as I possibly can Yeah, and then well how could you be a fucking bodybuilder doing bodybuilding competitions and like without a Massive ego to accompany it. It's tough. How could you you have to align your purpose with something else? Which right definitely wasn't you know like I was trying to get as jacked as possible right like you know People feel like they care about me or they love me right you know to get that value in right in most kid I mean most kids that age grew up or doing sure and like my horn's higher life Danny my whole life I put all the value in in myself and what I could physically do and what I physically look like Mm-hmm like and that's what I put all my value in and that's what I work towards and then when Do I lost all that you know then all of a sudden my body started breaking down my mind started breaking down like what I did when I was 21 22 Wasn't still as cool anymore. Yeah, you know what he mean like you know and even my racing like I wasn't getting the best results You know my even my career in BMX was just getting like worse and worse and like yeah I was getting less and less relevant and like all the stuff that I put this value in was just doing it in a way and then all of a sudden my body started breaking down like I mean I'm talking I had so much pains in my bodies from my angles to my knees to my hips to my back I couldn't even open my hands all the way and it's just from like I was going hard to like not just in BMX But just in my life and partying and yeah, like in all this stuff like I was going so fast and so hard in In my life and like the more pain I felt physically mentally emotionally You know the faster I went, you know because I noticed when I started slowing down I started feeling that pain if it was mentally or physically or whatever it was So I would just try to go as fast as do as much as I can and then it was just causing more chipping of my body of My mind and then and then it took to the point where everything literally broke I broke my leg, you know my whole knee exploded my femur cracked like dude my collarbone broke Like was the femur crack was that in a bike race or a bike accident so Um not necessarily but it was in training like in practice. Okay. So like so was on a bike. Yeah. Yeah. So So let me get this straight to make sure I don't femur that's fucking gnarly. Yeah, your femur so like so I built up all these Bad movement patterns right so I had all these awful and balances like where I was walking like shit I was moving like shit and then it hurt so bad to use my body when I wasn't training I was just sitting on the couch and and then it was just getting worse and then once I started realizing like All my shit was out of balance. I started working on rebalancing it and then when I was working on rebalancing it You know like starting doing yoga and starting doing movement therapy to go rebalance my body And I started but I never took a break, you know like I never took a break from the training I never took a break from the writing. I you know I just started to Rebalance something but when something is out of whack or twist and turned and then you align it reback But the old grooves are still there. It's gonna cause something to crack You know it's gonna cause something or because if something was moving like off balance like bones right there Yeah, okay, so say or really any a joint each okay, because one thing always works the way everything works Everything's right so like so if you're knee is supposed to work in alignment like this Yeah, you know and perfectly and then if you have in balance is it's slightly turned or just going off that track a little bit Right, it's gonna cause potholes. It's gonna cause chipping away and okay To chip like any machine and then when I slowly started working at Realigning that the grooves were different So then it caused it to crack it caused it to explode because I just kept riding I kept training I kept and then Like a stress crack on yeah So then literally I'm riding a practice. You know my knees starting to feel funny But I didn't want to stop you know like like anything when I was feeling this pain. I was mr. Tuff guy You know what I mean like I wouldn't admit I felt any pain because I'm tougher than that Yeah, I thought and then I just kept riding and then all of sudden then all of a sudden it just Like exploded and and and did what was crazy was when it exploded like all of a sudden it hurt so bad to walk Just to put my foot on the ground. I was in so much pain And I didn't know like what was going on, you know I was like oh, this is going buff out, you know, but yeah Two three days two three days later. It didn't buff out And it was getting worse and worse like I literally couldn't put my foot down You know without like just extrusion pain in my knee and I'm thinking like what the fuck You know, yeah, and then Hurricane Irma came you remember the big hurt. Oh, yeah, fucking. Oh, that shit. Yeah It's already came Irma came and we lost power for like two weeks and that sucked and that's when I fasted That's when I did that eight day fast. Oh really yeah. Yeah So what now what? I don't want I don't want to jump ahead I don't want to jump ahead But I want to get into fasting. We're not to get into it right now because this is obviously happening way before Irma Dude, dude, dude, dude. He's tough the thing with your femur. Well, dude. My femur broke like a week before Irma Oh shit. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So like so while I was riding and training like pushing through all this pain that I was dealing with like Like My knee exploded and then Irma came okay, and then Irma was a big hurricane that hit Florida and we lost power for two weeks And then it's weird. I kept hearing about these small things of like how fasting helps heal your body right? Right, right, and then I was hearing that it just helps like rebuild yourselves, you know Yeah, where'd you hear from like Dude, I'm just around it all yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, like I'm around health people all the time Yeah, I originally like who was telling me the most about it was actually my old racing buddy might call well He used to live with me. Okay, you know and like dude He tore apart his body where his whole like a drenal fatigue got so gnarly like his whole body shut down So he had to rebuild his whole entire body and like he was telling me how fasting is literally like the best thing you can do Yeah, but then I Just could never have time to fast because I was too busy training so hard Mm-hmm, you know and like you know dude It's hard to train if you're all gun You know like you can't train if you have an empty stomach like that Like not over days and days, right so then Hurricane I had no power the only thing open was McDonald's. Yeah, I couldn't ride I couldn't train But I can't freakin walk yeah, and then oh and I couldn't get a doctor's appointment because everybody was out of power right So I was just like all right what a weird time that was do with Irma the whole town was like a fucking ghost town It was weird right it was like eerie Yeah, dude, and I'm just sitting in my backyard like dude full hunger mode like dude Reach in different levels. So at what point did you decide to fucking fast? Like before the hurricane got here or after you lost power dude the hurricane got there and then we all lost power and the Like dude everything just set up perfectly to where like the only thing that I could have eaten was McDonald's Okay, you know what I mean so you're like fuck it. Yeah, so then like I was like dude My knees fucked up the only thing he is made McDonald's I can't get a doctor's appointment like I'm just gonna try 24 hours right and then the goal is to do 24 hours and after I hit 24 hours I woke up the next day and I'm like Shoot, I think I can go two days Yeah, and then during the two days my buddy might call to always tell me shoot You know if you hit three days your body has already rebuilt its whole entire immune system right and I was like I'll make three days hell yeah, so then I made three days and then he's telling me You know after three days when your body rebuild this whole immune system Then that's when it really uses all of its resources on rebuilding all of yourselves Rebuilding your cartilage and just Rebuilding regenerating your whole body. Yeah, it's like being born again, right? Yeah So so so then I went and I just kept fasting and then I couldn't get a doctor's appointment either So then and then he was telling me after like six seven days like dude it starts getting like spiritual like this different level of perception This different level of understanding and like what it's from is like Your body or most of us our bodies and our stomachs are always working on digesting because we're eating all day Right, you know what I mean other than the first hour so that you hear a wake your body is using most of its resources on digesting food right, so it's truly amazing what your body can accomplish when it's not working on digesting food like right all of our Organisms and all of our biology and our chemistry and our physiology wants to fight for health so when When it's not being preoccupied by all this Bullshit that it has to digest it instantly goes into just start healing and rebuilding and cleaning and we have all this all these toxins that are in our body Yeah, every time that we eat a bad food or breathe shitty air or breathe in exhaust fumes or even have a bad emotion You know if somebody cuts you off on the side of the road and you think oh fuck that guy That just produces toxic chemicals that are released inside your body And we're 75% water and that's where they all sit You know and like all of our these emotions sit in our body as like toxic, you know, whatever so Just for our body to start cleaning that out dude. You feel it. You smell it. You taste it You taste all these toxins just releasing your body like you smell bad like you taste it like like after three days Like you know going to the bathroom is a lot different too like it just gets emptying like yeah You're seeing this all the this nasty stuff that's in there. Did you have the mukoid plaque come out Dude like it's hard to tell shit that line. You know there's the stuff that lines inside of your guts It's like it's like old sewage like old plumbing. It looked like it. Yeah, but like I mean I didn't like you know analyze it. How many days did you do eight days? Holy shit, I did eight days and and this is what's crazy You know and this is not a scientific fact, but they say that like about a one-day fast Hookling out about a whole year's worth of toxins Okay, so like if you don't eat for 24 hours your body cleans out about all the bullshit that you've given it in the past year Yeah, like I'm not sure of that sign, you know, but that's just what I've heard right and then they say so if you went through some big like Trauma especially big emotional trauma that might have caused a lot of toxins You almost regrow through that while you release that so for example if your mom died like four years ago on that fourth day You start having those emotions come up You know and you're releasing those emotions. You're learning from those emotions like a crazy thing is going on there And like it's really hard to explain unless you experience it, but what's crazy is after eight days I weighed the exact same weight as I weighed eight years prior and something Like all of me running away from home and all that craziness that happened while it's like 15 years old was about seven years prior And I refelt all that going on and then afterwards. I never felt so like clean so pure like my my understanding my my paradigm just felt almost better than it ever was But when I first broke my fast I honestly was thinking what the fuck where my superpowers You know what I mean because I heard about all this crazy like suit like dude I just fasted for eight days. Why don't I feel like Jesus? Yeah, you know what I mean? Like did you I mean did you have any kind of like peak state that you were in during the fast Was there any point where you felt like did feel like Jesus or felt like you could fucking do anything or felt great? Um anything notable or never quite really feel great Yeah, I mean right but you're diving into such a deep depth of yourself You're learning what the fuck you went through, you know like fasting is you'll learn so much You learn more from an empty stomach than almost any other thing on this planet Yeah food is is the the number one drug that we're addicted to It's worse than detoxing off of probably any drug is food is probably the hardest thing You're so right and you know and when you can withstand from food You gain this inner sense of power this inner sense of strength that you take in all different areas of Mmm life when I was younger. I grew up so poor so hungry to wear like Food was Something that when you have you had it get as much as you possibly could the second you got and I had this really bad relationship of food every time I was hungry I remember growing up porn. I got upset You know what I mean and then it built all these more toxins You know that's just in my body, but then as But then as you work through this and you start fasting like Your perception of food changes like you learn that okay like I went eight days without eating I've only you know if it's lunchtime and my body's feeling hungry My relationship is not like oh my god. I have to eat right now and get as much food as I can But more in control over those urges 100% and then now it's like if there's bad food and I want it Choose to you know instead of like having no control to where I need that food and that is one of the biggest strengths That helps you with all different areas of life. Yes food sex drugs. Yeah, you learn a lot about discipline when you try to fast for that long especially and You know, it's weird is like the way I felt I did a five-day fast about a year ago and On the fourth or fifth day. I was playing basketball with my buddies and like normally if I play basketball It's high intensity you're running around full court and Usually after like one game on the second game I start to feel like that size stitch. Why I gotta take a break or I'm winded I gotta take a break. I gotta breathe. I gotta drink water I swear we played probably four games back to back and I felt no fatigue It was weird dude. I'm doing like high intensity cardio running and you're probably not supposed to do that It's probably not smart to do while you're fasting. That's right, but like I had no fatigue I didn't get that stuff that side cramp. I normally get and then I went to the gym and I can normally do I'm like I'm a pussy. I can do maybe eight pull-ups on normally like just on per one set of eight I could do like 20 dude. No lie. It was so weird. I could not explain it. How on a fast? I could have so much more endurance But then I saw I read I listened to a podcast a Tim Ferriss podcast where he interviewed I forget the guy's name Dr. Dominic something South Florida doctor who studies fat like really studies nutrition and fasting and he talks about like the ketones in your blood and how Like our ancestors when we were hunt when we used to hunt food Old human monkeys that we would have to go. You know seven to ten days before we would eat. We and that's what our mind and body has to be working at It's best right and you have to find food right and at the seventh day 10th day you haven't eaten How are you gonna? How are you gonna? Stock down your prey? How are you gonna chase down? Whatever the fuck it is you're trying to eat and you have to have energy So those ketones that go in there in your blood after you haven't eaten for so long the way it breaks down I don't know the I can't remember exactly the science of it, but the ketones in your blood basically give you a Longer sustained amount of endurance. Yeah, it's a different type of energy. It's a different type of energy and it lasts longer It's crazy dude. It's fucking gnarly You know and I think like we don't activate that or get into that much because of our modern day Bifestyles are for sure it is always being available for sure like we lose so much of our inner powers and inner abilities and strengths because we kind of donated away to these modern technologies. Yeah, you know Building disciplines that fast was definitely by far one of the best things I did in my life You know because I needed to get all that toxic emotion that toxic will shut out. You know, especially in my early 20s I was sick and yeah, yeah Like there was something wrong with my head. I was living not the way I should just doing fucked up shit You know like living a toxic lifestyle And then to get all that shit out of me and then almost like like you said like being reborn Yeah, you know to where like I didn't feel like anything was crazy that first few days, but it all started settling in where I just felt better in my body. I feel like a better understanding of Everything, you know, did you work out or do any kind of exercising when you were fasting? I couldn't because my life broke Nothing like you can do like any kind of like pull-ups or push-ups or anything No, no, no, no, no, no, cuz I like I was actually healing from a broken collar going to shit. Wow. Oh, dude You're a jack-dell So like I was fucked up man like I was stuck in my house. I couldn't raise my arm above my head I couldn't walk like dude. I couldn't do it and it was the only and it was the best thing that could happen Because it was the only thing that Had me slow down, you know like it was the only thing that slowed me down That hadn't stopped to to start processing all this shit that was going on You know to get myself outside myself and it start you know seeing what is going on because I was going so fast You know like the dust would never settle so I could never see what exactly where I was and what was going side of myself and start, you know, seeing what is going on because I was going so fast, you know, like the dust would never settle so I could never see what exactly where I was and what was going on and then when I slowed down and stopped, everything became real and started speaking to me and then I had to stop and listen. And then that's when I started meditating and breathing. Really? Everything changed. That's when you found out about Wim Hof. Dude, yeah. Like everything changed. Like I actually, I saw you into Switzerland and did and got in some cold water. Yeah, so that was pretty sweet too. But like, so that summer was, yeah, I think it was summer 2017 when I started doing, like when I did the fast, when I did the Wim Hof and like, so I broke my collarbone, I was healing from the broken collarbone and I got cleared to start riding three days into it. Like, oh, and during that time that I was healing from my broken collarbone, that's when I did a lot of the realignment therapy with my body and then so then three days into training, that's when he exploded and then that's when the fast happened. But when I, or but that summer is when my brother, you know, I was trying to find other ways to train other ways to better myself, to make myself great. Yeah. And I couldn't train myself physically because my whole body was shutting down and then that's when I kept hearing things about meditation. You know, and I was understanding that will like, if physical exercises the way to train your body and meditation is the way to train your mind. And I never done that before, but I knew I needed it. Yeah, right. Yeah. So then, you know, I would meditate here and there and like never consistent, but I knew when I did it, it felt good and it was helping for sure. I just could never like build a habit of it. And then when my brother told me about Wim Hof, I got back from Washington State that summer and I was like, I'm going to do this every single day. And then that week was the week that my leg broke and I did the fast, but I was doing the Wim Hof like every single day in my whole body. Like I was starting to get outside of myself, like get outside of my ego and see myself from outside of myself. Like look, you just lost everything you put your value into yourself. Where are you at now? Yeah. Like your best thinking got you here. You know what I mean? Like you don't have nobody around you. You're sitting here miserable. Like your loss. Like dude, are you living by yourself or you alone or would you have a roommate? Sir. Really? Like I have a roommate, but I think he was racing in Europe at the time or something or like he was out of the country or you know or out of the state or something. But yeah, it's crazy. And then I started breathing. There's something about that being alone by yourself and being miserable. Dude, 100% like that's when you're going to grow and learn what was dude and that's what happened. Like dude, I just started blocking everything out and connecting with my breath. And then like our breath is our spirit. Like that's our doorway into everything internal. Like every emotional pain, every emotional joy, every physical pain, a physical joy. Like you know, the doorway in to understand that is through our breath. So then when I just started connecting with my breath, I was connecting with myself. And then one, I started realizing that I put all this value and trying to make myself a badass and I really ain't shit. You know what I mean? Like you know, after all this, like I realized I ain't shit. I ain't doing nothing for nobody. You know what I'm saying? Like what am I contributing? What value am I bringing? And then when I look like I realized dude, I've been doing all this for what for nothing. And then that's when everything changed. I started starting to put things into other people. And then the more I started helping out, like the people closest to me, like the better I felt, like energy is energy. So if they say that you become an average of the top five people around you, like if you can just help out, you know, the people closest to you is going to make you feel better, you know. And if you want to help out, you know, the people closest to you, if you just help yourself and make you better, it's going to something. Something's going to be around you. Yeah, exactly. And then when I began breathing and then that's what for the first time I was able to stop and like understand what was going on, like understand this pain, understand these emotions, understand all this bullshit I went through as a child, you know, instead of just blocking it out and trying to go so fast so I didn't hear it. Yeah. I began to listen to it and like understand, you know, the depth of myself and my personality and my purpose. And then I started like, and the more I became into it myself, you know, the more I started understanding why I'm here, you know, and what my gifts are and what my talents are and like how I can really use these to contribute to society, to the world, to the people I care about. And that's when I created this whole plan and I've been going out at ever since hard for like two years. So what do you actually do with breath? Like what do you do with like what is your like the breath or the breath? Just fucking breathe, man. Yeah, but when you focus on when you sit and focus on you, obviously meditate while you breathe. So how it, what's like the actual, it's just like the big, the big end and then like the push out like the, there's a million ways to do it, you know, but the simple thing is the simplest way to do it is to stop, set a timer for five minutes, three minutes, ten minutes, whatever you have and just feel your breath, start breathing and notice the feeling of your breath going in and notice the feeling of your breath going out and like normally after a few breaths, then your mind will go towards this, you know, or go towards what you got to do later or go towards what happened. Right. Just notice that, let it go and connect back to your breath. That's the mindfulness. Yeah. And that act there of just noticing where your mind went and bring it back to your breath, that strengthening your awareness, that strengthening your self-awareness, that strength or knowing where your mind is going and that's the practice of being present. Right. You know, and the more present you are and everything from you're doing, from a podcast to making a movie to having sex to a relationship, you know, the more present you are, the better you're going to be doing it. Not so much from sex. I figure sex helps me more and I try to get myself out of the moment. So that way I last like an extra 30 seconds. Let me think about a chair. Yeah. That way I go longer than that, I've reached two minutes. Yeah. Anyways. But yes, then the breath. So yeah, just connect to your breath, man. Yeah. And then you'll start to notice like the way you breathe is the way you live. Yeah. Like if you're a shallow liver or if you're a shallow, like if you live very shallow, you're most likely going to breathe very shallow, you know, and like when you just start connecting with your breath with no other distractions, you'll start to know where your mind goes. You'll start to know where your mind goes when you're feeling good and when you're feeling bad and you'll know how to kind of jump into the mechanics. Like, like think of like an airplane, you know, like a pilot, they have all those different buttons and all those different controls to control that airplane. We have that too. We just only know three buttons, but we have hundreds of different things available to us. Right. We just don't know how to activate because we've lost through this modern day culture of inside and fake lights and, you know, nice air condition like we lose our ability to connect with ourselves and to use our tools that we have and to connect with our breath, you start to dive into those, you know, and start to understand yourself. And the more you can do that, the better you're going to feel and the better decisions you're going to make. And then one good habit led to another, led to another, led to another, and then my whole life, my whole paradigm, my whole perception changed and now like I've never felt better. Like awesome. You know what I mean? Like I've never felt more confident and faithful and where I'm at right now today. Yeah. Um, but for Wim Hof, isn't there a specific technique where you have to almost to breathe or you feel like you're about to pass out where you feel like really like headed? So, so Wim Hof is great because most of us ain't fucking breathing. Right. We're barely breathing. Like we're barely living. You know what I mean? Like we're hanging on. And no one's most people haven't ever thought about breathing. Right. No one's ever thought about it. You do it four years ago. I never thought about my breath. Right. But I never really thought about where my life was going. You know what I'm saying? Like and and Wim Hof is getting people to breathe and breathe deep. And when you, okay, and all it is is say 30 breaths, 30 breaths of the biggest inhales you possibly can. Right. 30. 30 to 50. Okay. 30 to 50. Yeah. After 10 to 15, your body is not used to that because your body's not used to all that oxygen because we're usually breathing so shallow. You know, unless you play sports or do some sort of training, you really don't breathe heavy that very often. So then to start breathing in as deep as you can, all of your cells, all of your systems are being activated. They're getting woken up and they start to speak. Right. And then after 30 of those deep inhales you possibly can and those exiles, you just released your body, all that toxic carbon dioxide and replaced it with this fresh new blood and a fresh new oxygen. Oxygen, you know, straight into your blood. And then after 30 of those breaths, do your lightheaded your hands are feeling like shit you're going to pass out. You feel like this feels crazy. Then one big last breath in and let it all out and then hold and sit there. Empty. Yeah. Empty lungs, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Hold and sit there and witness, be the observer, you know, and notice what comes up because your body is going to be speaking to you, whatever it wants to say. Like our bodies are speaking to us all day, but we don't understand the language. We're only hearing our bodies when it's absolutely screaming at us. And we don't know what it's saying. We're just like, fuck it hurts. You know, but our bodies are speaking at us all day and when we stop and just listen and the more we listen, the more we can connect to that and the more we'll be able to understand that language and then soon as something is off, our body tells us immediately. So then it never gets too far off to where it feels pain. Right. You know, we can go around a lot of the suffering that we go through if we just get really in tune with ourselves and then tune with our breath and understanding like, yeah, just what the fuck's going on and that's with your breath. So during that time of that breath hold, dude, you start to learn about yourself. Yeah. What comes up? And then if you're timing those breath holds, I can, this is what I did was do for a a year to straight. I was timing my breath holds and I was journaling and writing all of this down to where like I could, I had all these new ideas of this way that I was going to change my life and change my body and change everything I was doing. But it was getting mixed up unless I started documenting it. So I started documenting my breath holds. And then after doing that for a while, you start to really notice when your times were really good. You know, like when you could hold your breath a lot and then when you can't, you know, there's a few things that I just kept noticing like patterns like when I was focusing on the result or the number my breath holds were less. But when I was just in the moment just relaxing and let things be how they are, my times were way more. You know, like if I was doing it with other people, the more I tried to compete with the people next to me and try to hold my breath longer, you know, the worse my breaths were. Put the more I sat there and thought like, I hope he has a great time, you know, trying to give all the people around me really good energy, the better my times were. You know, and then I started taking this into my daily life and I started really like I started learning so much about how my mind works, how my body works and how everything is working just from connecting with my breath. Because connecting with your breath connects with yourself and you can't understand anyone else until you first understand yourself. So your level of understanding of other people is just the level of understanding of yourself. If you understand yourself on such a shallow level, you won't really be able to understand another human being. Right. So then I just started to understand myself more and then understanding other people more and then understanding how the world works and you know, and I'm still learning every day. Like, you know, I'm not saying like, yo, I figured all, you know, I'm not saying I figured all this shit out, but I'm figuring shit out every day from just connecting with my breath and just stopping and being the student of life. You know, like every single day, every experience that happens is an opportunity to learn, to help you to learn and to grow and evolve to your best self. And you know, the more you can do that, the more you can help out the people you care about. How often and how long for how long do you meditate for and how often you do it? Now then. Yeah. Like currently, right now. So currently I wake up every day and I like to hit a 15 minute timer. Okay. So usually one of the first things I do in the morning is I like to get blood and oxygen and blood flow moving throughout my body. So I'll do some sort of breathing and some sort of movement therapy. So I like to set a timer for 15 minutes and I say, okay, this is just 15 minutes. I'm going to use to connect with my breath to be present, you know, and to just connect. I'll usually do about three to four rounds of Wim Hof and then just regular can, you know, noticing my breath until the timer goes off. Yes. Sometimes I'll be doing Wim Hof breathing and tell the timer goes off. Okay. Sometimes I only do two rounds and just sit there and regular meditate till the time time goes off. Yeah. But I just have to give myself that 15 minutes. And then a lot of times I like to do a second session too in the afternoon or okay at night. Like if it's with friends. Yeah. A lot of my friends are pro athletes as well. Okay. And I got all of them doing this. Do you really do? Do they do it? Like, yeah. Like, they, when you do it and you feel it, you get it. Like, dude, your body goes to a whole different place. And like, you have a longer that you're holding your breath to the deeper you're able to go into your brain stem. Like, you're able to really activate that fighter flight to where your body can fight off the disease, fight off that inflammation and like, dude. And the more I started doing this, like the more I started being able to control what was going on. Like, controlling my moods to my immune system to my body to like, I got to the point where I was doing it so much. I could just lay there and with my mind, I mean, call me crazy, but I can consciously feel my inflammation draining through my body. Wow. You know, just laying down and doing a certain type of breathing and and putting my mind to it. I can feel the inflammation draining through my nasal right into my lymphatic system. Then I could just pop my ears while I drain it back down. And like, I learned all this from my breath. Like, all the answers that we search for, like we're all looking for something, you know? Like, all the answers that we search for are within us. We already know everything. We just don't, we're just so distracted by all the outside. You don't listen to our bodies. That we're not listening, you know, but all the answers are within us. We just have to stop and connect. That's why I love fucking talking to people like you man because so many people are just not worried about that kind of stuff. They're not worried about how to get better or fix themselves or how to eat better or how to, and aside of that is definitely, yeah. It's what I said. And then aside of that is selfish. Selfish. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because if you're not wanting to get the most out of yourself, like, like, how are you contributing? Right. You know what I mean? Like, it doesn't matter what team you're on. If that's your family, if that's your co-workers, if that's your friend's like, you know, the better you make yourself, the better you can help and contribute. Exactly. Whatever team you're on, right? You know, so like, I believe to not work on bettering yourself every day is selfish. Mm hmm. You know, like for sure. Yeah. And you can't really help other people until you can truly help yourself, I think too. Once you learn how to truly help yourself and you really understand, understand yourself, you know, and that was something that I learned through all this, like, I realized before all these injuries I was putting all this and trying to make myself great. And then I realized, fuck, that was the wrong way to do this. Yeah. Then I started realizing that the more, you know, like if I wanted to be loved and valued, I had to bring value. Mm hmm. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. So then I started realizing that, you know, the more I help other people, then the fucking better I felt, you know what I mean? Yeah. I believe that the most selfish thing that you can do is help out in the people around you for sure. I was going somewhere else with that, but I want to say the same, the same thing with eating too, like what not only like about breathing, but with eating, what you eat is honest is truly what you are. You're made up of what you eat. They're finding so many different connections with your gut from your, yeah, dude, your gut is connected to everything. It's like our brain, you know, I think I don't remember who it was, but there's like, it's like another brain I should say. Yeah. So what you're saying that your gut is definitely like your second brain. They asked this guy somewhere in Asia who was like the oldest person ever recorded living. And I forget fucking how I think it was he lived like 120 maybe. And they asked him like his last interview before he died of like, what's your secret? Right? And he goes, take care of your gut the first half of your life so that your gut will take care of you the second half of your life. That's that hit that hit hard. Because for me, the first half I'm fucking half my life's almost over. I'm 30 years old. And I've never gave a shit about taking care of my gut or thought about what I ate. Yeah. You know, that's what got me into my whole yard project. Like, yeah. Oh yeah, you're fucking yard is full of what you eat. You eat everything out of your own yard. Yeah. So like, dude, so what's crazy is they're finding out that like our gut microorganisms and our gut microbiome is so connected to our soil. And like, it actually works almost the exact same way. So like we have all these. So for example, a lot of people thought that, okay, if you eat a vegetable and your body absorbs those nutrients and the vegetables and that's how we get healthy. And just like in trees, they thought, okay, the roots of the trees absorb the nutrients in the soil and that's what makes the tree. It's not the case. It's actually based on like millions on billions and billions of like microorganisms of like fungi of like this microbiome that works as like a network that has this perfect relationship that breaks down the food and feeds it to whatever we need it. Just like in the soil. And I learned so much from just watching my yard grow about how my own gut works and about how everything is aligned with it. And the more that we can eat in a line with our gut, the better everything will connect. So for example, we're eating so much of this industrial food from these industrial monocrops where you have like a certain vegetable or a certain fruit grown in like tens of acres with just a bunch of that and no ability to connect to other plants or animals because they spray it with a bunch of shit too. And that's what's going on. Not only with vegetables, obviously like factory farming with meat, that's even worse, but the vegetables in the same way it's terrible, dude. And then she wasn't around in the 70s. I don't think it was as nearly as bad as it is now. I don't know, maybe like the 40s or 50s when they started like industrial farming. And that's pretty much when everything started going to shit like dude, cancer went up, like asperger's like to dementia, dude, all that stuff started going up because all this toxic, pretty much the way that we're growing food. You know, the way that we're growing our food is killing us and our planet, like 100% and when I started to wanting to heal my body, I started to just start researching and like what is the best nutrients I can have? Like how am I supposed to eat to heal my body? And it just kept going down to, of course, like the most organic and the more naturally it's grown eating from the earth. So are you vegetarian vegan? You mean, okay. I love it. I love it. Nice. What's your diet like? What is your diet? What's the balance? So the balance is I like to break my fast every day with a super smoothie. And that is pretty much where I just take a blender and I blend up as much of the most nutrient dense foods I can find. If that's from my yard, from the grocery store, whatever's in season, you know, and dude, and that gets my gut happy, do that. It helps all the, all the bad shit that I'm going to do. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. Like I'm a strong believer is I don't want to fight all the bad shit. You know what I mean? Because that becomes a hard battle to battle against the, of the temptation of, oh, I can't ever have chocolate again. Right. But what I'm going to focus on is just doing the good. So I just to start my day with as much nourishment as possible because most of us are overfed and Mount nourished. So let's, you know, instead of fighting all the good foods that are all around us, let's start with just nourishing ourselves. So that's what I like to do is I source the best fruits and vegetables I can find. That's halfway convenient and I blend it up and I'll break my fast with that. And then it depends on my day or like how I'm training, but usually like sweet potatoes, bunch of vegetables, you know, I, like I, I really try to eat as much vegetables as I possibly can. Right. And then I'll take my carbohydrates like sweet potatoes or fruits, um, based on how much energy I'm going to be giving out. Yeah. It's different for when you're doing high intensity shit like BMX. Yeah, exactly. But pretty much do like the main thing with my diet is I like to have that super smoothie to make sure that I'm just properly nourished. Okay. And then I just all vegetables and that smoothie. It's just like a lot of fruits and vegetables. Fruit and vegetables like spinach, kale, blueberries, yeah, bananas, alaertos, carrots. Um, dude, I got meringue, katuk that's from my yard like dude. You were saying, you were saying something that you had like some ice cream flavored bananas or some shits. Cream flavored bananas. How the hell did you get that? Just like, I've never even heard of that. So just how there's like a hundred different varieties of apples, you know, like grannies. Yeah, yeah, dude, there's hundreds of different varieties of oranges or some different of mangoes. Right. Okay. Dude, there's hundreds of different strains of weed. Just like there's different strains of every plant on this earth. Dude, I need some fucking ice cream flavored bananas. Dude, ASAP. I got, yo, I got bananas that tastes like apples. And the most beautiful thing about bananas is so you have one banana plant, right? Yeah. The one banana plant, if it's happy nine months is going to give you a rack of some fruits and four other banana plants. Really? So you cut down the one that just gave you a rack. Now you got four other banana plants to put over your yard to give it to a friend to see whatever. So dude, I started with like three or four different banana plants that were four different varieties. Now I got just a whole border of bananas where it's like constantly I want to be a con that one. Sick dude. I always have bananas. Did you have you ever made like any kind of video on like how you made your garden that you have or you grow everything? Dude, because I want to learn how I want to do that. I need to figure that out. Dude, so the main thing is soil. Just the soil. Dude, like everything can like, do we live in St. P. Florida? Yeah. Like it's beautiful weather year round. Yeah. Like everything wants to grow. The hardest part about growing here is just the soil. So if you build the soil, everything, dude, all you got to do is just plant whatever you want it to grow. And building the soil is so easy. It's free and easy. All you got to do is call your local tree companies and ask for them to drop off their wood chips, their mulch. And that's what breaks down into the best soil, the best dirt. So just the mulch. Yeah. Yeah. So for example, if you go into these forests, every fall, every autumn, what happens? All the sticks and the leaves, they fall. Yeah. And then that's what makes that hummus, that micro biome, that fungus underneath, that's what breaks down into the soil. Okay. So when you go to the northwest, like Washington State, you know, that has like the biggest trees and the biggest forest. And if you go and they have this most beautiful soil. And it's just from years of like, dude, it takes like a hundred years for a forest to build like an inch of really good topsoil. And all that is is from the sticks and leaves falling. Okay. You know what I mean? Okay. And of course, like there's then nutrients from the animals dying on it. Right. You know, like the animals like pissing on it or whatever. But the bulk of it is what breaks down from the trees. And if you call a local tree company who are like trimming up the oak trees. So the oak trees are a pioneer species. They've been dialing in this climate, this soil, everything in this environment for hundreds of years or for however long Florida has been around. Yeah. So then when you break down that tree and cut it into wood chips, that's what breaks down into that perfect soil that's going to perfectly help your plants in this climate in this environment. Okay. And that's what's going to align that kind of like your gut, that gut microbiome with everything that's going to help feed all your plants and give it that internet system where it can communicate with it. So you don't actually use dirt. You just put the wood chips down and then how long does that take to turn into soil? Wood chips break down into dirt. How long does that take? in Florida once like two months of summer? Really? Yeah. Dude. So we laid like three, four feet of mulch. Okay. And then it broke down into like seven inches of soil. Damn. And like bro, we're constantly adding more mulch because it's like mulch is the nourishment. Mulch is the energy. So you know, mulch is one, it's the carbon too. So when you're putting that into the soil and that process of it breaking down is what is the process that feeds all your plants. Okay. And that's the soil. And you know our guts work the same way. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. 100%. And that's what's crazy. Like, and then when we're eating the foods from like, you know, the soil that is around us, that's when our guts kind of line with our environment. We're not going to be struggling with allergies. We don't get sick because when the weather changes, our gut changes, you know, and when our gut changes, like everything changes. So we're aligned with our environment. So every time the weather changes, it's not going to get a sick for sure. Yeah. And dude, and it's crazy. It sounds crazy, but just putting your bare feet or bare skin on that soil is what's going to help strengthen your immune system because like, dude, we're all electric, like all those neurons are rebalancing itself to like connect with, you know, the microbiology in you and your gut is connecting with the microbiology in your soil. Right. That's so important to just aligning ourselves with the earth and the more we're aligned with the earth, the healthier and happier we're going to be. And do you, so do you intermittent fast or no? Yeah. I mean, every day, dude, like all the intermittent fasting is going what? 12 hours without eating. 13, 12, 13, 14 hours like that? Yeah, I do that all the time, you know? Okay. But dude, if I wake up, I mean, do you eat this really for breakfast or do you wait? You skip that and wait until like the afternoon. Like you do it like at first thing in the morning. So I'm not like super regiment of like, okay, I gotta have this at 930. You know what I mean? Like, bro. If I wake up on a Tuesday and I got a big gym session that day, yeah, I want pancakes in the morning. I'll hit some pancakes. Yeah. And my roommate makes some bomb pancakes with the bananas that grow. Oh shit. That was good. Like, but then again, like if I wake up and I got a bunch of stuff to do and I just start doing it and I, you know, and that's when my mind feels like it's going to be working its best too is on an empty stomach. For sure. I feel way sharper when I have an eaten, but then post people aren't like that because their body just isn't used to it. Okay. So most people ride away. Oh, I can't do anything when I'm hungry. That's what they think. How hungry I am. Right. But that's because that's because their body just isn't used to being hungry. Okay. And their relationship with being hungry is a bad relationship. It's a negative thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. My body is just healing itself. It feels good. My mind's working. Like, I feel great. So yeah, like sometimes I'll wait till 11 to have this movie, sometimes 12. Sometimes one I go by my schedule and how I'm feeling that day. Okay. You know, like everything's always changing. So it's hard to have a super strict routine and everything. That's one thing that I learned from, you learn from nature and like watching my yard grow into its own like living ecosystem is like everything on this planet is constantly changing and constantly creating. You know, it's creating new leaves, creating new feathers, creating new sticks, creating new something. So when we create, we're aligning ourselves with nature and everything is constantly changing. Like if I go out in my backyard today, it's going to be different than going to my backyard tomorrow. There's going to be different flowers, different butterflies, different leaves. You know, they sit differently. They have their own, do their alive. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's the only thing that quits growing and quits creating is something that's dying. You know, so I always thought about I've always wanted to do that first of all. I've always wanted to grow my own shit, but it's way easier. I always think about it's like, I take so much upkeep and so much work. Good. That's how I would do it. If you do it the way like they teach you like, okay, you're going to build a raised garden. You're going to plant your seeds in the spring and harvest them in the fall. Yeah. It is a lot of work. Yeah. It is a lot of work. How do you up? How do you, what's your upkeep like? Who up keeps the forest? Nobody right? Why? The animals? Not, not, not even. I mean, yeah, they just, because everything's in balance. Okay. So all the trees, it just balance its an alignment. So when you have a diverse of plants, they take care of some, so for example, if you're starting a company, and if you're wanting to start this big huge company, you have to resource other things to other people because you only have certain amount of strengths. You have to hire people who have strengths that are your weaknesses. Of course. And then. You have to resource other things to other people because you only have certain amount of strengths You have to hire people who have strengths that are your weaknesses of course and then in a company When you have the diverse of talents and diverse of skills. That's what's a truly successful company and horses the same way So the more you have a diverse of plants So for example what we usually do is we have this monocrop So we have tens of acres of mono crop A monocrop is how we grow all of our food. Okay We have like acres on acres on acres of the same food Okay, and it brings in balance. It kills our soil It brings in balance and and that brings the pests because the pest knows whoever pests likes that certain food Is gonna all be attracted to that and then you got to spray chemicals to get rid of the pests and then the soils getting shitty So you got to spray fertilizer to get the plants right? But when you grow like the forest it doesn't really do that because There's a variety. Yeah because there's such a variety right? So if a pest comes in the other plant brings a pest that eats that pet So nothing goes crazy and then if something else needs a nutrient or if something's low on nutrient It has that that fungus network under the internet that communicates and that transfers these nutrients Yeah, and like it all works together And and and one is I'm planting plants that That are perennials so an annual is like something that you plant in the spring and then harvest in the fall A perennial is like an apple tree An orange tree you plant it once and it lives a whole lifetime. It grows for 30 years 50 years. Okay, whatever You know like there's some plants that may only live for five years. So most your plants are perennials. Yeah pretty much all of them So wow, so what I did is I just focused on soil I laid the mulch and then every time I have spare like fruits or vegetable scraps I add that in to the soil to compost it really oh shit you just throw them in there. Yeah, dude Everything that's like biomass like every stick every leaf every egg shell every like bro That's all something that feeds the earth soil. Yeah, like no makes sense like every scrap of leaf or broccoli that all breaks down into nutrients for the soil that feeds our planet and We are extracting all of this energy all these nutrients into this low quality food And that's why like yeah, we're we're sick the planet sick But when you have really rich soil then the food that's growing is rich with nutrients and then when you consume that then you're rich with life Right, you know, I was listening to yesterday. I was listening to something the other day. They were talking about how They killed they hunted this bear this black bear that all it was all it was blackberries Some some bear that all that a was fucking was blackberries or blueberries some some dark berry And when they cut it open they filated it open and they cut its meat It was just this dark stained purple and they were thinking it was because of the fucking berries of it all the thing A was berries And they were trying to correlate it back to like what you you are what you eat Yeah, yeah, I mean it was just super interesting For sure, but they're finding like dude all of our health is based on our gut flora You know what I mean? Laura so like so when you think of your gut all those organisms like you want to think of like a beautiful forest or a Yeah, yeah Park with all of the diversity right the diversity of the plants the diversity of the animals You know like you have a beautiful lake you have the fish in the lake You have the squirrels you got the birds you have the big plants you got the bushes you have the vines Yeah, beautiful life and that and that diversity is what's gonna bring that balance that strength of like why Chest like our stomach like why I won't need a doctor to maintain my health It's just like I won't need to tend to my garden right you don't even like it's the same thing like it's in balance So everything does pretty good at taking care of itself and then if something Like if some problem does show up you stop you observe and you learn from it and you evolve and you keep going A strong I need to get my fucking garden going ASAP dude It's so easy the first thing you do call a tree company Ask them can you dump off a load of mulch because that's the best thing that you could do to start building your soil Okay, and then second step you know the flea market on park. Yeah, they sell so many awesome trees dude Really plants okay some bushes hell yeah, you'll have all these tie people showing you fruits you never even Dude, we got jackfruit you covered jackfruit. Yeah, I have heard a jackfruit. They're the fucking pointy ones right Despite them. It's bigger than a basketball right? It's dude. It's the biggest like tree-grown tree-borne fruit on the planet. I had no fucking ideas They get like 50 60 70 sometimes 80 pounds What and they taste like juicy fruit they say it's what the guy like how he got the flavor of juicy fruit is from a jackfruit Really yeah, but dude They're using it to like help world hunger because it's dude It's so much food and you can cuz it'll feed someone he wanted fucking fruit will feed a ton of people right easy crazy And it's wild bro. If you shredded up cooking and post a barbecue sauce on it taste just like what Crazy motherfucker. No, no, that's the same dude. I've never I'm not a cook. Oh, yeah I've never specifically done it. Okay. That's what they tell you dude like they use it for like a meat substitute all the time Do you have a jackfruit? I got I got two jackfruit do you wow But it has that haven't started fruiting yet I think about one jackfruit will start fruiting next year and that's something that like What makes people a little bit resistant to do it is cuz this type of patient thinking You know is like an investment You know I'm saying like you lay all this mulch and you plant all these plants for fruits that are gonna bear Maybe in two years Fitting with our culture, bro. Yeah, you want it now man. I want the instant I want Instagram. I want to swipe and get it now Yeah, yeah, but then but I think eventually when People keep learning of you know a better way to grow our food Eventually, it's gonna be that way to where you can just okay I want to apple and you swipe it and then this fresh grown apple is gonna be right at your door Right, I mean is it really gonna be a fresh grown apple? It's gonna be fucked up modified in some kind of way I mean I think people have to I think people have to change though I think I think cultures got to a point where it's just it's got a the pendulum's got a swing people got to learn to be like People got to learn to be patient. Yeah, they got to learn that mindset of investing for long-term returns You know long whether it be with finance or your body whatever it is It's a whole different way of thinking did you're so right and like I mean in the only way to start that is with us You know Like we have to lead by that example. Yeah, do the best we can so then other people will you know Hopefully see that and catch on to that and there's always gonna be people who don't give a fuck And those are the people who are just gonna most likely be consuming You know like they are the consumers. Yeah, they're just consuming things all day without much producing and there's so many people There's fucking blind to it They don't even take the second to even stop and think they're just as that guy is that fucking person Speeding down the road trying to get to the grocery store on time That's fucking you know flipping you the bird going through the like because they're pissed off at themselves. They hate their lives Yeah, I've been that guy. Yeah Yeah, right so I just fucking angry at everybody you fucking didn't stop at the stop sign I'm pissed off. They're feeling their own suffering of course. They don't even they don't get it though They just want to blame it on everybody else you always get like what you made, you know I'm saying like you get what you put in if you put out a bunch of bad energy You're gonna feel like shit, you know, and that's something I had to learn I guess hard way Let's talk about the stem cell shit, dude. How did you get so stem cells healed your knees? Basically, okay, or how did you first explain it tell the story of how you first got into stem cell So the knee exploded yeah, right? The knee exploded that was in the summertime. I started doing the breathing. I started changing life I started reading like bro I never read books before because I couldn't sit down long enough to fucking read a book Dude, I started reading non-stu-mahol life change you gotta have a body hard of the new shield and a mind sharper than a blade So I began sharpening my saw there you go, you mean like mentally physically emotionally and then and the fucking knee due to for the last six months of it dude I didn't realize how broken the leg was but they were just giving me quarter zone shots And I was actually finishing the season and like dude I was riding with this broken femur and so much pain just causing so much more damage to my whole entire body But I was breathing through all this like learning about dude I was learning so much through all of this like just and then They finally went in and said look we gotta fix this thing So they did this micro-fraxxer surgery which I kind of regret doing at this micro fracture surgery So essentially they took a drill and they exploded the rest of my knee and And broke everything the pieces in hopes that it's gonna regrow back and then same thing like me I was supposed to like stay off it for like six months I started racing and training in like three and I went to this race in Paris and Dude, it was awful. Dude. I couldn't even walk through the airport without pain where I was just like did the This pain was not going away, but I also wasn't stopping my training yet You know like I started changing everything in my life But it was one habit after another, you know, I did the fast I was doing the breathing and that's when I started realizing that hey I got to stop living for myself and start living for other people and then when I went to Europe That's when that's what got me into video of like look if like I created this whole plan of like how I'm gonna use what I have to Keep evolving what I have and to use that to help and to contribute to the world and one thing I understood was video So I just like dude, I didn't know how to get my computer on the internet I did not attract emails. I didn't know how to work at camera But I told myself dude, I'm going all in on video, you know You know like I'm gonna learn how to do this and start making videos I'm gonna take everything that I'm doing that's helping me and Create it into some content that can help other people document it right exactly and I'm gonna keep pushing myself To keep learning and the more I learn the more I can video to help other people and if I'm running out of Material to create that I'm not pushing myself enough, right, you know, so then But then dude my knee do my like my whole body was starting to feel great But this pain in my knee just wasn't going away. You know like it kept telling me look that pain I have more to learn. I haven't learned my lesson quite yet. So then I Somebody I knew talked to somebody who did stem cells My manager brought me in and I met the guy and I said dude I got nothing to lose man dude. Let's try this stem cell and then I Did the stem cells and that's when he gave me like look you can't you can't do nothing dude If you really want this to heal you can't leave your house for like eight nine months So where did you end up getting this stem cell therapy? Yeah, I mean I know from doctor locks right there in clear water Oh really yeah, I thought last time I talked to somebody who did that they had where they were going to Mexico and doing it Yeah, yeah, that's do that. I think that's a whole different like they're getting like I know there's different types of stem cell Okay, like the stem cell that I used was actually from my own body like I'm a young healthy person Do they tip to get like straight from like month? For people who don't know explain what exactly what is what is stem cell? So we all have these kind of like stem cells that are in our body those are the guys that are in your body Working at healing and rebuilding cells and regenerating shit, right? They're like super construction workers Right, you know that always helping to heal your body And we we have those all throughout our body and we have a lot of it like in our pelvis You know like of course where that energy system is like right into right our main part of our whole body and They can harvest them straight from there and they inject it right into the trouble spot And it's like injecting these super construction workers to help rebuild all the shit that's going wow Or all the shit that went wrong. How do they extract specifically the stem cells big ass needle in it? What so like the first time like it was like a steroid needle fucking big Really like this big what yeah like two feet long Fuck yeah, I don't know. Maybe he was a foot. I don't know. It looked big Yeah, yeah, yeah, but like the first time I was numb I didn't feel it, but I did two sessions and the second time I don't know if he missed the numbing or he went deeper or like what happened? But I mean I've never been raped but the dude I felt like dude no loo my skin went white like dude I'm like like it felt like there was something somewhere it shouldn't be you know I'm saying cuz it's like deep like and they go and and from like your lower back But they pulled out and they put it right in my knee and I'll be a hundred percent it did help but it didn't heal my knee really it didn't heal my knee because Check this out if you have any problem, right? and If you have that problem of whatever caused that problem But if you just go to a doctor and they give you this pill or this surgery or whatever That's gonna help with that problem if you don't fix or understand what originally caused that problem to begin with That problem is just kind of come back in two to three years in however right? There's just like miracle that's gonna happen so for example. Yeah, if I had these joint pains in my body all right so say if you go To get stem cells because you have a bad shoulder or if you have a bad knee right those stem cells will Inject the super construction workers in your body to help rebuild your shit Right, but if you keep using your shoulder or your knee in the exact same way a Long-term the exact same thing is gonna happen. That's gonna happen. Oh, yeah. Yeah exactly So so this pain in your body is meant to be learnt from that's your body trying to speak to you That's your body screaming so stop and try to listen what it's trying to say and and That's what I did because dude I was stuck in my house for almost a year where like I would do that well It I keep put me on a step counter Right I had four thousand steps a day. It was pretty much just enough to wake up piss shit Feed myself walking the backyard breathing meditate in four thousand steps. Yeah If it like it if I went to the grocery store and got food I would go over my steps and I would be in a lot of pain damn So dude I was stuck in my house for like it's almost a year Oh of just like just breathing watching my yard grow You know cuz everything was already planted just breathing in my yard watching it grow reading book after book after book And then I got this sketchbook and I started creating this plan of like all when I can walk again You know cuz there was a time where these doctors were telling me I was never gonna be able to like walk or run or jump again without pain You know so I started just creating this whole plan of like you know hey, this is my second chance dude I was like it's realizing is not all about me But what can I use what I have to help other people yeah, and then So I started changing Everything from the way I thought from the way I moved and changing the way I moved and changing the way I thought is really what did it so they injected these stem cells into your knee and What was the pro like what did you have to do after that like what what did the stem cells actually do like how did that help? So all right, so check this out so for most people they go in they get the stem cells injected in like a Wager to their feeling fucking great right right cuz they're sitting on their desk all day You know they're not doing much, but I don't want a normal life. Do I want to be extraordinary dude like I? I wanted to have that extra of like I Plan on going back and racing professionally You know I'm saying right and that was my goal And still is you know to race it professionally all my bike and then not only be a professional athlete now But when I'm 50 I want to be climbing fucking mountains my dude. Hell yeah, you know I'm saying like who doesn't yeah I mean exactly that's a problem if you're not thinking that way then I want to be as physically fit as possible like being able to use my body and use my mind until the end and I knew if I didn't change everything right then from changing from the way I moved from the way I thought Then I wasn't gonna have that and then And I mean I started meeting with like the smartest physical therapist I could find and like finding Like there's these guys from California called move you who are like the smartest people I ever find of just like Teaching you how to move and use your body properly move you move you okay like M O V E Then the letter you come like they worked with Antonio Brown when he got hurt, but really dude They were doctors like physical therapist chiropractors. Do they did everything and they realized oh It's not fucking healing people. It's not working Like it's just a bullshit trying to sell you this procedure that it's just gonna Put you in the same place. Yeah, so this program like literally teaches you how to breathe how to use your shoulder How to use your body can give you all these exercises to realign everything and like I tell anyone if they have any back pain or shoulder Payner knee pain to check out these guys because like that's interesting that was stronger than the stem cells really because it Well, it changed the way I moved You know what I mean like it taught me to connect with myself and to connect with my movement to be aware of how I was Using my body of what was bringing me to this pain of what was causing my shit to break down and if it's breaking down It means it's not in alignment. It's not in balance So that program taught me how to like taught me what muscles were too tight and what muscles were too weak And how to strengthen those muscles and how to move and use my body and how to use my feet like I was never connected with my feet or my breath or anything Like right, but that's so important. How did you learn the how did you like digest the program? Did you go to you know California or body is it like something you download in the year? So like they have like this web to move you calm. Okay, and they have videos and shit dude It's dude. It's like the best program ever. Dude. They're not paying me anyway. Like I actually paid them Right right right that says a lot about them. Yeah, dude, and I've I've listened and I've been studying fitness and health my whole life Right, I'm saying and like I haven't found anything almost as good as these guys. There's guy named Edo Portau How like have you heard of him? No, Edo Portau like he's like the number one dude with the movement You know, okay, Wim Hof is like the guy with the breath and the ice and this guy's the guy with the movement Okay, but like move you these guys are just teaching you how to fix your shit Really because all of us out of a line we're having these pains He showed her pains these neck pains because we're just sitting in cars sitting with this bad posture It's showing you that your posture and the way you sit and the way you use your body and daily movement It's not that this certain crash caused that injury that might have been you know The well, it's like the camel that broke to or in the straw. Yeah, right But it's the everyday tiny little movements that chip away at our body for sure that if we're not using And moving our body properly then it's chipping instead of rehabilitating you know But if we know how to use our body just like if we know how to use our minds then every movement that we're doing become strengthening instead of like Degenerating yeah, I learned that recently like with my fucking lower back that I've really like never you I don't use my core enough So like learn to like I've been doing like a lot of like different things to strengthen my core and like I realized how that fucking Changes your lower back that with like rolling out the legs and shit. I never like never thought about that dude I'm still doing this program today We're like oh dude because I have this time off with my current shoulder injury now Yeah, right I crashed like a month ago Yeah, BMX going great got my knees healed You know jump into the story like that's crazy that you've been doing BMX for so long, too Yeah, yeah, dude and like after them who move you and like dude after like the physical therapy like I mean It's still do my knee. It's just my one knee. It's still getting stronger every day, but really it feels Fucking amazing awesome dude. Dude. It just Finally, I can walk without pain. I can jump I can do and just like the past Month or two. I've really been able to start running bro. I haven't been able to run without pain in years I really 23 bro like and now like I'm able to use my body so much more Do the stem cells helped but the move you is what taught me? You know and now I'm waiting for this surgery to fix my shoulder like I'm actually doing more of the program now to get my body ready to go into a surgery. How long do you think you're gonna? Do BMX for? Probably be riding my bike till I can't what how I die, man Do you think there's any as they're like a is there like a transition after I mean obviously so so the BMX that we're Talking about right now is is when you start on a big hill and you basically go around like a motor cross track Right let's look what you see in like like dirt bike races, but it's on a bicycle Have you ever thought about transitioning out of that to a different kind of bike racing? I'm a BMX, man. I love that so you're stuck. You're sticking to that. I love riding bikes. Dude. I just love riding bikes Yeah, okay, sure Like like what about like the fucking downhill shit where they're in the woods and they're like I'll do it. Yeah I'll do your try to I have did a mountain bike race before it Dude is fun like I love bikes. Yeah Yeah, I just love being outside hanging out my friends doing anything like physically acting You know I started BMX when I was younger and that's what got me hooked You know I've been doing it forever and now like I have this new passion of just like you know the art of mastery of just like Yeah, falling in love with the process of learning new, you know and then after coming back Like of this new reborn self is like I never enjoyed BMX more because before I just started BMX Because I'm trying to make myself look cool. Yeah, you know what I mean? Like I only started BMX and continued to race BMX to make myself seem awesome and to be great and to build up this ego of mine And then when I lost all that during those injuries now Now I love BMX more than ever because it's not you know I'm not doing it to look cool But I'm falling in love with the process of learning and bettering myself Yeah, you know, it's not so much about crushing the dude next to me But just bettering myself from yesterday. Yeah Do you ever take any any mushrooms or DMT? You do? I mean, I mean You're talking about like the ego stuff and everyone talks about like I've never done DMT or mushrooms But I'm too much of a pussy So I've never done DMT Yeah, but I mean I had a couple mushrooms here Yeah, you know what I'm saying? But like when did you start doing that? Like was the first time you did it was it at what point in your dude? Do the first time I ever did mushrooms was only like probably a year and a half ago really? A year ago. Yeah Last time was last weekend dude. I ate a fucking weed gummy and I'm fucked. I feel like I'm tripping on mushrooms See those are all that's the best. I love I love like all honestly like I never even like smoked weed too much of You know like all this started happening. Yeah, you know what I mean? And then Like you know, I first started smoking a little bit of weed and then all of a sudden like I started feeling my body a little bit more To like do like always tight muscles. That's for all this pain is coming from and then but really like nothing has been better than the breathing Really like because I can get to these higher states with my breath We all can yeah, we all can get to these higher states with our breath and like go into such a deeper part Get all those lights and get all that craziness just with our breath And the consistency of doing that every single day is what helped me, you know But like you know, maybe one day on mushrooms is good Yeah, nice glimpse of what's possible. Right? And like it just I remember like the first time I ate mushrooms. I got to really see how the whole environment is really connected How much did you take? Not enough. Do you remember how many grams it was maybe three three? Yeah, okay I'm trying to figure out for my first time I do it. Yeah, but I mean like There was a couple times, you know, I threw like a gram or so and then super smoothies. Oh, yeah I'm a good day. Yeah, they talk about a lot of people talk about micro dosing like especially like it's silicon valley Those guys they micro dose on LSD and mushrooms so much. Yeah Because you're building all these crazy connections. Yeah, like you're able to lower your ego and Your ego just gets in the way and it makes you think in all of this like Separateness and your somebody-ness, you know, but when you're on like mushrooms or even weed it helps to diminish your ego So you can see how everything is just really one and we're all connected and we're all in this together Yeah, you know what I mean like like Just how we have Like billions of different organisms in our body. Mm-hmm. We are just one of those billions of organisms in the earth body right we're all sitting here trying to work towards the same goal of the health and the happiness of This earth in this point, you know saying like we just may not realize it. We're all looking for the same thing Yeah, we're all looking for the same thing and it's all connected. Yeah, so it's like It's fucking sweet. I just fucking sweet dude. You know, it's not like I'm telling you to go out there and do some mushrooms But sometimes it helps do like go out there and do some mushrooms Like dude I hear people they're using mushrooms for everything now. Oh, yeah, I'm really starting to think mush And I'm not talking about this cycle. It's legal in a Colorado now, right? Dude, they're using like the psychedelic mushrooms to help with like PTSD Oh, yeah, that stuff for sure you're able to drop your old self and to just build these new connections, but like not not just psychedelic mushrooms fungus and mushroom itself is like I Believe there's so much more to it than we believe like we're realizing that Dude the biggest living organism that we've ever found on this planet is a microbiome like you know like a fungus network in the northwest from like You know Canada all the way down to northern California. You know that whole forest Yeah, it's just one big microorganism of this fungi network of you know what I was talking about earlier of that microbiome and that's Like they're finding that everything is kind of like the star and the end for mushrooms Right, and if you look at mushrooms like in a forest It's kind of like the portal to break down what's dying to feed to the life that's coming Yeah, you know, and then when I take mushrooms like even the psychedelic ones I kind of feel like it's breaking down all that dead waste. Yeah to Bring room for new life in my mind and Even like the regular like portabellum mushrooms that you eat You know they help break down the old shit in your body. They really help with your brain health. Yeah I'm about to talk about the psychedelics like just the regular. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I want you by the grocery store. Yeah, yeah exactly I think mushrooms is definitely something that humans are just beginning to Scratch the surface of untapping the potential of what we feel like I think we can replace Plastic concrete everything with mushrooms, you know like everything that we're using and making that's kind of killing the planet from like what we build our Houses with from like all the plastic like I think if I think the technology's far like not quite there yet But it's possible to use like some sort of the fungus family to do everything that we need. Yeah, because it's way more advanced than we are I did one of those float tank things yesterday Yes, you're the first time ever. Yeah, well the first time I like it was cool It wasn't like one of the legit float tanks. They was one at St. Pete And it wasn't like because it wasn't one of those like round orbs They're like oh, yeah, it's bigger. It's kind of like a big shower, but it gets pitch black and They put a thousand pounds of Epsom salt in there and I felt really great But it was pitch black and I wish I would have fucking ate it. Oh weed gummy first dude. I ate when I did it. I had a big brownie and Nothing well, I think it'd be better just to go in their normal really So I did a normal and I felt like it could have been cooler Do it again, maybe I should yeah, I'm gonna try but I'm definitely gonna try both But it was definitely a good experience. I mean, I mean, I needed like the salt bath either way Like I needed I had so much fucking like like Lactic acid and shit built up on my enemy that I need I just needed that just to get those those toxins out But it was definitely a cool experience. Yeah, for sure. I definitely want to try it again. Dude, and it's so cool I like You know the more people are like struggling with certain things Even more people are creating new opportunities to help with that You know what I mean? Like there's all the things that are certain coming and becoming more popular from float tanks from yoga to meditation To where like yeah in the 90s if you talked about meditation, you were like crazy Or who's this guy? What are you like a Buddhist or something? Right right right but now like because so many of us are struggling with these mental health issues The like now meditation is getting popular. It's kind of it's definitely cool now meditation and yoga It's definitely gotten a lot cooler a lot more accepted in the mainstream. Yeah, let's do it. It should be too It's working. Yeah, dude It's working and it's making us feel better after your healthier stronger and do the more happier healthier stronger one of us is The more happier. How do you struggle? We all could be it's funny I was having just a talk yesterday with the lady at YouTube who I talked to everyone So in a while like that talks about like how to like to optimize like your channel or try to like you know help you grow your channel more and With like the content that you're creating and she helps like strategize different shows like different like types of content that I make or whatever and how we optimize it and We were talking about CPM you know like CPM based on like your videos of CPMs it's cost per milli basically it's like your ad revenue per Thousand views of your content. So every thousand views you can make X amount of dollars based on the amount of revenue You make from YouTube and I was asking like what's the highest? Because obviously there's different types of content that make more money because certain advertisers will target that type of content Yeah, like well there's health those there's lots of different like categories I think one of the biggest ones is like the makeup tutorials because it's so easy for those companies Target and I was asking I'm like what's the the highest? There's lots of different categories. I think one of the biggest ones is the makeup tutorials. Because it's so easy for those companies to argue. And I was asking, I'm like, what's the highest pay seat payment of all the types of content that you've noticed? Or the top category that makes the highest amount of ad revenue. And she was saying that it's personal finance gurus. People that teach finance or teach wealth, that kind of shit. First people that are looking to get rich. And I was like, what the fuck? And because I have real, I've noticed just so many people out there, especially on the internet, that are trying to be gurus of finance or personal wealth. They're 21 years old. They're just... They're just... They're mamas based. Yeah, well, not necessarily that, but they fucking... They just create content about that because they know it's what the culture wants. You know what I mean? They're not doing it because that's what they're good at or that's what they've done their whole They're doing it. It's kind of just like a degenerative cycle of they're creating that kind of entertainment because they know it makes money and that kind of reinforces what's in the culture. People just want it. They want to chase money. They see somebody with a fancy fucking car. They see somebody with the Lamborghini or a big house. I think, oh my God, I want to be just like this person. You know what I mean? It's like a... It's something that's in our culture right now that reflects onto the internet. People who consume their thinking and their energy with that, they get theirs. You know what I'm saying? Like it's kind of what we're talking about before. It's like people who consume their thinking in not in good alignment if it's just out of alignment or in a different place. They're miserable. You know what I'm saying? You know when someone is firing on all cylinders, they feel good, they're happy, they're nice. You know what I mean? Nice to people. They have a good energy for sure. I'm saying like, and that's when we're going to be at our most successful as well. I don't know. I don't really know what the fuck I was getting at by bringing that up, but I guess it's very relevant to being lopsided in what you're doing. You said you could have a muscle imbalanced somewhere, but if you really focus on just fucking making that money, getting that dollar, you know what I mean? You're going to neglect so much other important shit. It's going to bring pain. You know what I mean? In some way it's going to bring some pain or suffering. If you're just pursuing the money, even if the pain is the disappointment of, because most times if you're just pursuing the money, you'll end up either broke or miserable. You know what I'm saying? But then if you align making that money with some sort of value, connecting it with your specific strengths and how you can create that value to contribute to the world or having something that someone's going to pay for. Everyone's obviously bringing value in some way because money is just an exchange of value. You know what I'm saying? So if you can create something with your gifts that someone actually wants to buy, that's when you're going to kind of have your cake and eat it too. You know, like the money falls into place if you just focus on bringing the value with you know, the things that you enjoy doing or things you care about. Yeah, definitely. Tell everybody where they can like find YouTube channel. You make a lot of content on YouTube. Yeah, for sure. Other than like pushing myself and penciling physically to try to find my best self, like I use most of my extra time and energy to like creating content. And it's all funneled really through my website. So like my Instagram, my Twitter, my YouTube, all of the content that I create for that is also on my website, which is www.vwillgrant.com. But if you just want to go to YouTube or Instagram or Twitter, just type in my name, www.vwillgrant and I should show up just www.lglgrant.com. Yep. They'll find all your stuff. Yes, sir. Learn how to get better. Learn how to eat well. Learn how to work out. Learn how to be fast. Absolutely. Let's push each other together to find our best selves and create the best world we can. I love it, dude. Well, thank you so much for doing this and, and, uh, do thanks for having me, letting my audience absorb what you have to, what you have to give. And let's definitely do this shit again. This was awesome. Sounds good, man. Hell yeah. Yeah.