Now we're live 3 2 1 boom. Hello Annie. Hello, Joe very nice to meet you. I'm excited to talk to you I'm super excited to talk to you about several subjects But this one. Thank you very much for this First edition copy of your area 51 an uncensored history of America's top secret military based book I'm super excited about this. I heard do the grapevine. You're a fan. I'm a freak when it comes to this stuff Do you what do you think is going on up there? I? Mean same thing that's going on all over the place when it comes to military secrets Which is stuff that you want to know about very few people know about and every now and then a journalist gets a hint Yeah, do you think there's any alien stuff up there? I write in the book all about that. Yeah. Yeah. I'll tell them last 12 pages You want me to go to the water space pages? What do you think? So area 51 was this secret test base where the CIA was running Spy plane programs right so interestingly my new book is about ground branch guys on the ground that's about air branch what we were doing in the air and it was this idea that we should spy on the enemy, okay and But if you go back in time why area 51 really started you learn that it was a base hidden inside of a base nuclear weapons and it was all about beating Stalin at his black propaganda campaign Is I right in the book? Hmm to hoax Americans in a war of the world's type scenario whereby Little men who looked like aliens would get out of an aircraft and The government would go crazy about it and then Stalin would say look we have not only do we have technology better than you But we have a better propaganda department than you Real that Joe you got to read the whole book. Oh, this is like a this is a tough opening You got me on the top of it, but it's a good spot. All right. It's a good spot. So Stalin Just hired short people like what do you do? All right. I'm gonna make you save that. I'm gonna make you earn it Yeah, I was I mean you want me to talk about that right now right off the back. Why is it? I'm sweating we're gonna get to we're gonna get to surprise kill vanish as well But I want to just yeah, why is it making you sweat? Oh my god, it's such an incendiary topic. I mean people people want to believe their aliens right? Okay, I mean I've spent five books dealing with the mythology of area 51 which is phenomenal in its own way because it speaks so much to power to morality to information to You know people's desire to know what's going on and and the government's desire to keep things hidden So this topic is always coming up because a lot of people want to believe that there were aliens in that craft and my source who I write about in the book told me otherwise that they were genetically You know that they let me stop you right there because when you say that craft what you mean is the supposed UFO wreckage of crashed in Roswell, New Mexico in 1947 That's what you mean right? Yes, but that was never supposedly taken to area 51 was supposed to be taken to right Patterson Air Force base The legend has it that Truman flew there to meet them and right? That's one legend. Yeah, so in my book I interview a man who worked for the Atomic Energy Commission who tells a different story tells the story of receiving that Craft at area 51 in 1951 which is why the base is called area 51 oh and that inside the craft were humans who had been altered surgically altered to look like aliens in a plan for Stalin to sort of twist Truman's arm because at that time We had the atomic bomb and Roswell happened. We had the atomic bomb and the Soviets did not Can I stop you now when you say humans that were surgically altered to look like aliens? Do you mean so this is 1951 so you're talking about four years after the supposed crash? Yes So what they had the bodies they kept the bodies the kept the bodies in what from Alba hide like with us and also because the idea was and remember Or I can't say remember cuz you haven't wrote the book yet, and I wrote this book eight years ago But it did really impact a lot of my a lot of my thinking and working on on You know government secrecy projects because it makes you really consider what a hoax means and what it means to a Population of people and how the government begins to work with disinformation Versus cover stories and all of that but going back to answer your question That is what I was told by the source that but how reliable is this source? This is a very Insendiary idea to rely upon one individual's recollection of it Which is why the book went through the roof in terms of people being upset about it I mean were there. Oh my god. I interviewed 79 CIA guys Air Force guys spy pilots engineers. I mean who's mad at you? They conspiracy theorists were mad at me because they said this woman is bananas They were aliens well even if they weren't aliens, right? There's also there's accounts that it was some sort of a test Vehicle and that they were actually just dummies inside their crash test dummies of the use There's been a bunch of different versions of it, but the most compelling version of the area 51 alien myth to me as Bob Lazar Did you get into that? Yeah, he plays a huge role in area 51. I mean before Bob Lazar went public No one even knew about area 51 people people knew people it was it was common folklore But there was no definitive proof that there was something going on over there other than some weird VHS footage of Things flying around in the desert that seemed to be behaving in a way that Modern aircrafts are not totally capable of at least modern piloted aircrafts are not totally capable of I mean which brings Me to another book I wrote called the Pentagon's brain which you know sort of off this idea was like wait a minute What kind of technology is the government capable of and we have a whole department for that reason called DARPA? Which looks at weapons systems 25 years out? So the idea that you and I don't know what the military is capable of in the air underwater wherever it may be is Because we're not thinking 25 years out and they are and they're developing weapons systems The great weapon systems of the future. That's what they call them. Right like how they developed the stealth bomber like in that was all out in area 51 and groomed Lake and What do you think of Bob Lazar's story because Bob Lazar's story? What's it really there's some fascinating aspects to it? But one of the most fascinating is some of the things that he's said that people said was horseshit It's told has been proven to be true like one of the things the the biometric reader that measured the Length of the bones in your hand and that they are unique as unique as a fingerprint and people like what are you talking? And then they actually found out that this was something they really did have and they have photos of this thing now This is something he talked about and they claimed it was science fiction I mean it's fascinating when someone touches upon a subject that the government does not want known about for any reason and There is a campaign to discredit that person and there's no doubt that that happened to him I mean it was remarkable and I write about him in the book because if you follow the logic that my source told me that these were You know modified human beings as part of a hoax and the reason that I trust the sources because Joe he told me that he also worked on the program so he had like a burden to unload right and so if you follow that logic through then the Bob Lazar's story is that Bob when Bob Lazar said I saw an alien it looked like this. It was small. It had big eyes It's yes, those were the Jeanot genetically. I mean those were the surgically modified humans that the government was doing experiments on I think Bob Lazar's exact quote was he walked by a window and he looked in and he saw two agents that were it looked they were looking down at Something that was very small and looked humanoid, but he didn't know if it was a dummy or anything It wasn't even supposed to be looking in there and it was a brief like one second Look that he is bounced around and his head back and forth has it ever occurred to you that maybe the guy who gave that information Did work there, but is also feeding you horseshit Well the source was a major player in the Manhattan Project He went on and worked in the atomic energy commission. I mean there's a wing of a museum named after him His accolades his awards were so extraordinary. It would be Never said his name although, you know, I will say this well You're giving away like you're giving away a lot of the stuff He recently died and he did give me permission to tell his full story after he died and I'm circling around that circling around that but he was absolutely You know with the cute clearance. That's what you have when you have Access to nuclear secrets so if someone has a cute clearance for decades and they're Full of garbage. You really have to ask my god. Should this guy have a cute clearance? I mean that's reverse engineering his credibility, but I think you should read the whole book because You know it's shocking what he says, but it does make sense if you can get through 400 pages of you know the CIA's idea about Information disinformation why we need to cover things up. Why that's why I'm asking if you think that he's he might have been lying to you I don't believe you do you do you do you do I don't believe I don't believe so you think that the Stalin that the Russian government Definitely did surgically alter people to make them look like aliens. I believe were there images of these I believe what he told me Did you see photos? No, I did not see photo. Here's the rub ready. Okay When I was writing another book called phenomena which dealt with the CIA and the Pentagon's use of psychics Okay, um over decades. I mean this goes back everything all right about pretty much goes back to post-World War when the remote viewing stuff yes, yes, and it's all about government US government takes pole position after World War two and we now need to always be ahead of the curve We must lead we can never get beaten by the Russians now. It's China. Okay So the psychic program had a lot of people who really believe in aliens or you know other Intel intelligence from other worlds and when I was writing the phenomena book I Learned a whole bunch of new information about how upset they were With my story because they believe and they all knew the source by the way They knew the source and they believed that he was fed misinformation so these are two sides of the coin which are super interesting. I think if you can look at them with your own biased turned off and Not have a desired outcome. I want to believe this. I don't want to believe this. You know Speaking of I want to believe you know I was working on a project with Chris Carter who is the X files creator and the one person I took the source That I wanted to meet the source was Chris Carter and I we went out there together and sat with him and met him It was well because the source had never even heard of the X files and it was like oh I know probably talked about baseball, you know really See I don't have a desired outcome. I mean I would love it if aliens were real But when someone starts talking about disinformation and propaganda campaigns, but they want you to believe them right But don't listen I am here telling you the truth. I'm here telling you I'm not saying I'm telling you the truth at all That's why I was not you. Oh, let's wait. It's our three because it's too explosive people have such a horse in the race Yeah, already they with aliens you think well I mean maybe you are neutral I don't know. I know I'm neutral. Yeah, I will listen. I absolutely want aliens to be real 100% it'd be interesting. That's not I'm not neutral But I am Neutral in my perceptions and when I look at things I go hmm. I don't know about that Me too. I want to see a picture like what are these what do these guys look like? I mean what did they do to them? Did he describe what kind of surgical alterations? I stayed with the source I mean after the book published I would go and visit him we'd sit in a Chinese restaurant and eat and talk and I would try to get a droplet of Information out of him. Oh my god. He avoided. I mean look here's another thing when the book came out his wife of 65 years knew it was him okay and I went out to Las Vegas and sat there in a room with the source and his wife and She said tell me this isn't true. Tell me you made this all up to her husband Mm-hmm, and he said It's the truth. I mean that's a triangular version of getting at the truth, but Again to reiterate I believe he believes what he told me was the truth. That was the truth. He was told I Think there's certain agents that think it's fun to fuck with reporters and journalists and make things up I really do and I think especially when they're talking about secret information that they were sworn to protect and Then all of a sudden they want to talk to someone that they don't even know on the sneak tip. Let's meet at a diner I'm gonna tell you everything. That's not how we met. Well, I mean I mean whatever you meant Yeah, well we met because I was interviewing nuclear weapons engineers who were setting off nuclear bombs in area 51 I mean in the Nevada test site area 12 area 23 and they all said to me You've got to talk to the top engineer of all this weaponry and they gave me his name And we talked for days and hours about nuclear weapons and then in one conversation He began to cry and told me this story that I was like what? What was it crime? He was crying because he participated in our version of the human experiments because What the Russians do we do look I've written five books about this we altered people to make them look like aliens According to him we had a small program in 1951 where we wanted to see how the Russians did what they did how they made human beings look like this So what they do take prisoners or something like what who they alter? He said they were handicapped children. Oh Jesus and He told me that he participated in this so again I mean unless you have someone that lost their mind at age 90 and was willing to tell their wife of 65 years I lost my mind so he's saying that he participated in something that altered handicapped children when you say handicapped and you're like down syndrome or something like that and they Made them look like aliens and then killed them like what did how did they? What did they do with this this is where we get into drops of information coming out But what I can say is he had a grandchild that was born that way and And the grandchild did not live long the grandchild died and it made him feel so guilty about what he had done That he felt compelled to Confess if you will and I remember saying to him why are you telling me this? Why don't you tell a priest and he said a priest would judge me and I can tell you won't Why wouldn't you judge him I judge him well? I guess that's why I'm a born journalist joke Because I really try not to judge people. I mean my new book surprise kill vanish It's about assassins. It's about people who work for the CIA who do what needs to be done on the ground In the name of national security. I don't judge them. This is why you know what's really at issue here is morality, right? Yeah, I mean Can I tell you how I got the idea for this book? Sure, but let me before we go any further this so You what I'm not saying yeah, yeah was he saying that there have never been any encounters with alien spacecraft He was totally neutral about aliens. He had nothing to do with aliens He could have cared last he didn't watch the X files. What was his take on Bob Lazar? His take on Bob Lazar was that he probably saw Something that the government had an extension of the program. I mean he didn't know that was speculative We didn't talk about that. I mean, you know other than inference He was very limited in his in the information that he would get out But I mean I used 79 sources in that book that all went on the record in name and he was the one anonymous source Because but like I said, you know, he told me after he died that I could tell the whole story Are you going to I might you might come back another book? Well, if you give me a break and back off of this subject I might come back and tell you and your audience Your book I want to promote your book. I know you want to promote your new book, but I want to promote this book as well I mean I'm teasing you right? but it's it's like it's an astonishing story and I think the best line of all is that people that read about that in the very end of what we did They go I wish they were aliens. Hmm. You know So Stalin created some sort of a craft the mimic you're gonna read it Okay, you're gonna do the rest of the afternoon. Nope. I'm gonna come back And we're talking I think we should probably get into this a little okay come on with a question I'm used to asking the questions. Are you all right as a journalist now now Stalin and The Russians created something that mimicked UFL something that looked like it would be from another planet is that what they do mothership? Mm-hmm in those days drones were there was a mothership in a drone was attached to it and it was jettisoned off Okay, so In those days well in nineteen forty seven forty eight Well, they didn't I mean that was drone technology then okay, so there's a mother a mother craft like a aircraft And then the drone is like a small aircraft under it and it gets jettisoned off and That was what the craft was it was jettisoned off so that so Stalin actually and according to the source invaded our airspace Which was the deep embarrassment to Truman? So we invaded our airspace and then let this drone crash land on the ground with these things that turned out to be human They looked like aliens, but they turn out to be humans that were manipulated surgically to look like a yes as a way to and remember I mean, don't remember but where where this was was You know very close to a nuclear weapons base to our white sands military base. I mean this is like Not a place you want the Russians to be able to get near right? You know, I mean what was interesting is that area 51 we then went out and mimicked all of those one of our early drones was a mimicry of that It was the D-twit there was a M21 which was the mothership and a D-21 which was the Daughtership so how did the pilot them was it wirelessly like we do now no no then it was like that there was a Pilot in the mothership and they kind of let it go And it flew off. I mean there's incredible stories of what the CIA was able to do out there at area 51 with their air branch, you know The technology they're always ahead of technology. That's remarkable Well what Bob Lazar did film that was really shocking was the film the filming of these drones flying around and Performing these really crazy you've seen those videos In the 80s it gets really crazy with what they're able to do and what they're but I mean why I like looking at history It's because you can see the progression, you know you see how Science evolves, you know bit by bit and then there's these great breakthroughs because what the government is always looking For is called a revolution in military affairs. Mm-hmm. Right and that's certainly what drone technology did Later on as drones became developed after the Vietnam war So in the 1980s when Bob Lazar was filming all this stuff You think this was similar to the technology that we see publicly described today in terms of like what drones are capable of Sure, I mean that's what we had something like that. That's that there. Oh, you know when When the f-117 was revealed during the first Gulf War That aircraft was being developed for 20 25 years out at area 51 Actually at area 52 was where they had it set up To develop that stealth technology Think about and what was amazing talk about keeping secrets They had something like 10,000 people working on that No one knew about it that story was never broken by the press not by anyone It just suddenly appeared in the Gulf War and took out Saddam Hussein's you know facilities Mm-hmm. That's a revolution in military affairs. What becomes interesting is then it becomes obsolete Because now everybody knows about it and everybody's gonna mimic that and now you have to have a new Weapon system and that's the military industrial complex. So was this drone aircraft that was released from the mothership? Was this capable of autonomous flight or was it just they just threw it out there and let it crash? The latter right and remember that information I am very limited to that's why it's not Pages it's like the source gave me these little bits of information which I felt I felt was important to include because it speaks to the big issue Why is area 51 classified? I mean now it's not president Obama was the first president to actually say area 51 publicly Some people say it because of my book. All right meaning it was out the secret was out But before that I went through 10,000 pages of documents from the National Archives and every place you see The word area 51 was actually redacted Right why would you keep that so secret? I mean all the guys that I was interviewing say they could call it You know groom Lake they could call it the test facility They could call it paradise ranch, but they couldn't say area 51 Why and the source said well because we did this horrible program out there and the government doesn't want anyone to know about that ever I mean there's stories of like somebody asking Bill Clinton, you know about area 51 him going white I mean human experiments who wants to be part of those horrible But the human experiments were were they limited to this Mimicry of the Russian experiments where they were trying to get people to look like aliens or were there something else going on Wow my goodness I mean you read now the declassified documents tell us how many different human experiments were going on around nuclear weapons Okay Horrible experiments where they were subjecting people to radiation Because they wanted to know they felt well it's more important to know what happens to people Then to not know and so they would take groups of people that say had cancer or something and test them So there's no doubt that the government has experimented on humans It's just is that something that is wise to make public and you know there's two sides of the coin on that I mean you you when you reveal these kind of things when you write about them I mean people get really upset and you know vilify the government partially with good reason and partially it's like Bad for national security. So I think that's the justification on the part of the defense department to keep things secret. That makes sense Wow, it's a it's an interesting take that I never thought of before But if I was stolen and I was trying to air quotes fuck with the Americans That's maybe where I would do it. Hey man You got a problem Zaylians are coming and there was if people it's hard for people that live in 2019 especially if you're young to really imagine a world not only without the internet But with two television channels, right and radio which was where people got all their information from I mean was there two channels? How many channels were in nineteen four seven? Maybe three Maybe maybe three I mean it was radio world war two right most people are radio Yeah, mostly radio and newspapers and that's where people were getting their information and There was a mass hysteria where people were absolutely terrified that we were gonna be invaded Which is why when orson wells war of worlds which when they released it when they did it on the air? They were very clear that this is going to be a reading of Orson wells world worlds book Or that H2L excuse me war of war right was H2L's book and Orson wells read it yes and when they were talking about this on the radio a lot of people missed that part Right and so as the radio went on as the broadcast went on and people were tuning in later in the day It erupted in mass hysteria people were freaking out hundreds of thousands of people really did think that it was and it was also Something that was recreated in other countries I don't know if you know that they did that in other countries in different languages when they saw how cute it worked in America and You know so you see you can see the logic I mean at first it sounds absurd and it sounds ridiculous and that's why I was sweating because it's like Right right but when you think it through and I challenge you to read the whole book because you start piecing together These various ideas and this information becomes less vague and more specific and you go that's how it works And you begin to see how people's perception and how they're easily manipulated factors into national security Just like you just described Stalin knew about that he was a master he was the master of propaganda He invented it. I mean he didn't invent it, but he invented it in a You know on the political stage to be used to mess with another country's perception of things Think of what he did with brainwashing, right? Okay, so like in the 50s and this is journalists You know said so there was a journalist who was putting out stories about brainwashing and there was this idea Which is well taken that totalitarian government's brainwash people and this became a big code word It was introduced into the American lexicon in 1950 well then we're in the Korean War our pilot start getting shot down They're put on TV by the communists saying terrible things about America the American pilots and suddenly it was like they've been brainwashed it was very convenient to have that story So these things work part and parcel and you've got all kinds of smart people behind the scenes Knowing this looking at it examining it and using it to their advantage to stay where in the pole position That's the goal of the US government So the propaganda that we did that sort of copied stalling that we were kind of playing catch-up in that sense I mean we're playing catch-up then we're ahead right behind it so it's always a it's a game It's I mean you're a competitor. You know this that's a crazy Thing to do to make a fake spaceship and just let it slam into the ground with a bunch of people that you cut up to look like aliens Did he say specifically what kind of modifications they made to people that made them look like aliens? I got trips In those 12 pages. I'm telling you that because you're asking me these questions that as if I spent I mean look I did spend literally hundreds of hours with a source We sat there and talked about Everything and I would try to squeeze out just like you're trying to squeeze out of me And that's what I'm saying read it because I literally tell you Everything that there's I think what's most interesting about the source and why I Might come back and talk to you about it and tell you who he is on your show It's because Because of his backstory Hmm, right why he did what he did how he wound up in the Manhattan Project sounds like he was probably Jewish from Germany No Okay Morality talk to me. I want to talk about morality. I don't talk about why we can't talk about certain things Well while we're what you were saying before about being a competitor the United States is competitive obviously and When you're playing the ultimate game, which is war you have to be very careful about what you reveal and what you don't reveal and This is where the conversation about surprise kill vanish comes in because the CIA using these covert operations to assassinate people and whether or not that should be allowed or not allowed whether it's good or bad Whether it's necessary Whether it's like if you want people to be safe over here There's certain people you got to take out and sometimes you just can't follow the rules and why Why are we not supposed to know about that? Should we know about that? The way the story started for me I'm at my house in 2009 a source is you know calls me up. He says I'm on my way back Why are we not supposed to know about that? Should we know about that? The way the story started for me, I'm at my house in 2009. A source is, you know, calls me up, he says, I'm on my way back from the Middle East. I'm going to pop by the house and say hi. He brings me a challenge coin that says Cobble, Afghanistan, State Department. I'm thinking, okay, he is not a diplomat. I mean, he's weapons trained. At the time, my boys were young. There were lots of GI Joe's in the garden. And they had little weapons, right? And the source is showing them about the weapons. And they're like so into it because they know he's military trained. And then he says, if it's okay with your mom and dad, I'll show you some weapons. Boys are like, please. So he sets up this sniper rifle in the living room. And I live up in the hills and you can look across the canyon through this scope he set up. And I can see the veins on the leaf across the canyon. And I thought, okay, so now I know what he was doing in Cobble, Afghanistan. He's taking out Al Qaeda with this. Mm-hmm. There's another case on the ground that he never opens. And when the boys go off, I say to him, what's in that? And he said he opens it up and inside there's a knife. And it's serrated. And I said, what's that for? Immediately realizing, you know, my naivete. And he says to me, sometimes a job requires quiet. So why that became interesting to me was because of my own thoughts and perceptions about what he had told me. In other words, I could deal with him with a sniper rifle. I could be like, okay, that's what he does. But the knife gave me pause. I was like, is he slitting someone's throat? Is it in the ribs? And I thought, why is it that I am willing to accept sort of the clinical nature of a sniper rifle? But I can't. I'm uncomfortable with that close-up hand-to-hand killing. And that led me to surprise kill vanish. Because that was the motto of the precursor agency of the CIA. It was called the OSS, the Office of Strategic Services. Their motto was surprise kill vanish because they would jump out of aircraft, land, work with their French partners, and kill Nazis with a knife to the throat. And I thought, okay, that's considered okay because they were Nazis, right? But we're not supposed to do that anymore. In this world, we live in Y. And I spent the whole, this whole book researching and reporting is about that sort of conundrum, if you will, that moral puzzle. Why do we differentiate? You know, and who are they willing to do that too? Where do they draw that line? Like, I'm sure you're aware of the story of Jamal Khashoggi, the journalist who was assassinated by someone. Some group of people, and he entered into the Turkish embassy. And they walked him and chopped him up and carried him out in boxes. And it's an international, it's a huge incident, right? This supposedly was ordered by, who was it supposed to be the one. The head of Saudi Arabia? Yeah, MBS, Muhammad bin Salman. I mean, that's the idea is that their head of state wanted him killed because he was a threat, because he was a reporter, because he was writing. Yeah, because he was saying some things. Yeah. Yeah, and that they, this is how they did it. Yeah. I mean, and that's a great question because what you're saying is like, okay, so, but we all think of that as reprehensible, right? Right. Why, you know, because he's a journalist, and he's on our side. He's delivering information to people. The government of Saudi Arabia disagreed, though, like that information is our information. He's a threat by releasing it. Yes. He's a threat to our livelihood. Yes. Yeah. And who decides who's a threat? I mean, a lot of this book is about who's on the kill list. Right. I mean, there is an actual kill list. They're always has been. And the euphemisms involved. I mean, I write history, as I said. So Eisenhower called his assassination program health alteration. I mean, literally in the class of high documents. That's hilarious. Health alteration. He had a health alteration committee. Whoa. Kennedy had an executive action committee. Right. It sounds cleaner. Right. Guess what Reagan's was called? Super wonder boy power up. Close. Preemptive neutralization. Preemptive neutralization. Wow. Why do they keep switching the names for it? They're burying the information. Right. Right. And they keep switching around the switch around who has authority to, you know, say, yes, let's go ahead and put this guy on the kill list. I mean, that was fascinating. I interviewed a guy named John Rizzo who's a decades-long CIA attorney. I was stunned that he was willing to talk to me. And he explained to me how a presidential finding, also called a memorandum of notification works that gives the president the authority to put an individual on the kill list. That job is then given to the CIA's paramilitary army, an operator or their assassins, because the CIA works under a code called Title 50 of, so it makes it legal, whereas the defense department works under what's called Title 10. So in other words, and they can't, there are rules of engagement are totally different. The misnomer is like, oh, the seals killed bin Laden. Well, they were seals trained, but that was a CIA mission. Because Pakistan is a sovereign nation. And the military can't kill people in countries we're not at war with. So those guys all became essentially CIA operators for the night. Right. If you look at photographs, as I have seen, you'll notice that they have no markings on their outfits, so that if the job went south, it'd be like, I don't know who these guys are. And if you look back at Vietnam photos of the Mac Vee Saug teams, which I also write about, in surprise, kill vanish, because that's the precursor of that. You see no markings, right? That's that way you can go into, you can go behind enemy lines. You can go into Laos, you know, in the Vietnam War. Now you can go into Pakistan. What I learned reporting this book is we're in 134 countries doing Title 50 operations. Think about that. Government wants that to be kept secret. So in all those countries, they're doing things that don't fall under the normal letter of the law. Not, yes, not under the rules of engagement of the military. But the CIA works at the President's behest. That was one thing that really blew my mind to report, to research, to understand, I talked to 42 guys who have direct access to this, who are in this world. You know, from the knuckle draggers on the ground, as they call themselves, to the lawyer at CIA, senior intelligence staff at the equivalent of a general at the CIA. Those guys explaining to me, Annie, this is how it works. And again, to your question, why does someone get to know that? And why does the government want? Why do they allow that information now to super-interesting? And I believe that has to do with a certain climate we're in right now about military might, right? In other words, what the CIA does is called tertia optio. It's the third option. You've got the first option is diplomacy. Second option is war. So if diplomacy is not working, and war is on wise, you go to the third option, which is the CIA's paramilitary. And they're in 100 in how many countries? 134. Do you? Well, if you wonder why the military budget's so big, that's what it is, folks. You've got to feed those folks. A lot of work. I mean, what happened? And you as a competitor would be fascinated by the kind of training they do, and what they do. I mean, so many of these infiltration techniques are mind-boggling. They've got halo jumping, which you know about, right? Where they have high altitude, low opening. So they jump out. They, you know, free fall down, terminal velocity. Pull the rip cord really low so they're not detected by radar. And then they meet up with a team on the ground and go do what they do. And they also have halo, which is high altitude, high opening. And that way you can fly over airspace where we're allowed and float into, let's say, a country like Iran and land, gather your team and do what you have to do. But like so much of what I report, I get information like that. And then I ask a million questions like you've asking me. And it's like, can't talk about that. That's classified. You don't, you're a journalist. So you're trying not to judge. But is it your belief that this is a good thing for America? Meaning, have the president having a third option? Well, I mean, I write in the book that that's in the prologue after I tell that story about the source with a knife. I say, I wanted to know. And that exact question like, is this a good thing? And my answer at the end after it's complex, not to be vague, but it is really complex, is also that, well, if you're going to take that poll position, you must accept rivalry, right? And also after talk, do I think it's a good thing? After talking to a lot of 20-year-old soldiers who come back from the war theater, missing a limb, or within tense PTSD, and who essentially serve as cannon fodder, I would say, my opinion, right? For the Pentagon. That's the second option, war. The 42 guys that I interviewed, you know, they're like, send me. They are professional. They are Tier 1 operators. They're green brazed. They're seals. They're dilden. They retire. They join the CIA. Yeah. So they're like professionals at what they do. And they're saying, I want, someone has to do this job. I'm doing this since the end of World War II. I want to do it. So do I think it's better? I mean, I think that that concept speaks to choice, right? Because I'm not so sure that the 20-year-olds know what they're in for. And the 40-year-olds know what they're in for. And are willing to do it. So that it will also the difference between a specialized trained individual with a very specific task, versus someone who is sort of following orders at the front of the line. Yeah. Right. I mean, and also has a lot of times I talk to these young kids who go to war. And they tell me, one fascinating detail is that they talk about movies that they see, and whether it's Saving Private Ryan or Black Hawk Down, even, right? Where the outcome is not necessarily great. But they talk about the romanticization of war and of camaraderie and of brotherhood that comes from that. And then they have their experience, and some of that does give them that sense. But not always. Whereas the operators are much more about getting the job done. That's what I was fascinated by. I mean, these guys are really clear. They're competitors. They're like top tier competitors. So they do it. They get it done. And they ask for the next job. So is the oversight when it comes to choosing whether or not this operation takes place or not? Is it... Do they have moral guidelines? Do they have ethical or moral guidelines? What they say like this is the president is requesting that this person get taken out, the chief's staff, whoever it is. Do they have to make an ethical distinction? You mean, are they like kill him nicely? Like don't make it hurt? Or do they decide? Like does this make sense? Or like what if the president is like Rosie O'Donnell? She's been talking shit, figure out. Like, you know what I'm saying? Well, I mean, that's a big issue. But what I try to write in... What I try to report in surprise, kill Vanish, is the idea that the people we take out may be our bad guys, right? One guy I write about is Che Gavara, because Che is often portrayed in the press as this amazing hero. And that he... And we... I don't know if you know, but he was killed by the Bolivian Rangers, but it was a CIA operation. And I interview the man in charge of that operation in surprise, kill Vanish. His name was Felix Rodriguez. Okay. Long-serving CIA paramilitary officer. So... But I also report why the president, to your question, wanted Che Gavara dead. You know, he was really advocating for nuclear war. And I show that. And I show that. So he's a good borrower. Yes. I mean, he spoke publicly about, you know, if we have to have an atomic war, the Cuban paraphrase, and the Cuban people will be happy to have sacrificed themselves. I mean, Che was also... Che killed anyone who betrayed him. He killed. He writes about it in his diaries as I write in the book, right? But on the morality question, who decides? I don't have that answer, but I will tell you what I did. I went with my main source, Billy Wall, who he's 89 now. And he was... He's been with the CIA for 60 years. Okay. I mean, he went... And he and I went to Cuba for him to do a halo-jum. With Che, Gavara's son. So we were a guest of the man whose father was killed by the CIA. Okay. And we had this really interesting discussion in the cigar club where Che and Castro, you know, smokes cigars and plodded the downfall of the United States. And that's what I try to give readers a sense of, the long lens of history, how time changes all things. And maybe leave with them with this idea which they can come to their own conclusions about what you asked me, if is it right or is it wrong? Because really what you might ask is it necessary, right? I mean, I could moralize right wrong, but it would just be my opinion. But when you see... I went... Billy Wall and I also traveled to Vietnam because he was supposed to kill... He was tasked to kill the top commander of the North Vietnamese Army, a guy named General Zrop. And Wall didn't kill Zrop and we had this incredibly, this terrible mission that went awry that I write about in the book in the Vietnam War. So 50 years later, Wall and I go to visit the son of General Zrop, are sitting there in Zrop's home talking about these same issues, right? And my conclusion of that, again, is not is it right or wrong, but is it necessary? I mean, we have these wars. We keep having these wars. Is it necessary? Yeah. What do you think? Well, I mean, my opinion is that the Defense Department is far too concerned with vast weapon systems of the future, which is its mission statement of its science department. And so you create what's on at the Pentagon call a self-licking ice cream cone, or the military industrial complex. And there's a lot built into that. And there's a lot to be said about that. And there's also probably some concern about other countries getting ahead of us. So you have to do what you have to do if your job is to protect the American people and keep the military strong. Yes. You just have to operate with that premise that there's a bunch of other people out there that are doing the same thing for their country and trying to take down the United States. And we got to stay ahead of the curve and make human-eating robots that can shoot missiles. Absolutely. I mean, when I was reporting the Pentagon's brain, which is about DARPA, and I was sitting there with scientists who were working on limb regeneration, right? Right? Right? Or working? Yeah. Oh, my God. They have these little salamanders. I mean, they're showing that salamanders can regenerate their limbs. And so, their idea, they're down at UC Irvine, they have this incredible lab. And they're funded by DARPA because that's where the money it comes from, right? And their idea is that humans should be able to regenerate their limbs. And, you know, 50 years out we'll be doing that. And they're working on the science for that. Well, that's the same science that allows for cloning. And so in our discussions, because that's how I try to report, is like really ask people what they think about future consequences. And they said to me, your exact question, which is, well, Annie, what if one day we wake up and we find out that China has cloned the first human or a dark horse like Saudi Arabia? You know, the American people are going to freak out and go, where the hell was DARPA? Why aren't we ahead of the curve? So it's that there's a chicken and the egg problem with that. I'm like, well, we have to stay ahead. We're on top. We want to be on top. It's kind of terrifying. I mean, everything I write about is terrifying. I'm not going to sleep. Do you sleep well? Do you have to take ambient? I'm more worried of, no, God, no. I'm more worried about coming on your show and being asked to have questions than I am about. Now, it's using you. But then I am about, I mean, this stuff is informative. It's informative and it's a longer conversation. That's why I think what you do with your podcast is awesome because people can really get into the thinking about things. They can really, and they can move away from their own preconceptions, their own biases, they're bringing into it. And they're stopping for a minute and they're going, what do I really think about that? And to really think about something you need information. Yeah. And information can be boring unless it's interestingly presented through conversation, through, you know, uncomfortable conversation. Well, also uncompromised conversation where you don't have a certain time period that you have to smush something into, like a four minute segment on CNN or something. I mean, that's impossible. Well, it's so difficult. I see people have these conversations about books or something that are trying to complex, very nuanced subject that they're trying to discuss. And, you know, there's another person on the other side. Like, that's not true. And they shout over each other and like, boy, just the pressure. The people have to understand that people do understand, but you have to reiterate it and it has to be kind of drilled in your head. You're, when you're pressuring someone and you're yelling back and forth, you're not even going to get a good version of whatever this person's argument is. Like, you should have the best version. I want, like, if I'm going to have a disagreement with someone, I want the best version of their point. And I want them to get it out. With no pressure, I want to help them get it out. I'd like to reiterate it with them. I like to give them plenty of time. I want to know how you think. I want to know what you're thinking about. I would love to talk to these guys. I would love to, but the thing is like, they can't tell you a lot of this. There's a mean for national security reasons. There's a lot of reasons. I'm sure if they want to keep their job and stay alive, they have to, they have to shut the fuck up. They can't just talk about what they do and how they do it and decisions that maybe they may, they were uncomfortable. They killed somebody that didn't think maybe needed to die. Yeah. But that's the reporter's job or at least my job. So in other words, okay, so I go to visit Billy Wallard as home. I heard stories about he's this legendary operator, right? And he's also what's called a singleton. So he works alone. And when I was at- That's the column of singleton, right? Which is like he's got one guy giving him orders. And he's out there with him. Oh my God. Billy Wallard is, right? I mean, can we back up for something? I'm going to give you this review of him. Okay, so here's this guy. He's in Vietnam. And he's part of what was called Mac V-Sauch, right? And they're doing cross-border missions until now. And it's so dangerous. It's like, it's a CIA program that SAWG stands for Studies and Observation's Group. I mean, it's supposed to sound like a bunch of guys in Ivy League tower with bowties, right? But the guy's on the ground called it suicide on the ground. That's how dangerous it was. Jesus. A hundred percent of the people had casualties, right? Billy Wallard has nine Purple Hearts from the working day. Nine. Okay. I mean, they get shot. They bandaged themselves up there. You know, they're up in an aircraft because they're limping instead of on the ground, you know, viewing the missions. The war ends. Everybody's furious with the government, with the military. There's no room for special operators. I mean, everything, it's called the Time of Troubles by them. Billy Wallard is working in the post office. And he gets this knock, you know, and it's like he's back in the CIA now in 1977. So he was out for a while? He was out. It was over. I mean, he was, you know, it was over. And he was working in the post office. He was working in the post office. He was working in the post office. I mean, but he said the most incredible thing to me because he said I and he doesn't ever talk about fear. And he said there's only one time my whole life I've ever been afraid and that was in the post office. Wow. Because he was getting back into it. Probably it like recycled his mind and put himself in a place. I'm just a civilian now. And he said, I'm going to wind up being one of those old guys drinking beer at the end of talking about the war. Right? And instead he gets called up by the CIA and they send him to Libya in 1977. And his cover is that he's training Khadafi's paramilitary guys in paramilitary tactics. I mean that's the beginning of his career. And it goes on all the way until we were in Cuba I think was actually some kind of a mission because it was like what are we doing here in Cuba doing infiltration and exfiltration techniques? Allegedly with Jegovara's son. But in any event, you know, when I went to visit Billy Wall the first time. He's got this, you know, he's got certificates and awards and medals all over the walls of his home. But there's one framed item that I'm looking at and it's a knife and there's a seal from the CIA and it says, in appreciation to the assassin. And I said, Billy tell me about that and he said, you know, I can't talk about that. So I, you know, stayed with them for two years. I mean, stayed, we conversed, we traveled, interviewed him, you know, hundreds of hours. And I kept asking him about that award and he kept saying, you know, I can't talk about that. But as I write in the book, he couldn't talk about it, but others did. So that's how a reporter works. You get introduced to enough of his friends and enough of the others who are involved. You make sure they're a legitimate source and you begin to find out what he can't talk about. And that's what I report in the book. And that is very explosive because President Bush right after 9-11 created what was called a stalker team. And ironically, you know, people have this idea that we've been, you know, sending a team of assassins around the world in NATO partner countries. And that what I learned had never happened until right after 11 with the stalker team, 12 men and actually one or two women, the femme fatale, and they would go after bad guys. And they adopted the term from the Reagan era. So it was called preemptive neutralization. Who was, who were the women? There's always one woman on the team. That's what I was told by the guy who was in charge of the stalker team. And was a well, I mean, he gave me this great example. I don't report in the book, but I'll tell you right? He said, so women have a different presentation. And this like he told me a story of a woman sitting on a bench, you know, embracing a man, right? And no one thought anything of it. And it allowed her to spy on someone in a manner that would, a man would, it would have drawn attention. And then the stalker team could go. So what their job would be is to conduct surveillance of a target. And they call it making book. They have to make book on that individual. So they know exactly where the guy is. And they're waiting on the president's orders, whether or not they should take action. And you know, that's where the that's where the information stops, right? I say, well, then what happens? Well, it's all we can say, Annie, that must be so exciting. Like to live like that, like all cloak and dagger, it's got to be so exciting. Like it's, I would take that over a cubicle every day of the week. I really would. When you might get killed, I might die in that damn cubicle too. I think it's why so many of these operators stay in it long term. Yeah. Did you ever see the television show the show time show with the hell's it called with the Fox that show called that the homeland? Yes. Yes. Well, that's like the whole premise. Like she's completely addicted to being in that world. Adrenaline. I mean, that's what that is. Imagine jumping out of an aircraft landing in, you know, behind enemy lines. And then your work begins. And then you have to get out. That's why surprise kill vanish. I mean, you got to surprise your way in, kill them, and then get out. And if you're getting out, they frame your knife and give you a plaque. Jamie, I'm going to get you a knife. It's the appreciation of the assassins. You're a killer. It's just such a crazy way to live your life. But, you know, I'll take that over a boring life. I would take that over a boring like every day of the week. Well, it's like the pink Floyd line, you know, living life of quiet desperation. I mean, that just terrifies. Well, that's the rose quote that most men live lives of quiet desperation. It's one of my favorite quotes ever because it's true. And I've been that guy. You just you're just in this world where you just can't wait to just run away. And how do people get stuck there? How do you think they get stuck there? Bills. Bills like financial. Yeah, bills and commitment. You have an apartment you have to pay for. You have a car you least. You have a wife that you have to feed. You have a child. You have to raise. You have to, you have your mortgage. You have this. You have you that. And that's where it all comes from. Where do you think opportunity plays into that? Well, the opportunity takes place usually when you're young and you don't have any responsibility. That's when you have your options. Well, your options are severely limited. The more you gather responsibilities. Like if I had as a 51 year old father of three married man pays taxes has a house and a mortgage and a business and all that jazz. If I had a quit everything now and struggled the way I struggled as a stand up comedian, it would never work. But the only way I could be this person now is if I took that chance when I was 21 when I was dead broke and had my cars repossessed and all that stuff, that's the only way you you ever get where you want to go. You have to you have to take a path. It's dangerous. And most people want to take the safe path. The safe path leaves you stuck in quiet desperation almost every time it's hell. It's hell. You're selling insurance or some other shit that you care zero about. But can people just make that change? I mean, you have to plan it out. The way you can change is you have to put aside enough money to give yourself a window. And then you have to have a plan. And you have to spend all your waking hours outside of whatever shit job you do, planning your escape. And you have to come to the realization very clearly that you fucked up and you got yourself stuck. So whatever you're doing, you have to do it like your life depends on it. And whether it is you're trying to be an author and you're going to, you're going to, if you're going to try to be an author and you're working eight hours a day plus commuting plus family responsibilities or whatever else you have. Whatever time that you have, you have to. You're going to, if you're going to try to be an author and you're working eight hours a day, plus commuting, plus family responsibilities, or whatever else you have, whatever time that you have, you have to attack like you're trying to save the world. You're trying to save your life. You don't want to drown that one and a half hours a day that you have to write, God damn, you better be caffeinated and motivated. You got to go. You got to get after it. And you got to have discipline. That's most people don't have those things. Most people don't understand what it's like to really go for something. And to know that the consequences of not doing that are horrific. Then you're desperate and you're quiet. But I do think there is something to be said for fate and circumstance. Sure. And I always write, I mean, people in these military and environments that I write about and in these intelligence world environments, fate and circumstance plays a big part because they too can even get complacent. But when your life is on the line, a lot of times they have these experiences where they're like, I must change. And that's what I find really interesting in people. Sure. desperation. Yeah. I think fate and circumstance are giant. Fortune is giant. There's no question about it. Some children get shot and drive by us. You know, that's just horrible, horrible luck and unfortunate circumstance. There's a lot of it is fortune and fate. How about people getting lost? Right? I'll tell you. So the book that I told you I wrote on the psychics phenomenon. What do you believe about that? Again, I'm neutral. Right? You're not. Tell me. I want to hear what you believe. I believe there's a lot of people that are full shit. Absolutely. I'm not. All people that are talking about being psychic or full shit. But I do think that there is a strange connection that we have with each other that's intangible. And I think that some people have better connections than others. Just like some people are more intelligent. Like we were talking before the podcast about Elon Musk. And it's painfully aware when you talked to him what a champ you are. He's so fucking smart. And his brain is, it's just, it's built different. Just like some people have defective hearts. Some people have a heart like Lance Armstrong. It's incredible huge and anomaly. Some people have giant hands. He has a big heart, literally. Yes, he has literally. And they don't know whether or not that's from training or steroids and EPO or whether or not something he was born with. They really don't know. But yeah, he has an unusually sized heart. It's usually large. But what was my point? Fate, circumstance, getting lost. Oh, psychics. Psychics. That's what it is. I don't, I think that most of the people that can tell you the future are full of shit. Most of the people that are, I think people get feelings. I think sometimes you think about someone they call you. And I don't know what that is. I don't know if that's just complete fortune. Like how many times you think about a person when they don't call you? That's the argument against it. But how many times you think about that person they don't call you, but they're thinking about you as well? How many, I mean, how often is that with star-crossed lovers? They find each other years later and they tell each other they've been thinking about each other all the time. They can't believe it. That's, and when you get that text from someone, maybe that's just someone prone to action. But maybe there is some sort of a connection. Some sort of quantum entanglement between you and someone you spend time with or shared energy with. It's possible. It's possible. But the problem is you have these mediums and psychics and those people are just assholes. And I have a friend, his name is Banachak, and he runs a Las Vegas mentalist show where he shows you how he does these tricks. But he'll tell you absolutely these are, he's been on the podcast, a brilliant, brilliant man. But he'll tell you these are tricks. I'm showing you how I do this. I mean, I'm going to tell you this trick. I'm not going to give you the, how I do it. But I'm going to tell you while I'm doing it, this is a trick. But he's pulling all this information out of people about their past, their childhood. He's guessing people's ages. He's guessing where they grew up. And it's all sneaky shit. You know, it's the way they do it's a skill as much as anything. And so when you see these people that are channelers or psychics, they're telling you about someone in your past, they're trying to contact you. They're con artists, almost exclusively. I mean, maybe there's like one lady in Tibet that has a broken gene and she could tune into the next dimension and pull some extracts of information from it. But in my experience, the vast majority of those people that I've talked to that claimed to have psychic ability were also at least partially full of shit. They had weird ego problems that were glaring that they didn't notice. I could see it that this is a gross way to behave and they don't see it. They're interpersonal relationships. The way they communicate with people was like an agent, like a fake Hollywood person or something. There's something bullshitty about them. And people who lie a lot, I think if you lie a lot, it's very difficult for you to tell what a lie is. Oh, that's interesting. Yeah, I think you lose your connection. I think when you bullshit, I think you also bullshit yourself. I don't think these psychics are 100% honest, even with themselves. I don't think there's like, I'm going to fuck this lady over. She thinks she's going to talk to her husband, ammo, tell her some nonsense, take her money. I think some of them actually believe they're getting information. My grandmother used to believe that. My grandmother was a very eccentric lady and an old Sicilian lady. And she would tell you about the, like, old Italian ladies all want to play the lottery. They all have numbers. And she was playing the numbers. It wasn't even the lottery. It was like the organized crime numbers racket. And she would always say, I was going to pick this number and I just add up the last minute I changed the number. Wouldn't you know what the first one came in and she was so mad. But it was always that, that I had a dream of this and I had a vision of that. And it was all visions and dreams and psychics. But everything worked out horribly for her. It always did. Like if you were really psychic, you would have better instincts. Like this is just this inclination that people have that there's something special about their perceptions. And that they're psychic. And it's always these really wacky people that believe their psychics in my experience. Which, I mean, it's, I think you're talking also about what some scientists would call the self-fulfilling prophecy. And you know that if you believe this, things happen, manifest themselves and you can convince yourself that you believe this. But for me, I'm super interested in people who really believe in psychics. Right? Like that's what, and the military, for example. And you know, the most. You're talking to Ed Danes. You're talking to those guys, the remote viewing guys. I talked to a lot of the scientists who taught the remote viewing. And I talked to a number of remote viewers and for the book. What's interesting of all was the astronaut, Ed Mitchell. Right? And he was so, so I'm interested in like the psychology behind what are you looking for in that. And I saw that I was doing some research in an archive and I came across a photo of what turned out to be Ed Mitchell on the moon reading a piece of paper. Okay. It's this extraordinary image because you're like, wait a minute, he's on the moon and he's reading a document. What is that document? I found out the document was a map of the moon. Okay. Mitchell got lost on the moon and literally pulled a map out of like, okay, I mean, he was trying to get to a certain crater. And they had a very limited amount of time. There it is right there. Right? Okay, there he is. Wow. I mean, think about that. It's like the most advanced technology of the time. Why didn't we go with the camera tell him where to go? Different story. Different picture. Hey, buddy. Hey, bro. Let's just follow our footprints where the only one's walking. What are you stupid? Turn around. Look at the ground. See those things? That's where you walked. Let's go that way. Jesus Christ. I'd be so mad at him. I'm like, bro, you pulling out a map? Who wrote that map? Who's, who's, no one's even been here? Come on, man. They had little maps folded up in their pockets in case they got lost. They were on the way to this crater. And in that crater, they were going to find allegedly rocks that were going to solve the mystery of the moon's creation, the origin story. They had like all this pressure. They couldn't find it. The heart rates up the guys of Houston are like, you got to turn back. Your heart rate's going crazy. And think about it. Mitchell tells me I went to interview him at his house when I think it was his last interview before he died. And he said there we had gotten 240,000 miles to only to get lost. They missed the crater by like, you know, 900 feet or something. Really? So he never got to the crew. Never got to it. He was devastated. Back from the moon, he has this, what he told me was a psychic change, right? He, his, his consciousness flipped. And he became convinced that psychic powers were real. And that is really the beginning of his foray. I mean, Mitchell became a huge proponent of psychic warfare of, you know, the, the, the idea behind what you're talking about, that we spoke of as being sort of charlatanism. And he dedicated the rest of his life to it. And he was really lucky. But he had some wacky beliefs. He had some wacky beliefs about aliens as well. And I think that comes to weird, definitely in contact with aliens. And that comes from like, he was so vilified by the scientists and by the astronauts and by the kind of military men. Because this was just, he told me the story of when they were in quarantine after they came back from the moon, right? He and Shepherd were sitting there, you know, eating breakfast, waiting in Shepherd, the stories, a story broke that Mitchell had done some ESP experiments on the way back from the moon. And Shepherd said to him like, look at this nonsense, the newspapers will do anything to sell, make a buck. And Mitchell said, I did that. I actually did that. And what experiments? He, he was doing ESP experiments on the way back from the moon. He had a psychic in Chicago, a Swedish psychic, that he was sending messages to like, what's he got? It was an old Swedish man, right? I don't know if the name goes off, right? But I hear a Swedish psychic. Right, yeah. I get into my psychic. Can't wait to take my clothes off. Yeah. No, I'll introduce you to Olaf, right? Okay. I saw the movie Frozen. I didn't see that one. Olaf's the little snowman. I don't know. You got younger kids. Yeah. I missed that one. My older. Anyway, sorry. So, Ed Mitchell was talking to this hot chick in, no. The hot old man in, and, and, and, and the story broke because the, the Swedish psychic could not resist telling, you know, leaking to the press that he had done these experiments. What experiments were there? Well, psychics train on these little cards called zener cards, right? So like, you have us different symbols on them and, you know, one, one person, that's how they decide whether or not they're being psychic. Like, there would be a, a veil between us and I would say, what are you seeing, right? And you would call it out. So it's like a control system. And Mitchell had these items with him on the way to the moon and did these experiments to try to see whether you could have a psychic connection with someone back on Earth. Hmm. I mean, he, that was, you know. Did it work? Well, no. And he took notes and he showed me the notes. It was so wild to be at his house and Florida and he pulls out this old spiral notebook with like water stains on it that actually went to the moon. Hmm. I was like, wow, this is really something else. I mean, it was one of those moments in time where you're just like, I don't know. There was a feel, there was a feeling of sadness around all of it with Ed Mitchell sitting there in his, you know, his chair and talking to me about what it was like to be in a poll last or not on the walls. I'm not with a lot of these sources with like incredible amounts of awards on the walls. But what does that mean after time passes? Right. So his experiments didn't work, but he still believed in psychic powers. Yes. I mean, and that's, and he, okay. So what was that? He was ridiculed, you know, and he had such a tough time with it. And so the people who propped him up and the people who gave him a lot of encouragement had sort of more radical ideas as he grew older. And I think they, you know, conspiracy theorists who really kind of used him because he was in Apollo astronauts. So he was so much more famous than any of them would ever be. And they really took advantage of him, I think. So you think they manipulated him with information and tried to get him more and more enthusiastic about their, I mean, it's speculation on my part, but you kind of go where the love is, right? And I think that's an older guy too. And I'd seen some interviews with him as he was getting older and older and he seemed to be having some difficulties thinking about things clearly. And people take advantage of that. Yeah, he was really obsessed with extraterrestrial life. It was really interesting because didn't he claim that he had seen something while he was up in space? I think people helped him make that claim. That was my understanding of it of reporting it. I mean, I stayed away from some of the crazier speculative things about him because what I was really interested in when I was writing that book was how his authority and power allowed the program to get funding, right? Because so much of this is, it's like who's funding this stuff and why? And it really does come down to authority, which is always a narrative that I find fascinating, right? How do people get the authority to say go on these programs? Sure. We should do that. I mean, the question you asked of like, who's in charge, right? And in all of this, what I learned more than anything is that the office of the president has a lot more power than I think any of us are aware. Oh, I'm sure. What did you find anything about Ed Mitchell? Did he say anything about, see if he said anything about seeing, a UFO or seeing extraterrestrial life? But the problem is if he believes that boy, you know, if he was talked into saying that, you got to wonder about a lot of the other things that he said as well. The other thing is, as these guys get older, that becomes their career. The career becomes discussing their experiences and the more outrageous those experiences are, the better the career is. It's absolutely true. It changed their stories. Yeah. But once changed his story. His story when he just got back from the moon, excuse me, when he just got back from the moon, his story was that they couldn't see any stars. But then as he got older, he wrote in depth in his book, and I think it was in the 90s, you know, decades later, how vivid the stars were and how incredible it was out there with no atmosphere. But there's a press conference when he came back from the moon right after the Apollo 11 moon launch, he was talking about he couldn't see any stars. So everybody's like, well, what is it? They get lost. Their older has been so many years since whatever they did when they were working with NASA. And really, it becomes, that's their focal point of attention. Where they get their attention from and where they make their career is from their attention. And so they start telling these inconsistent stories. I mean, one of the great perils of, you know, living on your laurels is exactly that. And it's why, I mean, like a guy like Billy Waugh, I was so intrigued by that he was constantly reinventing his own role within the CIA as he talked to me about it, length, because he never wanted to just become one of those has been right. So his cover later became just another old man, which is like super interesting. He was in Sudan in the 90s and he actually took the first reconnaissance photographs of Osama bin Laden before bin Laden was on anybody's radar except for the CIA's. And his, I mean, how do you run around Sudan, which is a country made up of like really tall black dinka tribesmen. If you're a five foot eight old white guy who's 72, you know, supposed to get reconnaissance photographs of bin Laden, right? What do you do? Where golf shirts? Yeah, you know, I have a photograph of him. He wore like, you know, those socks like that go all the way up to your mid-gen. Oh, just like a dark. Yeah. Yes. And little shorts and a sweat band over his head. And he said, my cover was that I was an old man on a fitness craze. And there he is running around Sudan. I mean, there's no sidewalks, right? And he's just jogging away. And he said bin Laden's dogs used to come after him. And so he would have to run with a lead pipe. Wow. And he whacked the dogs on the nose and he said they stopped coming after me. Wow. Jesus. I can't find any evidence that he says that he saw aliens, but there's, I'm seeing different reports that based off of his conversations with lots of different people, he believes that aliens at some point visited earth and that it's being covered up. Don't, don't, don't. I mean, that's an easy narrative. Troy. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, how much they tell Ed Mitchell, they say, hey, thanks for going on the moon. Well, look, one of the most interesting things about reporting this is that you find out these people that you think have access to all the information. Right. Only know their piece of the pie. How much do they trump nose? Do you think they keep stuff from him? Because I would say like he's kind of a loose cannon. I wouldn't tell him about the alien. I mean, I mean, I, I, I, I often wonder that like can the president of the country president be like, I demand to know about them. Yeah. And then can they say no sir or they say, as I write in one of my other books, it's like, you don't want to know about that because you don't want to have to lie. Well, that's nonsense. I definitely want to know. I would want to know. That would be the only reason to become president. Right. You have to figure out why you have to lie. Like whether or not if you have to lie makes sense to you, right? Like there's some things that you know that were done like the Tuskegee syphilis experiment where you go, what the fuck are you doing? Like no, you can't do that. But then there's some things you go, oh, I see why you had to do that. Yes. You know, so it would have to be like, which one of those things is it? Is it one of those things where it makes sense where you had to go and assassinate someone who was plotting some sort of a nuclear attack on Chicago? Or is it some nefarious plot to turn down syndrome children into surgically constructed fake aliens and crashed them into the earth? And the curiosity factor would be outrageous. I mean, can you imagine being the president and saying, I want to know about JFK and they're like, sir, you don't want to know. Right. Then you would go, well, of course I want to know. Now I really want to know. I mean, that happens to me as a reporter all the time when I can't talk about that. That just becomes the obsession. It's like, I don't know. Yeah, that's the first thing I'd want to know. I'd almost run for president to learn about aliens and like, come on, bro. Then if I found out there were nothing, I'd be like, well, fuck this job. I quit. I don't want to run the world. I just want to find out about the aliens. And then there's all these things that you find out. Jamie and I were talking about that before. It's like, you know, Jamie was obsessed. Well, he's obsessed with Chicago. I mean, I know. I know. I know. I'll rather Columbus and we were talking about Nazis, right? Yeah. I mean, I wrote a book about Operation Paperclip and my God talk about a rabbit's hole. That's a rabbit hole. That's a rabbit hole. People that don't know what we're talking about. Operation Paperclip was when, after World War II, the United States gathered up a ton of scientists from Nazi Germany, brought them over to America and even Werner von Braun. They had Werner von Braun run NASA. He was a Nazi, like a hundred percent Nazi. Good friends with Hitler are type Nazi. Yes. He ran a Berlin rocket factory where they hung the five slowest Jews. They would hang them. They would hang them out front. So everybody would know, like, this is what happens when you work slow. Well, hang you. I mean, the Simon Wiesenthal Center said that if Werner von Braun was alive today, they would prosecute him for crimes against humanity. Yes, they would. And that was the head of NASA. That was the head of NASA. That was the guy who got us to the moon. That was the big cheese guy. Yeah. So we were willing to put a lot of really dark things aside in order to gather out the best scientists. So the Soviet Union couldn't get them all. And they got a few of them as well. But we got how many? More than a thousand, right? Allegedly 1400. But I would not be surprised if, you know, the story changes and there were more, right? But that goes back to our discussion earlier about being in pole position. I mean, that's why we grab those Nazis. We were like, if we don't get them, the Russians will. I get it. And, you know, and I'm sure the Nazis could say, I didn't want to do it. They made me. I'm a nice person. I love Jews. You know? Well, that was part of the mythology. It was like, we got the good Germans. We got the top Germans. And who do you think the top Germans were? They were coveted by Hitler, Hitler, Goring, you know? I mean, these guys were, right. I mean, there were guys that we grabbed out of the docks at Nernberg literally to come be part of our program, you know? One of these guys. Well, it's smart. You're an asset, right? I mean, that's what Genghis Khan used to do. He'd take warlords from the other side and capture them and go listen. Come over here, bro. Come on. I'm from me. I'm the man. I mean, you know, ideology aside, I'm super smart and I want that to be known. That's kind of it. That's the competitor, right? I mean, you cannot be the best rocket designer in the world and not want those talents, you know, demonstrated. That's the Horn of On Brown story. That's the story of all of them. And that was so shocking writing that book because it's a, it's like, wow, you know, huge amounts of talent. But how far will the competitor go to see their baby come to fruition? What are they willing to put us aside? Yeah. Did you pay any attention to the other places where Nazis went when they escaped Germany, like Argentina in particular? You ever seen any of that stuff? Oh, they have entire German towns down in Argentina. Right. They do October fest down there. They wear leader hosen. They drink out of steins. It's crazy. They speak German and you're like, what the fuck is this? Like my friend Tim Kennedy went down there and he said he was literally talking to people, interviewing people and they had photos of SS soldiers on their wall and they would talk about how grandfather was a hero and like, like you are, you're the descendants of escaped Nazis and they put together a town down there. I mean, the way the Nazis were able to flee is, I can't read enough of that. I mean, that's what Jamie and I were talking about. It's like, oh my God. And it's endless. I mean, there's so, you know, the ones that we, there was a famous guy that we got. He was the surgeon general of the third Reich. I mean, think about that, okay. Dr. Walter Shriver. I mean, he was such a bad dude. He was in charge of the vaccine program. I mean, you just put those words together and your mind goes really dark, right? But we wanted him because he was an expert in vaccines and we brought him to the United States. He was the only Nazi I found of the ones the paper clip scientist who came here that was actually out it, right? He was out it as an Nazi and that's because one of the investigators at the Nernberg Trials recognized him. Oh, Jesus. And he's the only one we got out of here and guess where he went. Our team. Our team lived out the rest of his life there. The show was called Finding Hitler. They were trying to find evidence that Hitler somehow escaped. He's really a bullshit premise of the show. But what was interesting is that there were thousands and thousands of Nazis that made it to Argentina and set up shop throughout South America. There's a lot of Germans down there. It's kind of weird. If you can imagine me on book tour of like the kind of questions I get because we're talking right? Having written books about Area 51, Nazis, right? Assassin's Army show a lot. Just last night I was giving a signing and people are like, is Hitler really dead? Oh, I mean, that right? Well, if he was alive, he'd be the oldest man alive. Imagine he was probably like, how old was he during the World War II? He had to be in his 40s, right? He'd be hundreds. I mean, you know what I mean? Or they say, he cloned himself. He'd be hundreds 60 years old. Yeah, 120 now. That's what he'd be. Oh, Jesus. Jamie knows. That's an old man. I mean, there's been 120 year old people, but it's fucking pretty rare. Yeah. So Operation Paperclip was not even publicly acknowledged until what was it like the 90s? When did it become public? I think it was through the Freedom of Information Act. It was this very intrepid journalist named Linda Hunt who shot out the window. Yeah. But she broke the story. That's what's amazing. As a journalist, you're always writing on the shoulders of those before you. And she had it really hard because she did a Freedom of Information Act request, got all these documents that no one had ever seen. And then the government sent her a bill for $125,000. And she had to spend a lot of time. This is what I understand. I never interviewed her, but for Xeroxing fees. What? I just love that detail because it's like, it's such a covert way of getting someone to stop. It's like, OK, here's the information we had to give it to you, but now here's your bill. Imagine if the government's coming down on you for $125,000. Yeah, see, that would make me want to call a bunch of rich people and go, hey, let's all just donate $1,000 to this lady. And it's a different world now. You could do that. You could do a GoFundMe campaign. Oh, 100%. My God, in the 80s and the 90s, you were just like out on a limb. Yeah, they would crush you. Financial. We actually had this very same discussion yesterday with my friend Phil Demers who's being sued by Marine Land. And because of, he was a walrus trainer and trained orcas and he's showing all horrific, it wasn't blackfish that's C-World, but C-World is actually the way he says it's a day in the park compared to Marine Land. Marine Land's horrific place in Canada. And anyway, they have been trying to squash him with legal beasts by dragging out his, the legal fees by dragging out his case, but we set up GoFundMe's and all his legal bills get paid for from people that want him to win the good fight. And this is a, this is an option today that wasn't available to Linda when she was exposing this $25,000. Do you ask holes? Like she should sue them for misappropriation of funds. Like does it cost you really $125,000 to print those things out of it does? You guys should be in jail. That's like with like those $10,000 hammers that they have in the Pentagon. Yeah. So she gets all this information and does the government immediately acknowledge that they imported these Nazis? No. She wrote the first book and it was just stunning and, you know, it, late 80s, early 90s. Okay. And, you know, then more gets revealed because they gave her a certain amount. I mean, I filed a bunch of foyer's, there was releases. I went to Germany. For you, meaning free to free. Free to free. Information act. Yes. Then I went to Germany and looked in their archives with like a fellow, a German PhD who had, you know, real access to stuff and was able to translate for me while we were there looking at this stuff. I interviewed a lot of grandchildren of Nazis and children of Nazis. And you know, I mean, this one extraordinary, oh my God, there's a guy I told you about Shriver, right? Mm hmm. I'm on the narrative level. Humans acting. I'm so interested in rivalry and competition, right? There's a concept because this is what America does to be the best and also as humans, right? Because people are like that. They're built like that. So the Nazis had rivals amongst themselves and Shriver's rival was Dr. Blum, who was in charge of the biological weapons program for Hitler. Okay. And Blum had a son and Blum was prosecuted at Nuremberg. You can see a picture of him with a big dueling scar, you know, he was a bad dude. He was a dueling scar? Do you like a sword? Sword fighting. It was like among the Nazis, they would, they would duel with one another when they were younger students. And then they would pack the wound with horse hair to make it even more pronounced because it looked ferocious. Really? Pull up, Jamie, pull up. I got a couple of witches. What's his name? Well, you can pull up Dr. Blum, B-O-L-M-E. But also, yeah. And also, you can pull up Kurt Debus, who was the director of our JFK Center. He was part, he was NASA's... Yeah, right. And also you can pull if you put Kurt Debus who was the director of our JFK Center. He was part. He was NASA's Von Brown's number two. He had a huge dueling scarring yet when you know he look at there. He is right there Knowing what we know now. It's like come on that you're trying to tell me that guy's not a hardcore Nazi So those guys had dueling scars on their faces. Yeah, you see him. How often did they duel? Well, when they were called to the death no, no, no, no, no, it was like on guard, you know, and then they would fencing fencing fencing Oh, this guy had it too. Yeah, how did they not get poked in the eyes? Oh I guess that was the gentleman's rules. How do you fuck listen? You go on for the cheek you hit the eye like that's Happens all the time. I mean there must have cut a lot of eyeballs out I haven't seen any photographs of missing eyeballs, but there's a lot right on the cheek So maybe that was the whole point. It was actually just a bit for show. Oh Oh, right But but it was a badger vaudevan. Yeah, there's more and But I also they all had on their face. Yeah, it's all the same spot doing scars. Yeah So imagine like wanted to have these scars That was a Jesus Christ. Oh, they had goggles on. Oh, there you go. That's how they didn't take out the academic fencing It says academic fencing. So what they were essentially doing they were having Fencing matches with real swords not with ones with tips Okay, wow and cutting their faces up fuck man. Oh Jesus look at this guy's face yikes Wow doing cults cults that is crazy so when you consider like that people people did not know about that and then you've got these Germans walking around America as part of our space program and our science programs and oh these are the good Germans I mean now you really have to say to yourself come on go around Right in big ass. Yeah, scars in their face. Absolutely. Oh That's dark magic fight club. Yeah, right? Oh gee super og Yeah, God it's crazy Wow, so I go to interview Doc sometimes you as a journalist you can get amazing information from these guys. Oh my god. They're sliced up That's your pure pea martial arts. Yeah Well, I mean that is a martial art Mean it's an art of war really a sword fighting is a martial art. I mean many martial arts have weapons Sorry, so you go to interviews people so To piece together the story, right? I can't tell you others can right sometime in the to find out more about the Nazis I went to Germany and sought out some children of these top top Nazis To see if maybe they didn't have journals or anything they might share with me and one of them was Dr. Blum His son I tracked down. I found him and he said yes, you may come visit me It was such a remarkable journey was like he lived in the black forest That's like a taxi through the mountains up over the hill down through the valley You know into a courtyard behind a church to Dr. Blum's house So he was the junior to his father who was this horrific Nazi I mean a top Nazi had favor of the fear or war what was called the golden party badge right Hitler gave out these little buttons Blums was I believe number six so that's how favored he was and his son Dr. Heartblum whereas the father was in charge of the biological weapons program so his plan was to you know murder people with Biological weapons from nature right the son had been a medical doctor But had left the profession to cure people with flowers it's called Bach flower therapy So he was this very interesting Individual who had never given an interview before and he agreed to let me come to him So I go on that journey. I go to his house And he was remarkable. I mean he was so interesting talk about the sins of the father, you know I mean my god what he what he had what he had as a burden Right and he and I asked him to tell me everything he could about his father and he did and then he asked me to tell me what I knew about His father I had information from the German archives about his father that he did not have What kind of stuff like that his father had given something I just come from this archive and found these documents Dr. Blum ordered That 6,000 to burglar Jews be given Sonder behind link. That's the German word. What does that mean? Special treatment? There's a euphemism for you. That was kill those 6,000 to burglar Jews when you say to burglar is that people with tuberculosis? They were suffering from tuberculosis and He doctor Blum worked closely with himler And they just decided to kill them and you know sitting there talking to this man telling him about his father at his request Was remarkable and then he's telling me what he knows and then as I'm getting ready to leave he says to me I Like you to have these and he takes down from his incredible bookshelf He himself had written eight books right and he takes down these books and he hands them to me and they're in these wrappers and I can see that they have Nernberg Nomenclature on them and what they are is there his father's documents from his Nernberg trial and he and I'm like I Can't take these I thought he meant take them back to my hotel room Look at them and then you know bring them back the next morning when we were doing the next interview and he said no No, no, no, I want you to have them and I was like I can't have them and he said I don't want them and you should have them And he gave them to me so I had this stack so I was like on my trip home It was so perplexing because I threw out all of my clothes I was like screw the clothes. I mean I just carry I travel with the carry on back right So I in my carry on back all I have is this Nazi paraphernalia In right in Germany that is Dr. Blum's The deputy surgeon general of the third Reichs Documents from Nernberg covered with swastikas. Oh my god. I mean he was acquitted at Nernberg based on all these documents okay and by the way based on human experiments and I'm at the airport and I realize suddenly oh my god swastikas like this is illegal if they go through my bag. I'm going to be arrested I'm caring. I mean I'm carrying these in Cindy right? Do you have any copies of your book on you? So you're in generalist Oh, yeah, no no no. I was just like holding my breath. I was at least one Joe I was sweating almost as hard as I was sweating at the beginning of this interview, right? I think you said it harder. I Went because you know I was like wow I went through no problem got home I have them. I often check anything. Nope. I didn't say boo. Look you didn't go through Israel Well, you know what it's not the swastikas not out there, but it is in Germany You may not have any Nazi paraphernalia whatsoever in fact my paper clip book which has a swastika on it Have to be redesigned the cover for the German publication And it just has like broken up images of the Nazis because you cannot reproduce that image in Germany It's I mean I'm not prose swastika, but it's so strange that we've given so much power to this Design that you can't even see it it used to be there's a there's a temple out here that I think is Believe it's a Hindu temple and it was a part of Hinduism that this swastika predates World War two it predates the Nazis predates there they're sort of reclaiming of it and this Building that was built out here in the 19 I think was built in the 1920s has swastikas on it. There's a big plaque explaining why they're swastikas on it I know they haven't had a different angle. Mm-hmm. Yeah, but I mean talk about branding right? I mean my god that was and the Nazis were You know kings of that. I mean they were holy that the mustache Like I killed that mustache There's not another thing like that that he didn't kill the dueling scar right that could come back Do you think no not after your show? What do you have four million viewers? Probably right but people don't think about it that way they don't think about the dueling scars being a Nazi thing No, no, that's what I find it remarkable Right they really don't but the Nazis did the Nazis did and then you look there's an amazing photograph of JFK Linden Johnson Kurt Davis sitting at you know for a launch a moon launch and there's Davis with his huge dueling scar and I'm like and their position was oh, he's one of the good Germans well That culture was a culture of ruthlessness. I mean it was even the good ones there is yes Good job Jamie look at that. Can you believe that? scar in his face They still give out an award by the way that's called the Kurt debu sword And I rang them up and said like why are you guys giving out this award? He was a hardcore Nazi What are they say they were like they've hemmed and hawed and I finally said well It least tell me what you say to people who asked that question, you know they said well no one's ever asked us that question before Annie Well, they will now Jesus Oh It's Well when you really stop and think about the horrific nature of what the Nazis did I mean how Inhuman it was how how crazy it was like that had to permeate the entire culture There is no good Nazis there was not one even one of them that was looped into that had to be responsible for some awful Shit, I mean Einstein said it the best when he said you you know you could have left like people who could have left should have left Yeah, well, do you know the story of Fritz Haber right the guy? Yes, I mean he wound up having to flee and He's the guy who created Zyklon gas and he's you know he created a Zyklon a which had Smell built into it so that would warn you when you were using this pesticide And then the Nazis turned it in a Zyklon B where they removed that element that added the smell and just this odorless horrific poisonous gas that they used to gas the Jews and He was a Jew. I mean I you know then when you think about he became he was no longer useful to them because they've figured out He really was a Jew. Yeah. Well once World War II came around So he was a part of World War one when they first started using gas and he was there's a great radio lab podcast about it I think it's called the bad show Let anyway what essentially it says is that he was Winning he was up for the Nobel Prize at the same time he was wanted for crimes against humanity Because he was up for the Nobel Prize for creating the Haber method of extracting nitrogen from the atmosphere Which was used for fertilizer? Which to this day they say 50% of the nitrogen in human bodies was created by the Haber method So what you get from food from vegetables like that nitrogen 50% of it at least is coming from this guy's method Who was a scientist who was a Jew who was working in Germany before became Nazi Germany and then Was the guy who figured out how to use gas on people? It's a dark his story. I mean he died looking for medical treatment because he had a flea Germany And he's had a bad heart he died on the road trying to get to Switzerland That's the thing it was Switzerland. Yeah, yeah I mean Nazi Germany is like the pole position taken way too far It's right and that's what's remarkable that the Pentagon was like okay But we can learn from this and there are there are elements that are dark in that well It also comes out of the devastation of World War one right the economic devastation the defeat the Germans are in this terrible State overall in terms of their morale and then along comes this charismatic psychopath That it's just really good at screaming to this day I don't speak German But this to this day when you watch that guy scream and yell at all those people and see them respond It gives you chills like that kind of charisma that kind of influence that someone has where they can do that in front of thousands and thousands of people and everyone's goose stepping and So whoo to see we're very fortunate There's not something like that right now and our forefathers and our grandparents and whoever fought in World War two If it wasn't for them who knows where this world would be right now because that was a literal evil empire straight out of Star Wars I mean that was like the Sith Lord They were they really were there were human beings who were doing some of the most evil shit that you could it almost demonic if you really stopped and thought about it if there were demons pretended to be people they would do the same thing I Mean it that's why I think it's a rabbit hole because it's so hard to comprehend that like a culture of educated individuals In that moment in time that you talked about between World War two World War one in World War two could could completely become Relent yeah, that's one of the more disturbing things about the Nazis was that there were so many of these people that they did extract through Operation paper clip Brilliant engineers and scientists that were also evil Like those two things are very Uncomfortable for us. We like to think of our scientists as being the people that are out there trying to solve the mysteries of the universe and provide us with the technology to make our life better here on earth Nothing not seen they were trying to figure out how to kill people better They were trying to figure out how to use rockets to shoot them at Europe and blow people up and it is a it's one of the more telling and horrific Times in our history when you read because it's it's one of the one of the more horrific ones that we have footage of Because we don't have footage of Genghis Khan. We don't have footage of Alexander the Great We don't we have stories and tales of Napoleon and some photographs and drawings of dictators past and part but we have a Lot of footage from Vietnam. We have a lot of footage from World War II We have a lot of footage from modern wars and out of all of them the one that scares us the moat And scares me the most is World War II Do you think those scientists when they came here? Because this is this is I could not figure this out even after writing that whole book is it do you think they came here and Actually thought about what they had done or they Were able to convince themselves that they were the good Germans that they were part of it because I never saw a single bit of remorse ever like no one ever acknowledged What they had done so it made me wonder I guess results vary right? I mean I think there's probably two people that go through the same thing in one Person has no problem with it and the other person literally can't sleep I don't know. It's a good question. It would be interesting to interview them The the ones who've been caught who've been prosecuted and have been chased down They've got one fairly recently they caught a Nazi like just a few months ago It's one of the last ones using his 90s. I believe the ones who survived they all tell different stories and some of them say they just were following orders and You know some of them say that they didn't do it they're being framed they all have different stories it's one You know you write a book about that and or you think about it and you kind of have you go down the rabbit home Then you have to you have to ask yourself what does this mean or are you kind of it's too dark? Right and so I asked that question to a Auschwitz survivor Okay, who I wrote about in the book his name was Gerhard Merschowski and the reason he was He survived Auschwitz was because he was taken over to the labor camp Which was called Buna? So it was a rubber factory and it was led by this truly evil man named Otto Ambrose who became part of Operation Paperclip Okay, after being tried at Nuremberg and being convicted of Mass murder and genocide, right? We got him out and he worked for us You got to read the story of I mean it's just it's just astonishing Otto Ambrose So the extra chemist oh my god, right? but he was so so Gerhard was at Buna this factory this rubber factory and He lived and I did an interview with him because I was asking him You know the flip side of All of that and his whole family was killed at Auschwitz and I said to him What is any of you know we went through all these questions to try to get some closure to this or some meaning and I said and Then I let we landed on I said what you know we couldn't answer what does this mean right? What does it mean for today couldn't answer we are so when I asked him What matters about all this? He went like this he lifted up his sleeve and he showed me his tattoo and he said that matters and I Have that image seared in my mind I had never seen a tattoo from Auschwitz before and I have not since and It also made me think because I thought he's gonna die soon and he has died since and then that tattoo is gone So all you have is the exchange of information and people talking about it. Yeah, the eyewitnesses die How did they get that guy out of Nuremberg? How did they get them to release him well? Okay, so he was convicted in a repurge. Any went to prison. He went to the prison where we had all the Didn't execute him no, no, they executed like the top Nazis and then a lot of these guys went to prison So there was a bunch of trials and so I went to the prison. I saw his cell. I mean in Germany was intense Lanceburg prison and Then we because we were sort of policing not see Germany after it was not you know after the war was over we were policing Germany and then Kate and a guy named McCoy was in charge He was kind of like the governor general of Germany and the Germans wanted Germany back and they were like we're tired of you guys policing us the threat from the Russians was very real and so deals were made I mean I write about all this in paperclip, you know based on the documents and one of the Provisions was we want our guys out of prison. We want them back in society and That was arranged And again, you don't even know these things, you know, they're like But that was and then auto-amplers and they even gave him his money back that was astonishing and the family still has this Villa in Switzerland, I believe or maybe it's the Bavarian Alps That had been in the family which is money from you know from world from Nazi Germany and I called up the Sun to interview him He was not as forthright as Dr. Blumson and you know He hung up on me and said if you if you ever contact me again all you know They have very serious privacy laws in Germany. I thought about going and knocking on his front door My lawyer was like Annie do not do that they have very different laws in Germany for privacy. Yes Even if it was like the son of a Nazi. Yes, absolutely. Well, I would imagine Look if he didn't do anything. He shouldn't be responsible for what his father did No, but he has the villa that was the point. We had all the money right and he got that money from his father Who got that money from stealing it from people? Yes during World War two. Yeah, like what happens there? Yes but if you go back to that like we should really find out who had the plantations in America and Who benefited from that like go several generations from there? I mean you could get weird with with war Reparations or big deeds where people profited. Yeah, I mean which is Sometimes a reason why you I realize and looking at these in reporting these books Which is why certain things are kept secret? I mean they open up a whole can of worms about Reparations sure, you know. Yeah. Wow was operating? Operation paper clip writing that book was out one of the most disturbing ones I mean that was so dark my husband is amazing. He's Norwegian, right? And the nor norway was occupied by the Nazis for five years Like people kind of forget that but he he grew up there and his mom You know was a grade schooler and was really impacted like didn't go to school for five years while the Nazis were there They were gonna breed with the Norwegians because they were such lovely airy and people, right? So my husband having a Norwegian mom was like when I was writing paper clip It would be so dark sometimes I would be like down in my office like I can't You know honey, I can't you know, ah and he'd be down there with a sandwich You're coughing and say but are you throwing another Nazi under the bus and I would say yes And he'd say keep typing right and then I realized well wait a minute The neutral journalist has to really make sure that she's not just throwing Nazis under the bus Without really good reason and so when I was in Germany at the archives I went to Dachau the concentration camp and I asked the lead archivist if I could come and see the worst possible photographs that no one wants to see and he said Absolutely and I didn't write about them in the book because I didn't want to subject people to that kind of horror But I looked at them and I watched I saw with my own eyes people moments before they were killed, you know and then the bodies afterwards and these are in human experiments to you know to see whether or not pilots could survive height or you know they simulated different things in chambers out high altitude or speed and I saw I saw photographs of you know freezing people to death, right? Because they were trying to develop programs where they would They wanted to see at what temperature humans actually died Right and so they experimented on Jews these are these are some of the doctors that came on our programs and I looked at those that evidence And I would that blew me away and then I knew when I left there. Okay, I can I can throw these Nazis under the bus It is it's such a crazy time in history Where you really stop and think about all the different experiments they did do It's almost like they just opened up the vault of evil and said listen We have an opportunity these people aren't people. Let's do whatever we want. It's like they're fake people. It's like like they were an invention I mean the perception Really played into it So gross it's so scary to think about that humans just you know Generation to away Okay, but we'll do in that Yes, and so I think what it when it all comes around full circles all these government programs I write about is That idea of an evil enemy, right? I mean we talked about that earlier when you brought up Kashoggi, right? I mean you know People often say to me and these are sources that are like any Saudi Arabia is the root of all evil I mean I hear that constantly and Why are they are ally? Why are we protecting them? You know oil right? Yes, right? Yeah, so money and influence on the Middle East and to have an ally over there and that's it's why I think people it the benefit of You know people often say to me why do you write these 500 page books? Well because I mean hopefully they're interesting and I do know they're interesting because I got this great email drill the other day from a reader and He said Annie I'm a truck driver and my whole life people have tried to tell me I'm stupid But I'd drive around in my truck and I listened to your books. I read the audio on my books And he said now I know I'm really smart. Okay, he's stupid. They're guys ridiculous Hey, well your whole life are bunch telling you you're stupid and then you read some books ago now I know I'm smart like whoa he Come on give him some space right? And he says they're smart doesn't get any space I Think he was making a point that he has the ability to listen right? Maybe he's not the world's greatest reader. That's how I took it. Right? Are your books available? I'm just joking about this guy obviously, but are your jokes of it up your jokes? Are your books available in audio form? Yeah, I read all my books Oh, that's great. I love that. Yeah, I get bummed out when someone reads a book that's a but my friend Graham Hancock had a really good point He's like not my fiction books because he writes fiction books as well. He's like my fact-based books I read myself, but fiction I hire an actor. I'm like that's a good move Nice, okay. Then you got to do voices and flexion and all that other stuff. No, it's amazing to read them I mean because you you really also feel like later on down the road you connect with with people sure Yeah, and then people that are hearing you right now the hill that they're the how that same voice when they get your audiobook and Because I write things that are so at the edge of conspiratorial thinking right? There's a certain sense of oh, there's a real human there right? This is not government propaganda right and I can relate to this and I can hopefully I Don't want to say trust, but I can recognize an authenticity right yes of Working with sources when you were done with the paper clip book and you know You you published it and you have to live with all the information that you had a gather and run through your mind Did that book was that the book did that change you that book like was it the most? altering of this different subjects that you covered I Mean each book has a huge impact for different reasons But when I think of paper clip I think of this one saying that was over the gates Book and walled and it was it said yada. That's a zina and what that means is everyone gets what they deserve and that Was horrible and I still think about that because it's such a piece of Nazi propaganda It was like saying to the Jews you guys deserve this and so I know much of my reporting and my General just way of being as a human is There's no such thing as what you deserve right there's what there's what happens There's what you do There's what you're responsible for and there's what you can change But there's that idea is reprehensible for some reason that really stuck with me as the as just the worst Possible thing that I could think of to use because it's the psychology behind why they did what they yes This the dehumanizing But the weird thing is that that was less than a hundred years ago that seems like that should have been something that took If you hear about the Inquisition you go, okay, well that makes people didn't know any better back then But 1945 is not that long ago. It's just not duh I mean people people just Read and read and read about World War II for good reason, you know and everything I write starts it all goes back to the Nazis and every book I The the trail the paper trail the National Archives or individual university libraries and people's papers where I go They all refer back to that because it was so remarkable that the Nazis led in weapons technology and they almost took over the world because of it Right and that is the premise of all of this I mean in surprise Kilvanish It's like these are the guys on the ground in the Pentagon's brain It's this is the technology in the sky, but we must we the government's position whether it's Pentagon CIA is always we have to stay ahead because the next Nazi Germany is right around the corner Yeah, and that's a that's really something to think about is that alarmist History repeats itself. I mean if we went and stopped and looked at all the instances throughout history of people being evil dictators There's quite a few and there's you know we we could look in North Korea right now and that guy assassinated his own uncle right With a what was that with a missile coming out of a helicopter I think Put him in a field. Yeah. Yeah. I mean that's straight-up messaging. Yeah Right, which is another thing. I think is interesting about the CIA's paramilitary program. It's all meant To remain plausibly deniable. It's supposed to be secret like we're not supposed to be giving out the message that we have these Teams, you know that go after high-value targets. They're just supposed to disappear. That's the vanish part of the So that and that as someone who is really interested in transparency and people being educated and having information That always puts me in conflict with you know the government in essence because I'm I'm like we should know But then you think about it Well the whole thing is you were not supposed to know because it's supposed to be just the hidden hand the president's hidden hand They call it in essence because i'm i'm like we should know but then you think about it well the whole thing is you're not supposed to know because it's supposed to be just the hidden hand the president's hidden hand they call it what has to be this distinction that they have the ability to break the rules because it's how they protect us that's that's the rub right and the stories we hear are often the failures because those are the ones that get reported in the press there is a sense undergirding this narrative which i really like and i'm interested in and intrigued by is that the successful operations you don't hear about because they are plausibly denied yeah there's got to be a ton of them that went through you don't hear nothing about and your kids will hear about maybe when you think about protecting us from something like another Nazi that's when people are willing to give up some of the freedoms they're willing to give up surveillance willing to give up and this is this is where things get real slippery right i mean also when you think about Russia because all of this cold war science technology operations all of that was to beat back the Russians okay then the Russians go away and now they're back you know the Russians are the master assassins and they do it through poisoning look at skrip all right uh... i write in the book about a defector who came over in the thifties and said i was in the sassen for the k g b and gave us all kinds of information it's fascinating to look at those documents and realize like this is how it works this is how it worked you know sixty years ago and then you kind of see echoes of that of how it's working today and you can only imagine the defectors or those who come over from the other side who we learn from and they just disappear into him and they disappear as sort of the c i a's version of witness protection wow do you because of the subject matter that you choose to write about does this affect you as a human like a you suspicious of everything now do you look at everything in terms of like things that are happening in the news to try to look at the the hidden mechanisms behind the scenes and i think the opposite i i really believe that information gives you a certain understanding of like the long view right it does not make me paranoid at all in fact the opposite people often say like my god the world about to end and i say well wow you should really read about what it was like in nineteen fifty nine or nineteen sixty two when we were really almost at war with the thermo nuclear war right that is essentially at bay for now right so i don't know maybe it's my personality but i actually take comfort in the fact that what is happening now is sort of as you just said it's a it's a bit of a re-branding in the modern era of what has always been there which is rivals seeking supremacy over one another you know people trying to outfox the bad guys uh... what i think has changed is that the desire to prevent war has shifted and that makes me that makes me upset because we used to superpiece we used to want a peaceful world i mean war was outlawed in nineteen twenty and now we just the military industrial complex such that it's really a lot better for the defense department to be in a state of constant war because then you're in a state of constant weapons production and you can always be creating those vast weapon systems of the future for the next war that comes along and and that's troubling because those eighteen-year-old kids are the ones who get sent into the line of fire what if any research of you done on artificial intelligence and robotics and autonomous weapons and the the future of warfare which a lot of people think it's going to be like what we're seeing now in Yemen with drones that we're gonna be seeing that with robots on the ground and that this would be the future huge amount for the book that i wrote called the pentagon's brain really impactful moment was going to los alamos when i went there to meet a dark as scientists who was working on an artificial brain for dark i mean this stuff is way official brain krit trying to create a system you know a free-thinking system and what his name is garrick kennion what he told me was just utterly fascinating because again that human thing i'm always after is like what are you doing and i mean leave the science you've had lots of guys on here i'll talk to you about the high technology elements but i'm interested in who's doing that who's creating that science and why and he said to me this is like and like where artificial intelligence is right now with scientists who are really looking into this it's like majellan you know like who will discover the new world but on the on the idea of frightening artificial intelligence he told me an interesting story about his daughter and he said uh... people seem to think like you know facial recognition software is like telling us that were one step away from a i true a i and he said if he's he was he showed me on his iphone this is a couple years ago any how much trouble the iphone had recognizing him like if he put a hat on or if he made a funny face and he said my daughter can recognize me from across a baseball field you know if i have a hat on just by the way i walk right and he said if if she couldn't there would be something really wrong with her in other words her human recognition abilities are truly intelligent and that is a system of systems of biological system of systems that no scientist has you you know the algorithm for which no one has ever able to be able to figure out yet and he believes that were far away from that but the defense department on the other hand is moving us in that direction and absolutely wants autonomous weapons to be fighting wars look there was a program that said uh... i quote this in the book it says the uh... the battle place is no place for humans so drones are the way of the future right but they're used to kill people which and which also means that the enemy is creating drones is to force and pretty soon that's going to be a big a big issue that's the big the big fear the big fears that they're going to be the first ones to implement it mean what scares you about a everything dark but things a i could help troops telepathly control machines of course they do and they probably can i mean they've already got cursors that people can move around their paraplegic they can move them around with their mind in their eyes yeah i think there's going to be uh... quite a few of those things what is it really made this thing is called the synapse this is uh... read this thing that's the dark but funded program develop electronic neuromorphic machine technology that scales to biological levels more simply stated it is an attempt to build a new kind of computer with similar form and function to the mammalian brain such artificial brains be used to build robots whose intelligence matches that of mice and cats jesus christ robot cats robot cats coming to get us well they created something called the the robo rat that was the first uh... bio hybrid right so bio hybrid is when you mix uh... animal and a machine and dark was doing that uh... right before nine eleven and people freaked out they were like you cannot put brain chips and rats and make them move through them mays by a you know remote control which is what they were doing and i interviewed the guys who are all working on this program before nine eleven and so the morality of the of the citizenry was like no then nine eleven happened and suddenly all this money got pumped into dark but to do anything they wanted the morality issue went out the window and they started creating all kinds of bio hybrids as i write in the pentagon's brain so they put uh... they they now have pigeons that are mixed you know animal and machine they created something called there's a moth so there's a man to cussack some off that's what it's called the large moth and signed dark as scientists put brain chips into the larva okay so that when it cocooned and became a uh... a flying moth it had the the chip built into its system making it easier to integrate and they could fly the moth around the lab that was a huge step and this is now four years ago but i was interviewing these scientists did you see any of the stuff i didn't see them off but i i told you i saw that the the limry generation lab with a trip and this is all so what was going on well they were just cutting limbs off of salamanders and watching the limbs grow back right and examining that and saying will if the salamander can do this so can we one day and i said to them but we that's impossible you know and they said well it's not actually because humans have they broke i love scientists who break it down into terms i can understand it's like what elan mosk did you know yeah right because and they said to me you were once a single cell in your mother's room and then you were two and then you were you know right so you can regenerate and that's their premise i mean these are the tops on the world's top scientists in regeneration what is this jim the moth being stimulated by electrocurrence and its abdomen so the stimulation of the electoral currents they can caused to go left or right yeah i was looking up these bio hybrid moths was a thing you three hands on head like you're freaking out makali called can and home alone this i read something he went uh... yeah i typed in this i started typing a bio hybrid stuff and this is the first in the popped up was this shrimp article yeah it says through they're gonna test them through a limpic themed events oh my god look at this star by mtosk innovative proposals for the development of micro to milli insects scale robotic technology shrimp we're developed will develop okay so shrimp is the an acronym of a they love an acronym uh... will develop and demonstrate through a series of Olympic themed events multifunctional m m to c m scale robotic platforms so i guess that's millimeter centimeter scale robotic platforms with a focus on untethered mobility maneuverability index darity to achieve this goal shrimp will also provide foundational research in the area of micro actual actuator materials and energy and fission power systems for extremely swap the capital letter s capital level w lowercase a capital p constrained microbiotic systems expected such advances will be enabling for applications including search and rescue yeah right search and rescue disaster really yeah we're gonna help people hazards environment inspection or killing motherfuckers with a it with an evil nuclear b that's all you need to always search and rescue that goes in your mouth and blows up fuck that's crazy i mean they do all kinds of planning for the future yeah search and rescue thing is a it's a great sort of you know way in which to present DARPA and doing all this great stuff i interviewed dart beside his who said look any we've got were able to send robots into fooka shema to twist the course you know and and and yes that is great but that's far from the only thing that's been trying to be a bit well but here's a trip you want to hear i mean sure it gets there are rabbit holes there because i sourced all these documents and also interviewed generals at the pentagon who are like we don't like a i we want like we want this we want our guys on the ground you know we they believe in the human the warrior that concept and so the the generals were very opposed with the that DARPA took a of a vote and it was like no a i we want humans in the mix and so what did DARPA start doing and they are the generals they said why don't you why can't we go more autonomous and the answer was we don't trust the machines okay so right around that same time what did DARPA start doing it started looking into and hiring scientists who were working with how trust works in the brain specifically with what is called the moral molecule and it's this molecule in the brain that mothers emit when they're breastfeeding okay oxytocin yes so think about that and i mean that's like the ultimate going way back biology like you have to have a mother a trusting mother to breastfeed in you know prehistory otherwise you'd be eaten by you'd be like this is a bad idea i'm stopping to do this i'm gonna die right right so they examined that molecule the the the brain's moral molecule and they began a program to work with that to be able to give that to soldiers so that they're that they trusted a i machines and that's where i think you're getting into really spooky dark multi levels of manipulation about what humans want versus what the pentagon ones the worry about trusting the machine scares the shit out of me because that's what everyone's worried about when it comes to a i that's what he lon must keeps warning people about these things are going to have superhuman capabilities and they're going to be sentient and it's a matter of when absolutely i i as the journalist said to myself well wait a minute if the general's at the pentagon and i'm you know that's a that's a euphemism but the meaning that the actual opera you know the guys that are in charge here don't want that who does want this and where my research took me to was the group that wants that is what's called the defense science board and those are the individuals who are counseling the pentagon in the manner in which they should proceed and now those individuals are all sitting on the boards of the defense contractors so you can really see how money drives the rubric the generals don't want it the humans don't want it but guess who does the people who stand to make the money creating the autonomous systems and that's exactly what isen how are warned us of in his farewell speech you know the military industrial complex and the other part of that speech which people don't don't know as well is that what he said his antidote isen how i said this the antidote to the military industrial complex is an alert and knowledgeable citizenry it's why i write my books because an alert and knowledgeable citizenry has the ability to kind of push back and go but we don't want that i think we were worried about his pen doors box right with it when it comes to a i and we're worried that first of all if we're not the ones to open it what if they open it right what if the chinese open it not and obviously their technology is super super advanced i mean their electronic technology particular their cell phones are cutting-edge i mean apple and all these other companies are struggling to try to keep up with wallways and these one fc or uh... one uh... act what is the one one st what is that one what is that big company that uh... they just released some they've just hired robert danny jr to to give them millions of dollars to one plus yeah one plus seven they have this uh... new phone that doesn't have a front-facing camera president but it slides out of the top they figured out a way to make it the entire phone all screen and they're incredibly advanced in terms of their electronics we we deeply are concerned that they're going to be the ones that implement military autonomous sentient robotics before we do because then you can essentially you can launch them with no physical human cost on your side and i mean they they're literally weapons of mass destruction if you have robots i can go over there and just kill people and and what they need for that is that world's fastest super computer yeah and what's interesting is that we jut we america just overtook the chinese in having again having the world's fastest super computer but they had it for a couple years and think about this okay because you're saying hard to believe the Nazis were only you know not even like just in just in our grandfather's age right so go back in time to then listen to this about this really freaked me out in terms of progress right after the war a guy called john voll noyman got a grant from the atomic energy commission to essentially build the world world's first computer i mean they existed but he built the first computer that could actually do calculations okay before that calculations were done with like by calculators computers were humans but there's this amazing story of on-noyman in the basement of the princeton institute for advanced study where he built this computer with government funds and he because he was a brilliant polymath he could add faster than anyone around him okay he's also the guy who calculated at what level the atomic bomb should explode over Hiroshima for the most blast okay because it didn't hit the ground it wouldn't kill as many people right so this is how his mind worked so he's faster than the computer he has a pen and paper in front of him and he can outperform the world's fastest computer with his own brain two and a half years into it in like 1949 the computer beats him and he made a statement that said one day artificially intelligent machines will be the ruin of man i mean i'm paraphrasing yeah that was his prediction but that was in 1949 in the 50s marshal mcclellan said that we are the sex organs of the machine world i'm gonna have to really think about that that's a deep one that is very deep yeah that we are the propagators we're the ones who are your progenitors yeah that's it that's our baby we're gonna make that baby and then we're gonna die most likely that's gonna be the new living thing who said that marshal mcclellan yeah just that's time to think about that figuring that out in the 50s so looking around and going oh right we're giving birth to these things but i have a question for you then on that morality issue right which is if man has always been a warring animal right why do we look so down upon the throat you know the knife to the throat and why do we as a society except drone strikes because that's the whole question i ask and surprise kill vanish and i'm not sure i answered it to my own satisfaction because it's such a complicated question well one of them is very personal the other one is like a video game you know to stab someone to look them in the eye and and shove a knife through the ribs that's uh it takes a different kind of person we don't think we want that person around us interesting you think it's a proximity issue oh it's it's just different you know one of them is throwing a rocket someone that's nowhere near you the other one is beating a guy to death when he's right in front of you they want it's very personal you see someone struggling and we don't like to think that someone can put that aside and still twist that blade we don't want that we don't want that on our side we don't want our people to be noble and just and but meanwhile when it comes to civilian casualties drones are one of the worst invention ever in human history if we really want to examine ourselves in terms of efficacy and the moral more high ground in terms of engagement like launching missiles at apartment buildings because you found metadata in there that indicates that most likely an al-Qaeda operative has a cell phone in that building like that that's some shit that people have done i mean that has been done and the casualty rate for civilians when it comes to drone strikes for innocent civilians is stunning i think it's in the high 80 percent i think that's we've done this before right haven't we i think it's some it's it's a disturbing i might be conservative by saying it's in the 80s it might be in the 90s it's a disturbingly high number of people who died who were not the intended target which would which would be an argument for the blade for the blade yeah the blade as you know who you're stabbing and that that warrior is going in there aware that he too might die what do you got jammy what's that face three percent three percent what what this is that's worship and now who released that maybe three percent accuracy no i know there was there's been some serious discussions among scholars about this that's not true whatever you read in the campy right so just one operation was three percent just to throw this out there because there is that big debate of i mean ci a paramilitary army tiny yeah defense department huge ci using either ground operators or drones mm-hmm defense department i read the statistic the other day seven thousand two hundred and change bombs dropped on afghanistan last year i mean people don't even realize we're still seven seven thousand that's as they just practicing here goes president don't trump revoked a requirement the u.s. intelligence officials publicly report the number civilian kills in drone strikes other attacks on terrorist targets outside of war zones oh so we're gonna get shit information now but it would pull up in two thousand seventeen i don't know that you have to find well you got a really look hard to get that statistic there's an inspector general who covers afghanistan right for the government he he looks at all the statistics and by the way this administration just canceled his job so we will no longer have that information but he's the one that is in charge of reporting that because it's called the reconstruction effort right but that number of bombs really makes you think long and harder at least me about you know the big footprint versus the small um operation um and i can i think this is why most people don't want to talk about this because it's a dark rabbit hole to go down you know people prefer to believe that we're just safe and sound here and not not at risk and i mean that's that's the endless question of are these are these threats real and must they be dealt with? what's very hard for people to expect to be a hundred percent aware of something they're not experiencing right and right now we're not experiencing a war currently in our in our neighborhoods but yet it is happening overseas and the united states technically is involved in these wars and i think that right now we're not experiencing sentient robots running through streets murdering people but that could happen we're not experiencing Nazi Germany anymore we we've got past that we'd like to assume that that's in the past but if you just looked at the vast amount of history that's dedicated to atrocities that are committed by armies against their enemies it seems like that's just what people do it seems it's a part of what people do and if there is a real technological race in order to develop autonomous sentient robots that are capable of killing people we should be fucking horrified and who are you most afraid of China? China? China? 100 percent well you know they keep they keep out performing us in that supercomputer which also have a total integration of their government and their industry you know that everything is connected it's not like us you know like they've got like they play the long game they're strategic in their ability to plan for things and not have them be currently profitable they don't have to operate on a bottom line like someone who's beholden to stock owners and they don't have an informed public yes at all i mean they have google censorship i mean they they convince google to go over there and i was talking to an executive at google and they were saying essentially we're willing to let them censor because we know we're gonna they're gonna just they're gonna do what they want to do anyway they're gonna copy all of our information and just redo google in like we think at least this way we will protect our interest by being over there am i do not crazy that sounds you're gonna let the Chinese government help you're gonna help them censor people? On an interesting note of that in the mirror all my books are published in china whoa like the DARPA book they were right on that they had that translated into chinese i have a copy of it it's spooky it's like you see the pentagon all this chinese writing i don't understand a word of it except for my own name all right wow but it's like wow they're reading they're reading us of course you know anything i mean there's nothing that makes us look bad there's an interesting story about the freedom of information act and a rann which came to mind with this new activity in a rann which is that they filed a foyer to get all the information that that we had on a rann and the government went to went very high up in the judicial system to say we're not gonna release this information to them even though they had the right to have it because it would benefit them we got to pull up jane i found a couple of a better information um i might have misread that it said the something i just found showed something like only two percent are the high target strike are the targets that's what i'm at the rest would be some of those children civilians but other combatants to them might be other soldiers but um part of the reason i got to get rid of that sorry part of the reason on why the strikes things has changed because the Trump administration has carried out way more than the Obama administration ever did over eight years well i think the trump basically told the melatonin you know what you're doing do you just go do it i mean basically let them just run the military instead of having the same sort of oversight that other presidents insisted upon and the military people like them for that and people aren't focused or interested in drone strike anymore they're more interested in the wall in watching the the battle and the yeah the conflict and the name calling and the shouting it's like it's like throwing rocks without warfare you know i was trying to make in robots to kill us absolutely right oh Chinese people please be nice this was the thing i was to say okay u.s drone strikes fighting ISIS and iraq and syri have killed at least 1,257 civilians according to the pentagon air wars estimate the number to be as great as 7,500 this year only yeah just this year yeah they're they're doing a weird thing they're shooting people from a remote location with a robot that all came to be by the way right after 9-11 i mean whenever we get attacked it's like pearl harbor you know suddenly there is a massive swing of what civilians what the citizenry will tolerate and for surprise kill vanish i interviewed i told you lawyer john rizzo who wrote what was called the 17th September 17th memorandum of notification and it gave presidential powers to the degree which had not been seen since you know the worst part of the cold war and congress wrote off on that in fact what rizzo told me is the gang of eight that are in charge of you know the intelligence committees in congress said is this enough and that's where the drones became such a big issue because the idea of preemptive neutralization the idea we're going to take out bad guys you know we should have taken up in lawton and we didn't yeah we're gonna now do that preemptively and it's set off it set us on this entirely different course which continues to this day although it's fallen out of the news which is let's strike someone before they strike us and it's such an interesting chicken or the egg because you know yes you have civilians dying and yes you have more terrorists being created on the other hand you really want the pentagon dropping seven thousand four hundred three hundred two hundred bombs on afghanistan in any given year it seems so detached whereas if you seven thousand four hundred three hundred two hundred bombs on afghanistan in any given year it seems so detached whereas if you sent someone over there to assassinate these guys with a knife you would think of that i don't want that person in my neighborhood that person is willing to stab somebody and what are the intended consequences of that and we never even know you know me i'll tell you an interesting story that's not in the book which is that billy wall showed me a number of plans that he had presented because sometimes the operators are asked like what do you think we should do and it doesn't mean we do it is just that those plans get sent up the chain of command and then it comes back so he said he showed me these uh... drawings they were going to go kill chavis right this is when bush was in power and you know he was like teaming up with uh... i'm a dina jade and he was really bad guy you know a threat to us and so the plan was to halo in uh... take the team down go kill chavis and vanish and the plans got rejected they were like no way we are not doing this according to billy wall well billy wall said to me recently i mean thank god we didn't do that can you imagine if we had we would be blamed right now for everything that is going on in venice well it's a really interesting point i mean who has to make that decision i'm glad it's not me you imagine no it's not kill this guy but don't kill that guy that's a good idea intense and it's the world we live in that we don't discuss and we don't think about because it doesn't affect our daily lives in terms of like it's not something you're it's unavoidable but i think it's super interesting is it also comes back to your own human that's right what are you making judgments about what are you for or against and why are you really are you really do you do you want that opinion i mean i think that's so interesting and important and and discuss it with your children you know and let people have my my favorite expression is just as long as you don't make me do it you know i'm pretty tolerant of other people's opinions about the show force me into it yeah but this stuff impacts all of us it really does really does are the robots gonna be taking over your show joe no no well they probably could to a certain extent i don't think robots are currently capable of spontaneous humor right does the only thing saving a person like me there's nothing funny about a drone no not yet but what is the difference between wetware and hardware and silicon based you know interactions like if there's a computer that can beat the greatest chess masters and they can't they have it and then the greatest go master now too which they thought was even more complex that people just get destroyed by these computers now like what what would makes us think that creativity is so unique and special i think what separates us really is our biological instincts and that these are things that are programmed into our DNA over thousands of years of survival that this is these are the things you have to worry about this is the information we have and act on that that's our intuition trust you know uh should i trust should i not and you take that out of the equation really bad things could happen yeah i want i worry i worry that we're creating a thing that's going to surpass us but i think that that's inevitable i mean if i was a champ and i was worried about becoming a person that should probably you know seem silly it's inevitable you want to hear that scariest ai story i know oh it's old right it's like a demo lights no can't along but it's from like the early day and gather round children this is like early days of dark okay and this is when we were really seriously afraid that the Russians were going to send you know a hundred thermonuclear warheads at washington and take out the whole country so darpa sets up this station at the top of the world uh... to monitor the soviet launch so that you know because it only takes twenty four minutes for a icbm to get from the launch pad in russia to hit new york washington so we set up the station up there uh... and to monitor this so we have some kind of a jump on this k like we'd learn it about eight minutes my god the you know it was a radar station that station called the be-moo side or j-site is connected to the no-rad station in chyan mountain you know the one from the movies right it's like the first week of business and the guys that are sitting there in the station looking for the alert are sitting there and they've been trained like the alerts never go off and all of a sudden the alerts go from one two three four number five is endgame so the information that the technicians are getting is now one thousand soviet thermonuclear missiles are on their way to washington dc with ninety nine point nine percent certainty actual story okay the guy panics but he trusts he says wait a minute you know because he's supposed to now give the launch code let's try and get the general's on the phone they can't get the pentagon general in charge of no-rad they get a canadian guy named general sleepman and sleeping you know my god we should be launched should be launched sleepman's like wait a minute human thought he remembered that the night before he thought he saw kush jeff on tv at the u-n you know that he's famously banging issue and he says where's kush jeff right now they check he's in New York City why would the soviet send a thousand nuclear weapons are way while their own leaders in new york they said i don't know sir but the radar returns a reporting this and there so someone had the idea that be moveside to go outside and lo and behold what was there a big full moon the system was reading the moon moving and misinterpreted as a thousand nuclear thermo nuclear i see the bm's coming didn't launch so we came that close to the end of the world i mean it's an astonishing story the documents are now declassified but is an actual indication of why that element of human intervention why trust why other information like oh i think i saw kush jeff on the tv last night is so important because the machine said with ninety nine point nine percent certainty this is happening you might we must launch in retaliation true story any freak me out thank you thank you for everything thank you for the books thank you for your talk here with us um... your new book which is surprise kill vanish uh... area fifty one which i will read i promise you i will read it and uh... if people want to get a hold of you on social media what is your what's your is it as well on you know you know it what are okay alright thank you any a real appreciate thank you so much for having me was fun thank you