Hey fuckers, huh? What? The show's on right now. We're live tweeting at the same time Hey, bitches sweet sweet bitches when I say bitches. I mean that would no disrespect some of my best friends at bitches Matter of fact all of them at one point in time. I've called the bitch if I don't if I don't like call you bitch at one point bitch, please or come on bitch, you know what the fuck I'm talking about if I don't say that at least once in our relationship I don't feel close to you. Do you know I'm talking then we are really tight. We're tight as fuck dude bitch This episode of the Joe Rowing Experience is brought to you by legal zoom if you have a situation like you want to become incorporated You want to become an LLC you want to make a will you want to handle some standard legal stuff Most of the time you got to go to lawyer you got to make an appointment go somewhere sit down Talk to some dude or a woman give them a ton of money and It's very frustrating that you can't handle that stuff on your own legal zoom though allows you to handle most of those types of transactions like wills like Becoming a and LLC all those things you can do online make it okay? You don't even have to be sober you could be playing with yourself You could have your cock in one hand and a mouse in the other and no one can stop you man They can't tell you what to do. They don't own you okay? But if you go to there's silly little legal box the legal box We have to say hi to the lady that sits at the desk and once a fucking jump off a bridge You have to say how to that check board out of her skull And then you have to give up credit card information your address and you're this and you're that and then you wait for the guy to let you in And then oh Jesus and then somebody coughs on you as SARS. Oh, oh Dunken that's not what happens Anyway legal zoom calm go there check it out use the code JRE and save yourself some money is it JRE? No legal zoom is rogue again, which one's Jerry? They really should all be universal Stamp dot coms Jerry yeah use the code name Rogan save yourself some money. It's an excellent service Brian is actually used it although I you know Not really not talking. Yeah They can do things for you and they can also get you in touch with a legitimate independent attorney if you get like along the process and you know I've done this before with certain things where you're You're going over some fine print of something you're like, okay I got to stop here. I don't know what the fuck I'm doing this this shit just got deep I just wanted to deep water well if you if you feel that way legal zoom can connect you with an independent attorney and Legal zoom is not a law firm. They just offer you legal services Online that you can do yourself. They will guide you through it But if you get confused, they will hook you up an attorney use a code name Rogan save yourself some money Well also brought to you by stamps dot com If you've ever bought any of those desk-wide kitty cat shirts at Brian red band cells and there's a new one on the way out It's available right now for pre-sale if you go to desk-wide.tv. It's my favorite yet It's pretty dope delicious and it's a much higher quality than the other ones with the the ink is like printed into The shirt itself instead of being like a plastic decal. They're very cool. Brian sells all those himself does it makes them himself Has imprinted and then actually sends them out himself. So if you get a box from Brian red band It's been touched by his DNA It might it's it's healthy. I mean it's not it's not dangerous DNA But you know you could convict him or something if you wanted to like take that box and he lick things on there And you could say this motherfucker lick my ass Just stick it on your ass and then go directly to a doctor and they swab your ass with the cute my point is Stamps.com is a simple way of sending things through the mail with just using your own personal computer in a printer Instead of going to the post office of the box of shit that you're trying to sell and have it on all way down You could do it all at home. You also have a Wonderful opportunity to save some money if you click on the old-schooly microphone on the upper right hand corner and use the code J RE you get a 115 dollar value which includes a free digital scale and $55 of postage postage credit it's an excellent service and it makes sense fun. It's a fun. Hi, it's fun to get stamps Yeah, yeah print it all up on your your printer. That was Duncan trust all he's he's strange But I love him anyway use the code JRE at stamps.com and save yourself some money an excellent service One that we fully endorse here on the German experience podcast this episode is also brought to you by on it This is the last sponsor I swear to the baby Jesus On it makers of alpha brain the cognitive Neutropic Subst well, I don't know if you most people don't know what the fuck you're talking about when you're saying you tropics What Neutropics are is essentially vitamins that Enhance the way your brain functions. It gives you all the fuel that you need to create neurotransmitters the building blocks if you will Very controversial stuff read up on it But one thing that I can tell you with utmost confidence now is we've already done the first in a series of double-blind placebo tests and had excellent results with the alpha brain so that was a big relief because you take something and even though You read a bunch of shit that says it does really good and even though you read all these positive results and even though you read Even peer-reviewed Evidence about the actual ingredients that are in alpha brain until you get your own double-blind placebo study people don't give a fuck about you Unfortunately, it was only we did it with 20 people and four dropped out It's not enough to to have like a full blown study So we're gonna do another one but the point is the results were positive and it was done the correct way double-blind placebo style and It showed improvements in memory improvements and cognitive function will explain it all once the the piece is published But it's a huge weight off my back and a lot of the people's back because rightly so whenever someone comes out with something that says it's a Brain-enhancing supplement people start thinking about all those big dick pills that you see and those porn ads Don't really work you start thinking about a lot of other snake oil type situations I personally have been using neutropics though for a long time. I started out with Roman Asky's Neuro1 it's a combinatorie thing like this that you mix it you make a drink out of it and I Read about it and Bill Roman Asky was a football player He started making that stuff and using neutropics after dealing with head injuries from concussions from football It's a fascinating topic that most people are Kind of ignorant about but if you're if you're interested in it I suggest you pursue it because there is definitely some fruit at the end of that tree We're also can I pipe in for a second? Yeah, I am not sponsored by on it for some reason I don't know what I do have been though on it company So but I can honestly say because I have no financial stake at all in fact I've been rejected by the company that I Love I take alpha brain and what Joe won't say is it's speed It's just it's good speed. It's like low-level Adderall. I don't get that at all. I don't get that at all It's not that's not with the function of the nutrients inside of it or you know like design to do that's not It gives me a very good when I say speed. I don't mean bad. I mean that's good It's like a nice buzz you take it and you feel awake I like taking it all day when I have it I go through the jars within three days. They're just gone. Well, it gives you weird dreams. Oh fuck man My I took an act today that was like Jacob's ladder Alpha brain and I swear I was in it an airplane Sucking on the feet of this woman Under sucking her feet. I had an alpha brain dream the other day. I tweeted about it. It was about Bobby Collins the comedian was doing a talk show out of his apartment and in the opening montage of his talk show Sam kinescence comb over and it's flying around the air getting pelted by meteors Well, it's flying around just like explosions his comb overs flying around in the sky and the meteors are hitting his comb over It was the most nonsensical Ridiculous you can't make this up dream and I woke up in the middle of it because my alarm went off and it was one of those Where it's like you're right in the middle of ram sleep and you your alarm wakes up and you're like what the fuck I don't I think that was one of the best pieces of at least anecdotal evidence Alpha brain actually was working that was doing something was that the Uniformity of the reports of people saying that it affected their dreams in a very radical way Why are you making everything Paul? Go to on it dot com. There's a lot of the shit we sell including kettle bells These primal bells that are kettle bells with awesome designs carved into them We hired a special effects designer to make an angry chimp. We got a gorilla coming out soon We got a bunch of really cool designs in the future. We sell bunch of healthy shoes. It has toaster on we sell powders Well, it's it enhances your body's ability to produce testosterone all of these things also all these controversial things They're all explained with science and references on on it dot com use a code name broken save 10% off Don can trust us here and we're fender get our freak on Hello, hey, pitches The Joe Rogan experience Worked all day did the show all day and this never feels like work this always feels like The podcast yeah, the podcast. It's not it's not work. I mean it isn't it isn't it's never I Mean if you start thinking this is work there's gonna be a lot of coal miners you think you're a mocks Docket trust will on TV today. Oh, great now. Yeah, kind of freaking out I've noticed I thought you were to handle it well, but you're not you kind of tricking tweaking a little bit. I'm excited How do I not be excited about this? I'm just fucking with you know you're handling it very well I mean it's exciting and it's like a thank you for getting me on the show Thanks for doing it you made it a lot of fun that that's a cool thing, man to usher Your friends into something like that because it's it's so it's been such a freakish year for me, man You know it's like in the beginning was fucked up ball snipped off For folks who don't know you got cancer of your balls ball got snipped They took one of your testicles home they threw it. I always wonder where it is it's in a cat's litter box somewhere But it's great because the year Cominated and being out in the Pacific Northwest with you High as a fucking Watching It really was like well, this is great, man. This is like a what this is this is definitely one of the coolest years of my life That was so fun. It was so fun. It really is like we've sort of we've made this life inside of simulation Like it doesn't make any sense like when you actually have a job where you get to go like we went to Utah last week Looking for UFOs and giant bulletproof wolves People they see wolves that turn into mist and disappear and the fucking show up on top of barns the size of a horse Yeah, bulletproof wolves the size of a horse. We're we're having so much fun It's so ridiculous like we're talking to so many crazy people and so many really interesting like sciencey people too Yeah, it's fun near on that's for sure, man. It's definitely spun me around in a lot of ways. It's helped me understand How religion starts it's helped me understand delusion yeah, it tells me understand the part of myself that is delusional or the part of myself that Is either too eager to disbelieve something or too eager to believe something like that's where my pendulum swings Right and in that middle place people don't like that middle place That's my middle places. Yeah people don't like it there You know because that middle place is the mystery people don't like that feeling that's where I live Yeah, it's my spot. Yeah, I think it's cool to get there, but God damn it. It's like that's no fun I like to be there with my life too though. I like to be there with my life I like to be that's one of the reasons why I do so many different things at the same time I don't like to be comfortable that much. I mean, I like to be comfortable in friendships and I like to be comfortable in relationships But as far as like work stuff and life stuff and in my pursuits whether it's a competition or Exercising I don't like to be comfortable. I think that's this the enemy I like to be plenty comfortable when I'm at home and I'm lounging Yeah, I'm chilling with my family or I'm hanging with my friends. I love being comfortable then but Other than that. I don't like it So like when it when it comes with an idea like an idea of what is or isn't what is or isn't possible that middle spot of the pendulum where it's all weird That's my favorite spot because I like when you're in a situation and people go big foot You believe in big foot and then you bring a guy like Jeff meldrum that guy that we talked to that anthropologist who is you know Got a PhD an expert in human movement and he starts explaining things like the metatarsal break that you find in these footprints That indicates it's built like a gorillas foot not like a human foot because human beings And then you see this break and he demonstrates it and he starts going huh You're talking to a fucking smart. No, the believes is shit like this is weird. Yeah And then we asked him if we'd be willing to cut off a pinky. Oh, yeah, oh, yeah What he said weird you have to watch the show Duncan I can't have to watch this. I can't watch myself on TV. Oh, you can You were great the the That place is a very zen place man. That's like what this Zen rosy I met when I went on this rammed off sort of treat that's what she kept saying again Again, it's live in the mystery that's where we belong is in the mystery It's you don't you can't you're not gonna know what happens after you die You're not gonna figure that out. Yeah, and the place of like the zen place or the Buddhist place or the non-attached place to be as a place where you are It's not that you don't know or do know it's some other state of just I guess being at the crest of the wave of the universe articulating itself and as you yeah, and what's important when I say that I like to be in the mystery What I would really mean like that about that is if it's a mystery and There's some shit that's not a mystery at all and that's also a part of the thing It's recognizing what is an actual mystery and when you do find it like the nature of reality if you get to one of those weird ones the possibility of a Universal power that's controlling the world and moving it into a certain direction The idea that this is all some sort of a mathematical program and that good and evil and sex and love and all this different shit Good and bad all sort of make sure that this thing keeps moving. That's the real mystery. Yeah, it's not chemtrails Okay, you know what I'm saying like it's it's not it's not ghosts All right, the real there's plenty of mystery the real mystery is does every decision that you make Literally branch off and start a whole new reality in a whole universe that you live in because sometimes it feels like that Yeah, and I'm not sure and I don't think you're sure either when tell someone tells me they're sure or they're sure It's not or they sure they're sure it is either one of those it's unacceptable because you you can't be sure there's things that you can't be Sure, and those things are really weird and it's hard to get comfortable in those things It's hard to get comfortable like holding on like holding on to those ideas and like pondering them because a lot of them The implications they they they transfer through your entire life The implications are well if you really are building up a career and build But you're you're just a part of the ether and you're part of like some sort of a gigantic super organism like why are you Concerning so much on yourself like why are you twisting your mustache at the end with wax? Why are you why are you doing this? Why are you buying you know? $2,000 shoes that you hope somebody notices why are you? You know, what are you doing? What what is going on? Yeah, are those things distracting you from the mystery, you know well? I mean it seems like there's two parts to a person which is the part that is the Personality the conditioning everything you've learned all the all the tricks that you've learned from other people a lot of imitation You know a lot of observing things and that imitating them and forgetting that you imitated them There's probably personality components in us that we picked up in the fourth grade from some kid We thought was cool and just forgot about it and stuck inside of us and so then there's this idea that we're kind of like The human body itself is a hive and it is a hive That within which dwell all these different bees and the bees are all the different aspects of our personality We're not one person we're a harmony of personalities that are always sort of rotating through because like if you think of the you and you're really pissed off Whenever you're yelling at someone or in a state where you find yourself in a confrontational place and then you think of the you when you're chilling at home with your family That's like two different people. Yeah, you know and so That's the idea is that there's all these different parts of us that are rolling through all the time I'm always rolling through and that we are constantly working to uphold the continuity of being by acting in certain ways all the time and and quite often you'll hear like if you're in a relationship or something Someone will say like I don't know you anymore. Who is this person? You know and it's because really what they're seeing is the other Well, some one of the other dominant personalities that lives inside of you that's starting to poke its head out every once in a while and people that don't have a Good transition between those those are the people we call multiple personality disorder people. Yes Exactly, and how many how many abbeys are in there with you Abby? Yeah, man That's what it is the one those when those and and you see or when people say that they're channeling or when people are quote demon possessed Yeah, really what's happening is one of these personalities that have is gotten shoved way deep down in the dark part of the hive is managed to Claw its way out and it's so different than all the other ones that people are like this guy has got a demon in him When really the truth is we're just this cluster of Selfs that are all sort of like the way it's been this I heard there's this mystic name gird gee food described it as like a mansion where all the servants are running a muck So it's a mansion where all the servants were supposed to have certain jobs and certain Area is where they work in the mansion have just lost if forgotten what they're supposed to be doing They're all going crazy and so the modern person is wandering around with this kind of constant chaotic stream of personalities that aren't disciplined in any way and so the beginning of spiritual life or the beginning of Discipline Martial arts whatever the thing is is where the master of the house returns and that's considered the personality that develops once you control all those different facets of the self and that's what you become is the master of the house who's gone away and while he was away all of the Servants went nuts and that's what happens when you get drunk okay, the master's not here Yeah, right there where over your face Yeah, what was my keys yeah, and it's also why you have to be compassionate to people if someone around you has been a dick to you You know some really stupid people when someone's addicted to them Will never forgive them like for the rest of your life you'd be like remember the time you said that to me Oh, you know, and it's like well, that was just a part of me that came out. That's not me That's not the totality of me. That's just somebody who made who managed to get to the window and scream Scream something that's a real problem those people that want to bring up shit that happened a long time ago over and over and over again I just always use it as a button to get sympathy like that's not good That's not healthy for you. It's not healthy for them It's not healthy for anybody like people that can't let certain things you certain things you shouldn't like oh You know like if you're in a concentration camp and Hitler killed your family Yeah, you'd be like hey dick, you know remember when you kill my family But if you like you know if you yelled at someone because you didn't want to get up and take out the trash like let's you know let that go Yeah, you got to let it go mostly you got to just let it go if you can it's it's hard though man I mean I I ruminate over shit that people have done to me sometimes Myself ruminating it which is such a such a waste of time dude. I had Graham Hancock I skype with Graham Hancock on my podcast today. Oh, that's beautiful. Oh, my mind man. He like that guy is so goddamn smart He's got a book out now a fiction book called war god war god. Yeah, and he's really excited about it when he starts talking about history It's amazing because you feel like you're with somebody who is actually lived during that time when he was describing like My and sacrifices when he starts talking about that. It's not like reading it in a history book like when he talks about the Jagged Flint tools to slice open the chest. I'm not even doing it. I don't know what accent Terrible accent, but he had the thing he was talking about today And it was I it was you know inspired from talking about his book is this idea a gnostic idea Which is Gnosticism is this weird philosophy that believes that the god that everyone worships currently and all the different religions the Christian god the Muslim god any god that's being worshipped is actually an evil force known as the demi-erge it's something that is Actually Satan so the thing that the Christians are worth the thing that whispers in the Christians here that it's time to go to war Or the thing that convinces some an Islamic terrorist to strap plastic explosives to his chest and go running into a cafe It's like an evil force that's been controlling the planet and Manipulating the people on the planet by pretending to be a god and causing them to do insane things Where does this concept come from? No, it's called Gnosticism Well, I know it gnosticism is what this concept of that is from gnosticism Yeah, and that's the demi-erge and the demi-erge Created humans so humans are all the children of the demi-erge humans are the children of this force Which is kind of the spirit of matter that is all about dominance and fear and control What a crazy idea and that's why people like overwhelmingly Throughout human history. There's never been a period of time where no one's done anything evil ever There's never been a period of time as far as we can tell as far as written history There's never been a period of time where nobody controlled anybody nobody hit anybody nobody Everybody nobody nobody stole anything nobody raped anybody nobody beat their kids There's never been one time where like nothing happened bad for like a year Everybody was just hugs and love and kisses, but yet we hold on to this Idea that well people were mostly good. We're basically good. Yeah, people in their hearts all people are basically good Yeah, but if you look at the totality of the the behavior of human beings and you factor in the time of utmost peace to time of ultimate peace. It's a zero This is zero percent Ultimate peace in the totality of the human race. It's never happened. Yep Like you occasionally get that in the household you occasionally get that in a community where there's just mild disagreements They try to keep it to a little bit of shit talking behind people's back You know, but then as you spread out and you get into cities There's no cities where nobody gets robbed. No, they don't exist in religious communities Yeah, I want to talk about some fucking stink holes dude I'm reading this book by John crack hour called under the banner of heaven, which is about fundamentalist Mormons Do you know about this no? Holy shit. Is that like the Jeffries guy? Yeah, there's it. I think so the Jeffries Which was the Jeffries guy was the guy that just got arrested. He was the polygamist. Yes. Yes. Yes Yeah, so here's the way it works there is in this book it talks about I can't remember the town But there is an area that is run completely by a guy named uncle Rulon or was run by this guy named uncle Rulon who is a Mormon fundamentalist this these are these people are rejected by the mainstream Mormons because the government came in at one point and said you guys can't be polygamous It's illegal and so they had to renounce polygamy and this was something that according to this book Joseph Smith said was the essence of Mormonism, it's still one of the most deepest most important parts of Mormonism is that you have Multiple or what they call a plurality of wives. It's a plurality. So and here's the thing This is why you need a bunch of wives if you are a fundamentalist Mormon You are only supposed to have sex with your wife when she's ovulating which means if you only have one wife You're not only gonna have sex a few times a month once a month I don't know women ovulate once a month if you have 15 wives You can fuck every night So it's very important to have as many wives as possible because then you could have sex with them all the time And they're always humping and a lot of these guys have so many children that one of the I can't remember which one It was I might do an uncle Rulon. I can't remember which one had so many children that they named them According to the year so if you're born in like 1979 your name would have an a so it'd be like Annabel Angus Ari and then you would know what year your kid was born in by the first letter of his name Wow, that's how many kids are having so then you have girls and your girls get to be the age of 14 and you've got a pal Like if I had a 14 year old kid and I was a fundamentalist Mormon. I'd be like Joe Why don't you marry my daughter? Lori she just started bleeding and then I would give her to you and you would immediately start fucking her and so That's what they're doing out there is like it's just like just herds and packs of pregnant Teenagers that have been impregnated by these older dudes who have so many wives and this shit is I think it's still going on today Man, there's whole communities dedicated to this polygamist lifestyle which is a lifestyle that Joseph Smith said was One of the most important aspects of Mormonism according to this book. Wow, the other thing about Joseph Smith Do you know what he did before he found he found in Mormonism? What he was what was called like a treasure seeker and so you would use magic stones to peer through to that would show you where Secret treasure was buried and he there was a huge lawsuit against him because he convinced all these people that he could find Very treasure that was also what he said about the golden tablets. Yeah That was the use of seer stone and see it through a magic rock That's how he could read the golden tablets before he was doing the seer stone and the angel Mooremaroni before he's using the seer stone and angel moroni came to him He was actually getting work Convincing people like hey look I've got a magic rock and There and I can find your silver for you because there was like a guy who hired him because he knew that there was a Some silver hidden up in the hills somewhere and Joseph Smith went around with like Awards Looking through the courts and finally after like three months of hiring him by the month They took him to court. They're like hey this guy can't really find treasure with that rock I mean what he's out there looking every day wouldn't you have loved to seem like a video of him talking of Joseph Smith Like talking and explaining his strategies and what he does and you know what Mormonism is all about. Yeah, man I mean exactly I just love I just love that idea of like That here's a man who was look come on Let's just admit it here's a man who's like just basically like a classic con artist. Come on man You're really telling people you can find treasure with a rock no one's ever found treasure that's something like when I was in the third grade that I would Lie about to a kid in the playground or something but this guy was making money off of it It's just very interesting to see something Grow roots and and flourish in the way that that Mormonism has when just with a very Simple investigation end of the you've got lawsuits There's written records against Joseph Smith. Yeah, because he was taken to court for lying But like no no no but the angels really did take the golden tablets He really he really is the one He really did find the lost work of Jesus. He really kept No, no, no, but the angels really did take the golden tablets. He really, he really is the one. He really did find the lost work of Jesus. He really can look at it with a magic rock. And for him, it was always a magic rock. Yeah, magic rock. That was his, that was his angle. Magic rocks. But meanwhile, when we were in Utah, we were in Utah the other day, and Doc and I show up and when we arrived, there was these hordes of people that were waiting for these elders. And the elders are the young kids that go away on a mission. All Mormons, when they're young, or they're supposed to go on these recruiting missions as elders, where they go, they wear a suit and tie, and they go to third world countries or wherever they go. Some of them go to their world countries, and they recruit people. And so these guys were returning from their missions, and they were all like, dalled up in their finest suits and with their ties on. And when they showed up, people just scream and cheer, and it was, for Doug and I was so strange, because we're like these weird heretics that are walking through them. We're high. We've got coffee in our hands. Yeah. They're not even allowed to drink coffee. And so by the way, by the way, by the way, by the way, they're also one of the highest per capita users of antidepressants. Because the fact they're not allowed to drink, they're not allowed to take coffee. They are allowed to take prescription medications. So they just chomped that shit. Isn't that weird? Yeah, it's really weird. Especially when sober people, like people who are really into sobriety are chomping on Xanax and shit. And it's like, what's the difference between that and booze, really? I know a woman who criticizes pot on a regular, but she's very ignorant. She criticizes pot. She takes a Xanax every night to go to sleep. She cannot sleep without a Xanax. She'll take a Xanax, and that's how she goes to sleep. Yeah, man. It's a really confusing issue. But drugs are bad. That's why I love Terence McKinnon's breakdown of that, where he's like, come on. Every morning, we are brewing a fucking drug. We wake up every morning and we have machines designed to extract alkaloids from coffee beans that we put into our bloodstream before we go to work every morning. And that's not looked down as strange at all. And then- Not like that. Every labor contract is negotiated with a break for this drug in it. The coffee break. Yeah, but that doesn't count. So when you tell people like, wait, no, really, the entire planet or this North America wakes up, slurps back a drug every morning just to get ready to go to their jobs. And then they take, what are they called? Coffee breaks. Coffee breaks. If you're someone like, hey, I'm going to go take a cocaine break. Do you mind? You're like, well, you've got to fucking problem. Well, how about the fact that they're taking Xanax to go to sleep and then they get drunk on the weekends? Well, yeah, you add on top of it that they're getting drunk. They're taking Xanax and- Sounds very popular nowadays. It's very popular. I understand why it's okay. Have you done it? Yeah. What's it like? It's awesome. You just like go to instantaneous, like an instant relaxed. I'm trying to, okay, like, let me- I'll try to think of a description of it. Okay, think about a night when you've had a really good show. And you wake up the next morning and you're laying in bed. You've had a good sleep. You're not hungover in it that dawning realization like, man, that was a good show last night, but you're still relaxed and laying in bed. And you're like, that's what Xanax does for you. Oh, yeah. Just it's like the opposite of any kind of anxiety or any kind of like tightening up you might have. It gets rid of that. It's a little bit- But I've noticed that there's a bit of a residual effect with it. It's not a clean drug. At least it hasn't been for me where like a couple of days after you take it, you feel kind of greasy and weird. And when I've taken Xanax, I've gotten the hiccups, which is really strange. The hiccups. Yeah, I'll start like having like Xanax hiccups. The way I've heard it described is that you- It alleviates a lot of your anxiety, but then it's almost like a rubber band. It snaps back, gives you more anxiety than you had before. My friend who takes it, he tells me- he takes it almost every day. And he really can't get along without it. He needs it like for anxiety. He tells me when he gets off of it, he gets really freaked out. What the fuck is anxiety, man? That's the reality? Yeah. The reality of your life, the reality of your body, this guy who is addicted to it, he takes it every day. He's also overweight and he also drinks too much. Right. He's got issues. And so I don't think he likes to address those issues. Right. And so instead of addressing those issues, he says he has anxiety. Man, there's certain things though that where anxiety is unavoidable, man. I just think there's certain times that emerge in your life where anxiety is not all- A lot of the time it's an indication that you're fucking up. Yes. But sometimes it's just a natural reaction to life itself. Life, yeah. Yeah. Life itself, the inevitability of your demise, there's no getting around it. You know, the ruthlessness of the day-to-day grind can also give you anxiety. The idea that even though it's Friday and you're off work, oh my God, I'm going to have to go back there on Monday. And I'm going to work eight to nine hours, whatever I have to do, including over time. And then I'm going to do it again on Tuesday and then on Wednesday and then on Thursday and then a Friday again. And then I'm going to get a little break again. And during that break, I got a lot of shit to do. So it's not really a break. And that, just that alone, as it accumulates over time, then you start to accumulate bills. And you start to accumulate responsibilities, social responsibilities, physical responsibilities. And the pressure of all that can for you, the fuck out. Because it's a never ending just a line of ants that goes on for millions of miles. They're all tasks. Every ant that you see in front of you, every dot, every just like a million pages is all things you have to do. Things you have to read. And it never ends. Yeah. If you have a job, a regular job, especially, that's one of the reasons why you should never, if you can avoid it, never have a job. I mean, if you need to have a job, get a job. But if you could find something that you love to do, you don't have a job. Then what you are is a lucky fuck. Yeah. And then what you have is a cool gig. You know, like whether if you're a comedian or a chef or a carpenter or something you love, you know, a guy who builds motorcycles, he loves it. He goes to work on grammar. Yes. Anybody who loves doing what they're doing, that truly is the key to this life. And everybody says, going to be different. Your love is going to be different than my love. You can't really judge. You can't judge what people like, what they don't like. You can judge what you like and don't like. But, you know, it's like music tastes or taste and food or anything. Things are weird. Things are weird and we vary wildly. Yeah. But yeah, the, what I want to mention the idea that I've been thinking about of, it's called a temporal peripheral vision, temporal peripheral periphery. So like, humans develop peripheral vision to deal with predators. So that it's something to, to our side. We could see a predator coming. And so we have this kind of like side view that helps us out. It's a very important thing. Some animals don't have that. They can only look straightforward. Right. But we have a, where we can see off to the side a little bit. And that's a super important evolutionary trait. Well, we also have the exact same thing in the sense that, but it's a temporal peripheral vision where we can think about the past and we can think about the future. And anxiety is always related to things that we're looking at in the temporal periphery. Nine times out of ten. If you come into the present moment, you won't feel anxious. You could be sitting in a doctor's office about to go get your CAT scan. And if you could really pull yourself just into the moment and what's happening there, you wouldn't be, you'd be 90% less afraid. But the moment you step past that sliver of the present moment, that light being, and into the darkness of the future, that's where the anxiety pounds your fucking ass, man. It's like touching an electric fence. It's, because things are always fine. If you really look at it, things are always fine. Up until the zombie rips your intestines out of your stomach, things are generally pretty okay. You know, that's the real conundrum. And I think that's the thing that is so perplexing about it being a human being is you know that you're carrying around with you the ultimate treasure, which is the present moment, but you can't stay in it. You don't have to discipline to stay there fully. You're always wandering off into the future, always wandering off into what you have to do, what's coming tomorrow, what's coming in the next few minutes. You know what I mean? It's so curious that right there in front of us is the ultimate Xanax. Well, that's why the shallow feelings of materialism, you know, what is materialism? Well, it's fixating on objects to fill up your attention span, fixating on them instead of all the other shit that you could be thinking about. Instead of your own designing your own personal philosophy for life, finding out what you like and don't like about your past behavior and incorporating it into the present, living in that moment, being aware of what's happening and managing it correctly. All that's too much. So you start thinking about the future. I love to have a house that's like 6,000 square feet. I want to have 50 acres of land. I want to be on top of a mountain. I want to have gun ports. You know, so you start thinking about shit because if those motherfuckers come, I'm going to be ready. Instead of like being like right there in that moment or you start thinking about, you know, what a piece of shit you were when you were a little kid. And you used to yell at your mother. I mean, you could start thinking about weird shit and it could fill up your present. And it's part of being a human being is managing the thought that you hold on to. Managing what you gravitate towards. It's so hard to do. If you just got fired from a job, it's very difficult to see the silver lining. You're like shit. You just, that feeling of getting just fucking kicked out of a job and someone doesn't want you working. in what you're a failure. You failed. You're like, oh, God. It's so hard to go. Come on, it's good. I have a good time. You don't want to have a good time. You feel fucking terrible. That month because it's also there's a dance going on, a balancing act, if you will. And that balancing act is you got to learn from the fuckups. And the only way you really learn is to feel like shit. And it's best if you feel like shit for a while. Because then it really sinks in. You can't show up an hour late every day. You can't smell like whiskey after a lunch break. You can't yell at your boss because you're, you know, you got to have a hangover in your Krabby that day. You can't do those things because you can get fired. And when you get fired at fucking sucks. But every time I've ever gotten fired in my whole life where I fucked up and I got fired, I made like an evolutionary jump as a person after that. Absolutely. Every stupid thing that I've ever done that's resulted in disaster has always made me a million times better. And why is that? Because you have a terrible feeling. And you don't want to have that feeling again. So it's forcing you to really focus on whatever the hell it is. Well, this is the, this is the, this is, I mean, it's something that you don't want to accept. You know, you want it to be, you want the universe to be something that's more gentle or something that's more compassionate. But it really does seem like a huge portion of what makes people great is their ability to overcome internal difficulties or external difficulties and failure. And, and, and that's something that when you're failing, it won't give you any, it won't help you. When you're failing thinking like, oh, this is, I guess is this helping, I guess it does relieve some of the pain of the thing when you realize that you're in a kiln and you're the failures that heat that's sort of transforming you into something. Yeah, there's, I think that it's, the feelings are there. They have, they serve like an evolutionary purpose or a purpose that's in, in line with progress, a purpose that's in line with moving forward and, and, and taking things to a next level. Like, which is why, where we always feel at our best. I always find that one of the reasons why I try to like deal like a lot of things at once, is because I like figuring things out. I like when things get better. I like when a joke that I'm working on becomes better. I like when it grows and becomes real. Yeah. Like when you write something down and then you add to it and then it becomes better. I like getting better at a skill, like a martial art or a game. I love getting, I love getting better at video games. It's a great feeling. Yeah. And if you're not getting better at things, if you're not, if you don't have some sort of improvement and movement, if that's not the general trend that you find your life in, I find that I don't feel happy. I find that that greatly affects my happiness. And I also find that's one of the most difficult things to achieve if and when you have a job that you don't enjoy. Because the majority of your time and focus during the day, they take all your best hours, man. You think about what a job is a nine to five. They take the hours that you are the most awake, the most tuned in, the most aware, the most focused on the world. So if you want to figure out how to get out of your job, you've got to take your weakest time. That's all they give you. They give you your time when you're the most tired and most likely to sit in front of the TV. The most likely to just have a beer, the most likely to take a nap. They give you those times. And they say, all right, you want to get out of this fucking system. Here's your time. Well, this is why I like chanting. And I think chanting is a fantastic tool that you can use in those times. Because chanting is something that you can do. It works. It works. You get fired. No, you do it in your mind. You don't say it out loud, but in your mind you can start doing a mantra. You definitely don't have to say mantras out loud. You could just say it in your mind so that in the midst of when stress comes, you could actually start training yourself to start doing a mantra inside of your mind. Because normal can't do that if you're working. Sure. If you have to interact with people, you have a job. You can do what you're talking to people. I'm doing it right now. I can do it right now in my mind. I can definitely write out how you're doing that if you're going to concentrate on what you're doing. Because it's something that you give. Can you give some outies? Yeah. Can you do what? Which dunk am I talking to right now? Do you think you give something your full attention, like a job while you're chanting in the back of your head at the same time? Honestly, the next time you find yourself in the midst of like working, or doing some identity and whatever it is, watch, become mindful. You will see that some percentage of you is focused on the task at hand. But then another part of you is always thinking, always thinking, always processing, always a whole other conversations, always going on in people's minds. It's an inevitability. You know, and some people have more focus than others. But in general, there's always that part of the mind that's like an electric wire. And a puddle that's just sort of skipping around and spraying out random thoughts. Well, that's the part of your mind that chance. That's the part of your mind that you begin to train to start doing a mantra, which is like a simple mantra. So that thing, if you can, instead of it being like, man, what the fuck, God, I hope the CAT scan doesn't mean I have cancer. Jesus Christ, man, I wish my jizz was wider. I fucking hate that song or whatever. Whatever. Whatever your mind is stupidly spraying out. You start training, when you can, do you go, him, wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong. And you let it, it's like throwing a dog a bone. Why, why, wrong, wrong, was it just a sound? That's a mantra that people recommend. It's got the home in it. But it also has this nice little r that you can, wrong. Do you think that people who have like A.D.H.D. Or isn't A.D. Which is the one that the guy in his death bed said isn't real? Was it A.D.H.D.? Is it A.D.? Is it A.D.D. is real, but the guy who created A.D.H.D.? he said it was bullshit. I don't know. Yeah. It's ADHD. Is that one? What was exactly happened? He was on his deathbed and he's like, ah, this bullshit. Yeah, I wonder if he was being serious about it or if it was just because he was crazy. I was funny, you know what I mean. Right. Yeah. What is the difference? ADD is attention deficit disorder and ADHD. And attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, isn't it? How much of that? I mean, how accurate is their prognosis or their diagnosis of ADD? Because so often they're dealing with kids and kids are bored as fuck, you know? And it's not because they have a disease. It's because you're making them do something boring as fuck. Like I know because I have children, I watch how they develop as like little people sort of learning how to get through things. It's difficult for them to sit down. Yeah. They got fucking energy. They want to dance and play and have fun. They want to throw things and wrestle with each other and play. When you make them sit, even if they're 10 or 12, they're still juiced up with life. And if you make them sit and just do things, they get fucking bored. And they know that what they're doing is not as fun as baseball. They know what they're doing is not as fun as the video game they're addicted to. They know it's not as fun as playing with their friends when school's over. So they can't wait to get the fuck out of there. And then you say, well, this boy's got a disease. Well, they don't. You're offering them shit sandwiches and they're not hungry. Yeah, no shit. And that's why I think it's a funny term. Attention deficit disorder. Yeah. These kids, there's no deficit in the attention. There's a, maybe it's an attention control disorder. In the sense that they can't control what they focus their mind on. I know I have an attention control disorder because I can be sitting on my porch and then like look down at my phone and not look up for another 15 minutes. Okay, but stop right there because you don't. Because if it's something that you really love, like Starcraft, you can fucking lock on that shit for hours. You can tune in with 100% of your being for hours. That's not an attention deficit disorder. What you have is a love of Starcraft. What you have is you find the one thing that you just fucking really vibe on and you chase after that vibe on. It's not in very 70s. Well, no, it's true. That's a family on everybody. But I think that it's a, if I had my, if I could, I would much rather, maybe this is an impossibility or fantasy. But I'd much rather have the ability to lock my attention on anything I wanted to with the exact same level that gets locked on the things that I enjoy because I think if I could do that, then I would be able to, but you can if you actually enjoy it. If you actually enjoy it, you can. Yeah, but certain things like books, like especially like really long novels, like I'm just listening to the stand, the Stephen King audio book, the stand, oh, it's good. But I'll tell you, the first like two hours, there's a lot of shit in there that doesn't involve people coughing up sprays, a thick briny plague mucus and wandering through an apocalyptic wasteland. There's just a lot of character development. It's not that fun, but you need to focus on that because it brings the characters to life more, it kindles the fire of the story. So it's like, you know, and also running, you know, when I go jogging the first 30 minutes or 20 minutes aren't exactly a blast, like my mind's going everywhere, but then this thing'll kick in where something like, oh, this is fucking amazing. It feels so good. But to get there, you need to get through the first 30 minutes or ever, long of not enjoying it. Or fucking jujitsu, when I was taking jujitsu with Eddie Bravo, man. That wasn't, my mind was everywhere. And like, I know if I just had the ability to focus on that for a year, then that would have radically transformed my life. So that's why I say I wish that I could figure out a way to make my mind become immersed in anything that I wanted to instead of what it wanted to get immersed in. You still can. And not only can you still do it, you would you describe is the very difficult aspects of things that you really enjoy. It's a subset or another aspect of how you like find what you enjoy and make what you enjoy better. And then that involves doing things that you don't enjoy at all. It involves work. And that's the weird sort of thing that happens to kids when they learn a sport or they learn a martial art. Or you try out for the wrestling team or something. You realize like, I love wrestling, but to get really good at wrestling, you gotta go through wrestling practice. And that's a motherfucker. And that's like this thing that you learn in life. But when you're dealing with something that you wanna describe as attention deficit disorder, that I don't think that applies to that. I think all that is is a conditioning of discipline. And a recognition that discipline is like a mode that you can put your mind into. And that you can achieve. And it's also one of those things where if you have a characteristic that you cultivate on a regular basis, then it becomes a part of who you are. If you get used to an act, you get used to have it. All you have to do is do something for 90 days. And that will become who you are. You say, I'm gonna take yoga every day for 90 days. It seems impossible. People have been doing it for years. You can do it. Just get up every morning at eight o'clock whenever the fuck the class is and take it for 90 days. You will be a fucking yogi by the end of those 90 days. That will be who you are. But how many people ever actually do that? That's the discipline that life requires. And that's one of the lessons that you learn once you apply yourself to something. You learn how to develop your human potential. And one of the ways that developing is a force yourself into and through situations. But you still love the things that you love like video games, like doing stand up comedy. The things that don't require the discipline at all. You still pursue them and have this passion for them. It's just there's other stuff too that's not on the surface. You just have to work to get to it. Like to get good at jujitsu fucking sucked when I first started doing it. But I knew that these guys were way better than me. And they were in immortal. They were just people who practice more. So in getting killed, I realized, ooh, if I just keep doing this, I can eventually do that to someone else. Yeah. And when I started playing Quake, same thing. I was getting crushed. I would go online and spin around and start golden dude would shoot rockets into my face. It was terrible feeling. Yes. And then I've learned how to get really good at it because of that. I know. Same with Starcraft, man. Try starting that shit off, man. You'll get your ass handed to you. I still do. By the way, everybody, Starcraft people out there. I should make this very important announcement. This Friday at 1 p.m. I will be live streaming a match between me and Pendleton Ward, the creator of Adventure Time. who also plays Starcraft. Kick my ass the last time we played. We're having a rematch and it's being cast by Artosis and Jeff Robinson, who are these professional Starcraft casters. And there's a caster. What does that mean? It's like what you do for the UFC, but they do it for Starcraft. Oh, a broadcast. Yeah, they broadcast it. So when you're playing Starcraft, they will do commentary on your strategy. And me and Pendleton suck. So bad. So it'd be like you casting a UFC with like me and me and Ari fighting. Yeah, it's like just we're not good at all, but it's cool to get these two like super professional casters to do it. So that's at 1 p.m. Pacific Time. I think it's going to be on Twitch TV, but I'll tweet about it for those of you like Starcraft. You can watch us flail. Don't get in his eating, drinking the mountain do and eating no Doritos. He's slowly, like, like, imagine being a caster. I don't think, I think that game is like one of those, I think Starcraft, like you have to be on the ball. Yeah. Correcting them all wrong. Yeah. You have to be the, you can't be like eating chips, right? No, you can't eat fucking chips like it's full. If you're, if you're going to play a real game of Starcraft, you got to eat your cashews and drink your Coke and then you start playing. You might be able to take some swigs of water in the first four minutes or so when you're building up your army and your little zerglings are just beginning to grow, but you got, you, 10 minutes, six, basically it's all time, man. I'm not going to get in a Starcraft. I was with Duncan in Utah. We had a long drive to and from locations, like two hours from the airport. And we got into a Starcraft conversation and the passion in his voice when he describes Starcraft, it's like, man, if you put that much effort into anything else in your life, like it becomes, I mean, this is a real problem is that those things don't pay off. They don't give you anything back. No, I get really awesome at them, but then at the end of the day, you don't have a car. You don't have a house to show the best tennis player. No, man. Like Pete Sampress, like that guy has a giant ass house, but like, you know, if you become like the motherfucker at Starcraft, how much can you make? What are the best pro Starcraft guys make? $40? Dude, I have no idea. I think they make real money. No, they can make real money. Yeah, I think I'm wrong. If you go to Team Liquid, I've saw somewhere there was a listing of like how much, like in fact, when they, when players start playing internaments as part of their credits, they will show the amount of money that they've won over the course of their career play again. So, so you could see how much money these people won, but it's look, professional Starcraft is a young man's game. This is for somebody whose neurology hasn't been frazzled by countless hits of LSD and nitrous oxide. It's like you've got to have like quick, quick fucking, what's called APM, which is actions per minute. Well, they love this stuff, by the way. Alpha brain would definitely go over well with some of these people who play the game. I play the game just for fun. I mean, it's, but I do recognize the time suck that it is. And inevitably when I'm playing, I'll look at my watch and think, why were you not writing for the last two hours? You've just been running purple things all over a screen for two hours. Doesn't do anything for you. It gets you, it does do something for you. I shouldn't say that because it has been proven that it has a positive effect on cognitive function. Okay. It strengthens your, it strengthens your decision-making abilities and it makes your brain fire at a rapid pace. They, for real, they've figured this out with video games. Right. That you're dealing with an intense series of things going on, you're managing them and it's like an exercise for your mind. I just think it's a drug and I think that it's like, some drugs have benefits and I think that it's a digital drug. And I think that when you're, when you're playing, so you know, when I'm playing a video game for a long time, for a really long time, like that's when I was addicted to World of Warcraft, which I'm, I'm not anymore. I don't play anymore. But when I was addicted to the World of Warcraft, which was a true video game addiction, and I think about spending a couple of days playing that game is the main activity of my day. I don't really see much of a difference in physical activity between me and somebody who just got on the spike and shot some heroin into his veins. You know, he's going to be sitting on the couch nodding in and out. I'm going to be sitting on my chair focused on a fantasy world and clicking buttons, but our caloric, we're not burning a lot of calories. We're just kind of sitting in a, in other words, if that team, if my monitor was turned off and I was just sitting there, doing the same thing, I might as well be, it's like heroin, except that I don't have a chemical inside of me. So it's a drug. It's a fucking drug. And when the rift comes out, when these. Oculus Rift. Yeah, man. When that shit comes out, people are going to have to accept the fact that we found another way to get high. That's as addictive and potentially life destroying is any other hardcore in our car. Well, you keep hearing about these people that abandon their babies because they, they've been playing a video game and they let the kids starve to death. You hear about that shit all the time. It's happened several times. And you know, these, these video games are only getting more and more powerful. So their impact, what you're getting now is way stronger than anybody ever got from a not-play and pong. You know, and then when pong became, you know, the Pac-Man and then when Pac-Man became, well, you're dealing with now is something that's way, way, way, way, way more powerful. And the question comes up is, are we really designed to handle that kind of stimulation? All right. Our brains are set up for a whole series of rewards that we get for finding food. You find a rabbit. You shoot it. Then you get to eat. You know, there's that thrill of catching it and eating it. Well, if instead of rabbits, you're doing zorks or whatever the fuck you're doing, you're, you're, you're, you're, you're saying your troops over this 3D mountain range. Yeah. You know, you're setting a trap on the other end when they retreat. Yeah. So you can attack from the back end as well. Yeah. Be evil. I be evil. I touch it. I don't want to fuck with it. You would love it, man. That's exactly what you just described as a great strategy. And that's part of the fun of the game is like you start learning new strategies. There's cheese strategies is what they're called, which is like, leave out of trap when you attack within the first 6 minutes. It's like a four minutes. There's lame. It's lame. Cheese is lame. So like there's, there's like, like you can instead of spending your Six minutes. It's like a four minutes. There's lame. It's lame. Cheeses lame. So like there's there's like So like you can instead of spending your time building a giant army if within the first five minutes you can build a very small army and get that into your enemies base Taking them by surprise and they haven't built up any defense Then you can sometimes defeat your enemy within the first five minutes of the game because they weren't prepared for what's called a rush and that's called Cheese attack and it pisses people off and it's so fun that piss people off and you're playing because then they'll chat to you Like you fucking new piece of shit What are you doing because they get really mad because it's lame because it's just a lies at lame though It seems like it's an option well, it's lame because it's it's the it and I used to not I used to think I used to think Like you think and because I would love to do cheese attacks and I thought it was funny But you don't do any more you let me take it seriously I don't want to be taking seriously. I enjoy the game more when I have bigger armies It's more fun when you like have to deal with more variables and you let the thing expand to like the game is divided into phases So it's like mid game in game and the beginning of the game in each of these phases There's different strategies that you employ according to what your enemy's doing. It's kind of boring looking though You know, I mean, I want to argue with that a little dude's are like there no big deal They're not very distinctive. I like how they explode when you shoot out What was that so look what we have start up here is I can't I can't see very well It appears that we have taren these are taren's attacking. I can't tell what this fucking they turn into like little red puddles They explode and you shoot out my Duncan zombie mod. Oh, it's zombie. Oh wow Zombie mod that looks fun so that's taren's attacking zombies There are zombies that are actually in the game, but I've never seen those zombies before but I wish it was More first person. I wish you had the opportunity to go first person and then above just for the visual enjoyment of it Yeah, I keep praying that Blizzard releases some version of it where each member of the armies can be somebody else playing like Halo style so each of the armies are like each individual troop is being controlled by some other player somewhere else Oh wow Awesome, that would be crazy. So you you literally would be an army of people how many people would you get into a game then? Well, you you can only get a maximum of 200 units So or 200 not 200 units, but it's like 200 supply is what it's called because for every every unit requires like for The zerg to create units you will max out your unit So you start off you can only have 10 units on the board and then you have to build a thing called an overlord and for each Overlord you can you can build another five units. So you could have potentially 200 people as Individuals 200 different individuals logged into a server. Well, it wouldn't be at 200 But it would be like you could have like 130 or 150 or something because certain units are anyway It's like would be fucking wild. They would be 150 people online representing a team Yeah, I mean is that what's gonna happen with Oculus Rift? It seems like that would be totally possible Yeah, I think I think that is gonna happen with Oculus Rift and I think that How many people are gonna die having a heart attack playing that playing that and probably not many but Oculus Rift having sex Well, what about the running with the fucking oh, you mean running on the fucking Hummy directional treadmills that yeah on the Omni. Yeah, you're right I mean I think that's gonna be one of the problems that we see is people are gonna get sick and people are gonna like Go into cardiac arrest people are gonna have the most amazing legs ever people are gonna be ripped But they're good people are gonna be using this is something that Silva was talking about he had a word for like the mixture of certain psychedelics and video games Silva who Jason Silva Jason Silva he had this He was talking about some kind of mix of psychedelics and video games So it's like not only are you gonna be putting the rift on but you're gonna be taking some synthetic drug That helps you merge into the video game more so that you can merge into it more you get deeper into it Maybe it'll just be marijuana that solves but you're gonna smack that fucking rift on man And I haven't seen much mention of porn yet with the Oculus Rift But come on man think about first person porn. They film their first porn with a goo glass Yeah, some guy film porn with a goo glass. There you go. I don't think Joe would like a Starcraft I think you'd be more like like a battlefield for I disagree. What's battlefield this is a battlefield for where you're there's tons of people playing I Three-d like this Tanks yes this to me this to me speaks to me as like an individual like as a human being experiencing life Like I know I'm just in a video game But you're running around with a machine gun you're flying around in a plane It's like you're seeing it from the point of view of an actual player when you're looking at it above I'm sure it's really cool, but it lacks that feeling like it's actually happening. It's apples and oranges It's it's chess versus quake. It's a whole different thing. You're you're controlling You know, it's multitasking to the end degree mix them with planning and mixed in with Strategy with these kinds of first-person shooters. You're dealing with a whole different type of gameplay and those are fucking fun Man, let me I was just telling Brian I cannot wait for the new Grand Theft Auto Wow That looks amazing and that's not even on the new generation of consoles man. That's just a that's a That's on the we'll have access to that in a few months and it looks so fun and There's like a giant forest in it. I've heard and there's rumors that there's a Bigfoot that lives in the forest That's awesome Did you ever play a quake like a duel? Did you ever do duels with quake? Yeah? duels are fascinating because they got it down to when they know when weapons would respawn So the whole key to a duel was controlling the map You had to know where the rocket launcher is you had to get to the guy before the rocket launcher Respawned yet to make sure that he never got a good weapon So all you have is like a little blaster when you spawn and then if someone kills you and they're all armored up and they're filled with weapons They can fuck you up and the key is like you got to figure out a way to kill that guy while he's all armored up It's very very difficult and it becomes like this massive duel to get to various strong spots on the map Where's the armor where's the rail gun? Where's this and where's that and it's so fun and it's so funny the way It's too fun unfortunately. Yeah, I I'd actually deleted my fucking Starcraft So funny two nights ago. I deleted star crack. I tried again. I deleted Starcraft and then Pendleton texted me and he's like I want to come over on Friday and kick your ass at Starcraft again, and then it's like oh fuck you man Well played because I played Pendleton. I didn't know that he knew how to play Oh, I got really cocky and was like being lazy and fucking around and then he like stomped my ass He like crushed me in the most horrible way So I wasn't prepared for that. I thought he was like just to just start a plane And you know what I think he had that's a pathetic thing. That's how bad I suck it started Just started playing and he got that guy. I think he's just really a really really smart guy I mean have you seen adventure time? Yeah, it's genius. So when you do it It's possible for someone to just learn like right away. No, not me. I'm I've been playing now for like You can learn the basics pretty two years and I just I'm still in the silver league the silver league I just got out of the bronze league, which is the lowest league. You're such a dark. I got a pee. I'll be right back Sorry, hey everybody. Hi. I had a P2, but I haven't holed it in But that's cool You go and then we'll go have you seen this this new campaign about pornography? They somebody sent it to me on Twitter the pornography is the new drug Like this is the new drug and then this like fight fighter blog like they're fighting pornography It's like fighter blog and fight of it's very odd. It's what are what are they saying? It's well, you know They're essentially saying things that people have always said about pornography that people get addicted to it that it can affect your relationships And yeah, can with some people, but it's another one of those things. It's just like TV booze cigarettes It feeling the blank. It's like yeah, yeah, you could just jerk off all day and sometimes that happens to all of us for like a week You know, especially when you're single, you know when you're single like you could easily When you're lived but when I live by myself and I was saying a lot can easily have jerked off twice a day for like a week in a row Yeah, the other day I masturbated and then like I like two minutes later. I was like I'm a masturbate and like wait, I still have come on my hands like like I wasn't even like Like no time had even passed like it's only a few minutes Yeah, people are weird. They're weird as fuck and yeah when you get something like pornography where you could just watch people Fuck and get stimulated for sure you can get addicted to that But does that mean that because you get addicted to it? It shouldn't be available to people that enjoy it Does that mean you know does that mean just because you think it dehumanizes people and Objectifies people that everyone looks at it that way. It definitely is changing the kids nowadays Like yeah, like these girls like the you know, I forget who I think of Sarah Tiana has a bit about it where Where you know like the girls that are growing up nowadays things It's normal to get come down their face So you know what I mean like that's what you're supposed to do when you have sex You know or you're supposed to have a fist in your ass once in a while and and all the because the porn soak Shocking and crazy and like and they're watching it at such a young age that you know usually back in day used to look at a playboy Go that goes nice boobs. You're not seeing like crazy, flaunt triple X porn back then and people are seeing it on the phone And they're in their seeing it's at a young age. Yeah, it's almost like you can't stop it Yeah, and you know the other thing is how about grooming? The grooming the pewker. Oh, yeah, that's a porn one that yeah, porn one that battle. Okay, everybody does it now It's very rare the girls let their whole box get get crazy. Perhaps it's going extinct actually because of that That's yeah, that's awesome. Yeah, I'm gonna pee now. Just be feel free to talk shit about me longer Isn't that amazing that crabs are going extinct? Yeah, that's weird They're like the indigenous people in the rainforest that are getting wiped out to think that we had something that you know is Wouldn't be extinct one day Disney should do a cartoon about like a tribe of crabs living in the pubic air Someone who's on the verge of shaving their pussy and they've got a like convince her not to do it Save it do I I love it man I had this girl recently that had a bush and I forgot how nice it was to have a bush You know, it's a little teeny bush. I get I mean I if a girl wants to shave her pussy because it makes her feel better. I think it's good But it's not something I really I would like that much I like it when there's some hair down there I always just feel weird when they've they've decided to take that leap because I I mean if it makes them more comfortable It makes sense But if they're trying to appeal to some notion that that's what guys want I think that could be a little off base, you know, I don't I don't know that that's exactly the The the thing that guys fantasize about man just a nice shave pussy Right I never gotten it. I've never that's never been a thing that it just made me feel like wow you're really committing to fucking Right I just recently started shaving my balls because Joseph's that he Shaves his balls and I'm like, you know, I've never really just like shaved him completely bald as I did when it's so much nicer What do you use? Just a razor put some soap on it or shaving cream and I could you let sensor once I was trimming my pubes and I sliced a piece of my like Skin with the scissors is really sad because like I was about to go on a date And I'm like I gotta trim this bush and I ended up like cutting a piece of my skin off So it's like now if we end up having sex she's gonna think I have some kind of so never gonna believe you either I yeah, I was trimming my cubes for you are so excited that I cut myself I caught my dick in a zipper once more than once but once in up a way that it left like a mark like a little herpes mark or something Oh so painful. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, you got to wear underwear, you know Yeah, you got it one time I caught it with underwear and it was not not that bad I've caught my dick so many times in a zipper I can't even imagine if I had a countertop. I'd be so sad You know fucking stupid I am but it's more than a dozen over my whole life, but one time was bleeding That's how j-d-out Chase out jeez. Yeah, I go button fly nowadays. I hate zippers, but I'm flies a good move I got a problem man. I I gonna need to figure out better pants I need to start wearing pants that are too big and then like get a belt that ties it down because when Pants fit my waist. They don't fit my troll like thighs. Well, you just You know, I mean you get straight leg you get I get bought baggy ones They're not baggy. They have to be like skateboarder baggy to be baggy on me Like like regular Levi 501s good fucking luck those I can't put those on I can't even get those I get those halfway up my fine. They're stuck. They I can't I can't wear them like that's the regular jeans that guys Just supposed to wear I can't wear them where I guess can't you buy them big and just go to a tailor? I think I'm gonna have to buy them The right length but a wider waist just to see if they make the legs They must make your legs bigger than a figure you're fat fuck right? Yeah, yeah This I gotta I gotta a real problem with that though because on TV I look like I'm wearing girls jeans because my jeans like they're tight on the top like I'm wearing skinny jeans You can see my package. I'm bundled in there and tucked I'm saying there's this app called Tinder. Have you heard it yet? No, no, I haven't heard it. It's Tinder. Tinder's this thing where it what it does. It's based on location and It will pull up a girl's photo that it'll say like this girl is like a block from you walk from you right? And you say you say like a Like a pound or like a thumbs up or a thumbs down and you can like look through their photos and everything like that But my friend Benji a follow he found this like secret So what we do is we just sit there as fast as we can and accept accept accept accept accept Don't even look at the photos because you're like going through like millions of them right and then what if they like you back It brings up a chat room and this guy. I know he says that he's gone for the last six months He's gone on like 30 dates and about 90% of them. He's fucked Man guys that guy's on a rampage fuck me addicted to pornography. That's what he's a dick We were talking when you went to pee about there's a some new campaign called about pornography being the new drug and I don't disagree, but I don't agree that you should stop it. I don't agree that you should tell people they can't do it I don't agree that you can tell people they they shouldn't watch it. I feel like it's like everything else Just like booze just like cigarettes just like coffee. You can you could overdose on starcraft You can overdose and everything and you could overdose on porn or a regular person I believe it's possible to watch to jerk off watch a little bit of porn and then go about your day I know people to do that. I just wish these fucking Fundamentalist creeps would get there goddamn morality and ethics and fear dynamics out of our orgasms. I don't think that this is a fundamentalist organization I don't I sound from what I look maybe from what I looked though It didn't reference religion at all. It seemed to be it was just there, you know It's just a Organization that thinks that pornography itself is detrimental to society into relationships And I could see how they would say that but I say no I say though the behaviors of People that are addicted those are the things that are detrimental to societies and those behaviors can manifest themselves in porn They can also manifest themselves in gambling. They can manifest itself in a lot of different crazy things Yeah, people are fucking nuts and the regular day-to-day job of no risk no reward that that pattern of life is not fucking rewarding and because of that people have these They go on these nutty chases often to the woods of craziness and they'll bet their entire house on a fucking hand of cards They'll do nutty shit and that man. It's not always because of Mundying jobs, but there's a part of us whatever it is whatever's the cause of it The point is there is a part of human beings that will just get obsessed with something and get crazy with something and just fucking Along with it and then go oh Jesus. What did I do and they could be that with pornography sure but it could be that with almost anything and if you looked at the amount of people that watch pornography and aren't crazy and Don't objectify women because of it and aren't mean to people because of it and don't hate and don't want to rape and kill I would have to assume that that's much larger and there's also studies that show that people that are exposed to Whether it's extreme like rough sex or or or different types of sex or different Different you know different sexual acts that it can ease their desire to perform those acts That it can actually like especially like things like like rough sex like there's some people that have like fantasies about that They can watch it in a porn and never want to hit somebody right and they think that it can act as you know Can have some sort of an alleviating effect I don't know if these studies are biased I don't know if you know they were they went into it trying to prove something and if it's been rejected by science But I know the argument is kind of strange that it has that sort of a alleviating effect that has that sort of a release mechanism Effect like violent movies a lot of people feel the same way. I find it incredibly strange that we have no problem with Violent movies. There's very little yeah blowback to these Batman movies or zombie movies or all these different movies But yet if there was that same type of extreme Sexuality in a film we would lose our fucking minds. Yeah, but isn't extreme violence just as disturbing if not more disturbing than extreme sexuality Wasn't it funny that the two even get put in the same goddamn category? Right did there even compared like one you have like just pleasure seeking people trying to reach Temporary utopian states by coming on the other you have people actively killing each other and yet somehow people even bring those two together It's like talking about dragons versus butterflies like one just supposed to be fun You know and I think that's one of the that that's one of the problems with this repressed Sexual culture that we live in is that what ends up happening is people watch porn and what they're seeing a lot of times is The result of sexual repression You know when you get that creepy narrator I'm sure we talked about this before but that guy you were like ruins the porn You know what I'm talking about the creepy narrator. Yes. Oh, what do we have here? Oh little dirty girl. You dirty. You dirty You want to suck this you know it's the worst was when the cameraman does it The girls having sex with the guy and the camera is going oh, yeah, you want to suck this cock Oh, it's all the way down. You're like hey, what's going on here? Who's that creep with the camera? You know that fucking weirdo. It's just so fucking weird man, and it's like The the that porn tone, you know what I think what is that where suddenly? Oh, yeah, this is what we're doing And sometimes it's the girl too sometimes girls can like oh yeah, fucking baby. Oh, yeah And you're like hey Jesus what's going on here that thing so this screaming yeah that thing that thing is so weird And that is just a result I think of sexual repression. Okay. I don't know about that I think because to some guys that's what they like to hear some guys want to hear that girl being a lot of them I'm not just yeah, yeah, baby And then some guys also want to hear the guy, you know, I think it's all the styles Everyone's wildly everyone's got their own but the point is how weird are we where extreme violence is the Expendables it's everywhere and they shoot someone to head their fucking brain explodes That's a someone's baby that guy just shot someone's baby that grew up in the head and is fucking skull exploded And we accept it because he's the bad guy right, you know and why is that acceptable? Why is that not just acceptable? But barely criticized well, it's because a long time ago some really fucked up dudes started controlling everything and It's been going on and on like that for a very long time and worthy We're the descendants of super sexually repressed fundamentalist Religious fanatics who came over here to start utopian societies and it's part of their understanding of things Decided that they were gonna lock that pussy underneath the Bible and that's what where we're at today She's true isn't it that is what it is isn't it? Yes, it's just of it's just a a really beautiful messie act That's kind of embarrassing but It's just ultimately fun and we managed to turn it into a goddamn multi-eyed HP Lovecraft monster that you're not supposed to talk about certainly never show it to your kids Never want your kids to see sex ever. That's the worst thing. It's like the most It's just fucked up. It's like Nancy Grace shit man. Yeah, I'm picking up. Did you hear about that? Yeah? Some guy was trying to kill Nancy Grace. Yeah, I'm a bunch of knives and stuff What was he on his way to her house or something? I don't know you know Jamie Jan, well poor Nancy Grace Are you loud in bed? Am I loud in bed? Yeah, do you make noises? How dare you? What the fuck are you? I want to know what you're gonna see here I've very very wildly like in all things I do Like to do that gonna you it depends on what kind of sex is happening what kind of ball gag is got his mouth Did you guys see that yoko oh-no thing? Speaking of ball gag I've seen that I see the new thing that she did the singing the cover of the Adele song I saw that that's kind of old I've seen that how old is it Adele's only been around for a couple of years I saw it like a year ago 2012 put pull it up because this bears repeating For fix for folks who haven't seen this at home He does this thing. I don't know. I mean it's almost like now She's like heard the criticism so she's just taken into the next level and making it a joke and so yoko Oh, no, I was at this art gallery and she pulls up this microphone it's really she's like really strange someone like you is the song and She's dressed like real weird and people still sort of give her attention Because she was John Lennon's wife and John Lennon was you know a motherfucker in his time So she gets up to this microphone So weird I'm sure most of the people in that crowd were like what the fuck John Lennon What did you do to us? Is it is kind of making fun of Adele? I don't know I don't think she'd be because that's kind of like maybe that's her interpretation of modern music or something like She's like making fun of what she considers to be the empty Emptiness or the book, and you look it into too far pal This is why I say not because she never did anything good before that It's not like she did something that was like really cool and interesting and then people really got into it and then she's doing this as a parody No, she's always done that that thing there that She's always done that like Bill Burr had this hilarious bit about Chuck Berry and John Lennon and doing a solo together They're duo rather and they're singing this song and you know John Lennon's there singing and Yoko Oh no is like playing the fucking Tamberine the background and she just pulls up a microphone and goes Ah Like she she makes this crazy noise and like and you can see the look on Chuck Berry's face like they whoever made the video of the Bill Burr thing did an awesome job. He yeah for it was it mrs. Maker. Do you make it? No some other do Whatever made it they froze frame right when Chuck Berry had this crazy looking as I was like what the fuck that bitches do Man, I've noticed that there's people like that He will attach themselves to things and ruin it like there's always a lot of times you'll find yourself around someone He's just gonna squawk out some bullshit and ruin everything. Yeah, I would love to see that Brian. Yeah, it's you had to see the Bill Burr version of it No But anyway, she's up there playing the bongos right so John Lennon Chuck Berry To the grace of all time harmonizing singing this hit from the 1950s That's what this moment's about and Yoko in the middle of it can't handle that she's not getting any shine She takes the fucking microphone out of the stands does play in the bongo and as this singing you know go go Johnny go Whatever she picks up the mic and I swear to God goes Yeah, some fucking crazy shit and you see What did he do what is it about the some dudes like a John Lennon type guide that seems by all accounts to be like one of the coolest people It's ever lived this brilliant artist. He's amazing songs this great way of looking at life And then he has this really weird white Asian fetish man back then it wasn't that common to have an Asian girlfriend right? No, I think it was also who she was I think Some women will provide They will provide like a guidance thing to some guys like Azzie Osborne's wife Obviously a very strong woman very opinionated successful business woman and she takes care of one of the craziest guys in rock and roll That's why that show was so interesting because you got this guy that's like eating pigeons heads on stage He's a fucking animal. He's done every drug known to man. He goes on stage and kids go fucking crazy It's fucking Azzie He represents the angst of every fucked up kid. He's goddamn Azzie Osborne You know and he's singing crazy training everybody's going nuts. He's got his wife who's like on the ball Taking care of shit putting things in line managing his career make sure he gets paid Let's we're gonna do reality show honey, you know and all sudden I always have a reality check. He's running. He's he's really talk He's gonna fucking reality show his wife and his kids are getting all the you know the attention of you I mean what not all the attention, but I mean he's it's almost under impossible to understand them. Yeah, but they they find this and In his case it was a positive, you know He found this woman who was like really on the ball But in John Lennon's case not he just found this woman who just said come here hold my hand I'll take this I got this and she just I've seen it happen I've seen it happen with comics have you ever met a comic and they have a girlfriend that's sort of running the show Christian It's hilarious. That's a bad one, but I had a friend Back in the day. He sadly has passed But he had a girlfriend and his girlfriend was you know sort of like his manager type situation Just run in the show like you know deciding what he does what he doesn't do and they get you know They get linked up together and it gets it gets weird It's like they become a package deal like every time you're around Mike you're also around sending like oh Jesus here we go or they'll start sharing emails. Yes. Oh, that's a big one That's a big one. Well, they have the same email account. Yeah, he me in the wife. I'm the same email account Dude, I'm not trying. I don't know your wife. We're not friends. Okay, I'm trying to send you an email Do you have your own email so we can talk shit and I can maybe send you a porn link? And not and not have to deal with your wife going hey, that's a shared email account I don't appreciate you sending him all your bullshit or every time you call they're on fucking speaker. Oh, that's bad Yeah, that's bad or how about when the woman answers the phone It's his cell phone. Yeah, you know you're like hello. I thought I was calling Mike. Who is this is? Is Mike there yeah, who's this please? Like oh Jesus like you know not even famous people This is Joe Can I talk to and then you like dude? Why is your girlfriend answer your phone? Oh, hey, I don't care, you know It's no big deal. It's just laying around like that person is like controlling your environment. So weird isn't it so weird It's so weird. It's weird. It's just as weird of a guy does it if the girls phones ringing like who's this? Debbie Debbie you yeah, I'll get her hold on Oh, I hated Joe. I hate that. Oh, wow you talk to Debbie Creepy man when people try to control each other like that. It's so spooky isn't it? It is spooky It's dangerous to it's tricky. It's dangerous You gotta just know when someone really likes you know if they don't like you either find someone who does or figure out what's wrong yourself I If I don't you're gonna get in that cycle like that girl that I dated that went through my phone and did Screen shots of every single text I did every photo that I had in there and sent it to herself Like like pretty much spent four hours while sleeping in bed just going through my phone and making copies of everything Well, that's obviously a person that thought you were doing something different than what you were doing Right, she just decided that she had the right to do that right. You know I have the right to do that to people No, you know, and that's one of the weirdest things to go to become the NSA You don't have the right to go through someone's phone. I mean if someone's lying to you Yeah, that sucks. It sucks at someone lie to you, but you know what sucks just as bad Are you going through their fucking phone? That's that's I mean finding out that someone betrayed you by betraying them nobody went It sucks at someone lie to you, but you know what sucks just as bad. Are you going through their fucking phone? That's that's I mean finding out that someone betrayed you by betraying them Nobody wins there right, you know, that's not a win and it's certainly not a win if you're using it to I don't know what the fuck it's like People need to figure out a way to just get along better. I don't know what it is I don't know how How you eliminate the 50% plus divorce rate that we have in this country? I don't know how you get it so that people can figure out how to not be that person not be the woman not be the man not be the problem But fuck it's so it's so hard to do. Yeah, you got to let go man You just got to let go. I mean you got to let go It's if somebody's gonna leave you They're gonna leave you what's not just that it's you got to let go while you're with them, too That's what I mean I'm saying like going through by the time it gets to the point where you're going through somebody's emails to see if they're cheating on you That fucking that ship is left the port Right, it's over whether they're cheating on you or not you guys are so Unconnected that you don't know what they're doing What you never know what someone's doing. No, I mean you don't trust what they're doing right. You're so unconnected Did you hear about that guy that? Disappeared for 22 years or I think it was 19 years something like that long-ass time His family assumed he was dead. They had five children. They got a life insurance policy $800,000 and it turns out he was living with his gay lover in Palm Springs Talking to you tweeting right now. You're not really here. I'm Sculpting job. What are you squee? Sculpting played? This guy like he was a deeply religious guy and just couldn't deal with his sexuality It was just too crazy for him. He couldn't handle it and then he went crazy He went on a vacation and just never came home He just moved in with this gay guy and just started sucking cock and taking the butt and then just loved it This is like this is the place for me so much so that he abandoned his children and now his children like they were eight at the time Now they're grown like one of them is a grown woman and she has a children of her own And she's like I would never do that to my kids like he doesn't understand like he left when I was eight That was devastating to lose your father when you're eight just because you know you can't come out of the closet So you go and you never come back for like X amount of years 15-16 whatever the fuck years it was and then finally do come back and like look I fucked up like wow People can do that too. Like that's one of those things you got to realize like we're crazy We can that's that's also in the wheelhouse of human behavior It is you can I mean that's the trick. I think of relationships is just you got to be in the you bit of all Top things you've got to be in the moment with the relationships if you start Holding on to the idea that that should it's gonna last forever. You'll start going crazy That that that's just never the case It's just never the case you have to appreciate the moments that are good and then the moments that aren't so good You've got to trust that things are gonna get better Yeah, and you got to have a support system you got to have some exercise in your life to blow out the fucking bad hormones You've got to have a lot of shit going on and we're not told this you got to figure it out over Stumbling through your life running in the wall. This is a question. I have for you Something I've been thinking about man in a relationship is a great way to bring it up. Okay If you don't feel loving Toward someone if you don't feel it. Uh-huh and that quite often happens in relationships. We're just not feeling it right How were you supposed to act in? Other words you can't if you're not feeling it and you start acting like you're feeling it aren't you being dishonest or phony? Well, you have to that's a really that's a giant General question and that's the problem because it really depends entirely on the moment It depends entirely on you that person the variables are so vast the variables of of people the variables of scenarios The variables of lifestyle the variables of culture the veil of variables of what part of the world you live in There's a lot of variables when you're gonna answer that question and it's like why do you not you're not loving with that person? Who the fuck I don't know your situation? No to find out your situation would take a long time I would have to I would have to deeply delve into each one of your individual lives I'm saying wake up in the morning. You're a little hungover. Mm-hmm. I'm not even talking about relationships. You go to work You feel like shit. You don't feel kind Empathetic compassion at all. You don't want to listen to anybody. Yeah Are you faking it if you start acting kind to the people around you? What's better to follow that feeling and just be kind of like closed off or to try to act is though you're happy or you care about the people around you? Well, that's a different scenario and that scenario I feel like you have an obligation to be kind to the people that are around you as much as as humanly possible without compromising your own sanity But I'm you know getting to the point where someone's taken advantage of you being kind and they're just ruining your life and Acting like a shithead all the time and you're like hey dickhead. How about pay attention yourself How about you not do that? How about you not spew out every stupid thought that comes out of your fucking mouth that ruins everybody else's conversation Because you're doing something really selfish. All right sometimes you have to do that sometimes you have to regulate But other than that like if you go into work hungover, that's on you bitch All right be nice to everybody and you as a human being you should do it because you want to do it And if you think I don't want to do it you're in the wrong frame of mind Period and that's not a generalization in that type of a scenario What I thought you were talking about was inside the confines of a relationship and if you don't feel loving to someone inside the confines of a relationship Well, you know, there's so many possible of it variables, but I ultimately think if you're If you're a balanced person if you're if you are at least in the mode of balance like trying to attempt to achieve balance You should go with your instincts and if this is not the person for you. This is not the person for you Right, you know, yeah, no, I'm in I just was using that because we were talking about it I just mean in general you know, there's the prescription You know, you're nice Just be nice even if you don't feel it. Yeah, you could be nice You could be nice You mean you could sometimes get upset, you know sometimes, you know, just like oh look I'm sorry man. I just fucking today's crazy with me, but you know unless they're doing something to you be nice It's not their fault that you hung over some their fault that you're troubled. It's not their fault, you know As long as they're not like interfering with your ex as long as they're not being rude or disrespectful to your own space You know, we have all been there before like if you come to me like dude I'm sorry. I'm just in the shitty mood. I'm like hey, no worry about him man. I'm gonna talk just chill relax Like that's one thing about guys too like say if you and I were in a car Okay, and you like do that man. I just don't I really I don't want to talk. I just want to sit I'd be like I get it no worries just chill like you can do that But yeah if a guy in a girl or together and the guy's like look I just don't want to fucking talk. Yeah, you know within 10 minutes like okay. What's wrong? You can't Tell me what's wrong. What is it? It's such a problem Man, but it's such a problem because because like I I like to be quiet sometimes like I like to Just have moments of quiet and stuff and it really is tough because sometimes it feels like Girls translate that quiet and to exactly what you're saying and it's a real problem Well men and women are so fucking radically different as human beings with the hormone levels the the life experiences the goals and dreams and the fact that men want to fuck women and the fact that women are willing to let men Fuck them. It's like all of it is so bizarre. Yeah, you know It's so it's so they're so radically divided in like who we are and then yet We love each other and yet we're constantly around each other and if you're in a relationship that you know is you really enjoy and is really serious You're around them all the time like most of the day. Yeah on a regular basis You know and it's it's strange It's a direct for Simmons is a fucking great bit about it where he talks about like if I had a choose to be With one person on an island for the rest of my life He goes if it was you or my wife. I'd be like sorry honey. I'm gonna live with Joe on an island He goes because we're gonna have fun. He goes when was the last time you went? I'm gonna have a great conversation with my wife. He's like that doesn't fucking happen He's like yeah, love her and yeah, we have children together But I'm hanging out with my friend. He goes yeah, we're not gonna get any sex But so what we'll just go jerk off in the bushes then we'll make each other laugh for the rest of the day and you know that's because we are We're men and we understand men and that's why when women get together and they tell jokes about purses and shoes and Fucking 50 shades of gray or whatever the fuck they're into when we have whatever their their style of person is into You know, whether it's whatever feminist jokes whatever they get together and they laugh at the shit that they think is funny And if you were there you'd be like oh fucking Christ, but for them It's so awesome. They're laughing ah They're LOL and then they're saying stupid shit to each other that they like to hear Why because they don't have estrogen or they don't have testosterone rather they have estrogen they have ovaries They don't have a penis they have a vagina. They have totally different set up. It's a different animals It's totally different thing. Yeah, so for you to try to become what she wants you to be That's madness and for you to want her to become what you want her to be like that's madness too But you got to figure out what each other is and just sort of accept it right and as soon as you don't do that You're fucked your fucked. It's you're just gonna fucking hit the rocks It's not gonna last it's gonna fall apart You're closing your eyes and hitting the gas and one day eventually you're gonna hit something right It's not gonna work right yeah, it's true So when someone's going through your fucking emails and checking your text messages and sending all that shit to themselves That's not it's never gonna work. It's never gonna work for all the rough what you don't know He's crazy. You don't know Brian red bands of freak and you're not paying attention How are you not paying attention? Do you not know this guy? I know this guy you know, I don't have to look at his phone I know him, you know, it's like we we're so radically different though that that is a lesson That's so easily said and so impossible to Absorb and then it doesn't help that if you tune into the view You know and they're all going oh no girl He needs to give you his phone you need to take that phone You need to be able to look at that phone any time a day whatever you want You need to be able to do that pornography is just as bad as cheating. I've heard that I've heard that there was an argument That was on the the fight porn website Well, woman was saying that porn was watching porn is just as bad as cheating, but just crazy talk, you know It's they're we're just we're just we're just we're just totally different. Oh, I was My Scrats in unicorns. I was dating a girl once a long time ago And and I you know made the mistake of leaving porn up on the computer and leaving it like she came in and saw whatever porn Website add up in my apartment. I don't know why she's going into my apartment, but I remember coming home I guess I told her to meet me there something on her mark coming home She's sitting on my bed and she's in tears and she's like is this who you are This is what you like you like jerking off to this shit. I'm not good enough for you It was shocking because I at that time I didn't realize that that was some women associated my four minutes or five minutes of Lubing up my hand and jerking off to some random clip is like something Something offensive. Yeah, I didn't because it's such a small little it's such a small little thing That's what you failed to mention though. It was gay porn. That's why she was pissed off I Would I date with a girl whose mom is I older than her younger than me. Oh Hey, is there any booze in here man? Yeah, we got a drink. Yeah. I have ice No, we have was it was 9.25. It's not gonna start until 10 o'clock We're at the ice house tonight folks if you have in if you're in the neighborhood and you haven't made plans for the evening Hey, dude, did you happen to get ice? Did you Joe? Did you see that fucking Pacific Rim? No, I didn't did you yeah, you did see it. We're talking about it the other day. Oh My fucking god, man. So really It's visually really cool, but the characters are I tweeted that in like it and caught a lot of flak from really people who like robots and Godzilla It's no good. Let me ever see the Godzilla movie expect that to have good characters, but it's like come on Just because it's got fantasy beings and it doesn't mean it can't be good right? There's a lot of fantasy beings movies that are awesome, you know even simple ones like you didn't like Avatar though Avatar I liked better than I liked I made it through Avatar. I didn't make it through Pacific Rim I left really 40 minutes in oh my god I can't believe the board out of my fucking mind. That's amazing and this is a Benicio del Toro or a not-be-seal tutorial Where's one of those things where he presents it? I don't know if he if it was I'm not positive about that He did the same thing with mama where it's like Guillermo del Toro presents mama You just like it attaches his name to it. I mean I would would not go see Pacific Rim I would go see that movie that's coming out this Friday about the the new What's his name the guy to grizzly man? Oh? Yeah, yeah, Warner her's all yeah, he's putting out a movie called the act of killing oh Oh, I heard about very disturbing. I heard it's it's a disturbing and I heard it's brilliant Yeah, so his stuff is always brilliant the one thing that I didn't connect with with him is that cave The movie about the cave art. Oh Yeah, cave it forgot and drinks. Yeah. It didn't for whatever reason. I didn't really I don't know I didn't enjoy that. That's a snoozer dude that one. Yeah, knocks your ass out. Yeah, I don't know I don't know why everybody liked that one. I was watching that one. I was like hmm I don't there's nothing there for me, but I love the happy people I told you about that one life on the tiger about all these people that live in Siberia and their trappers and fishermen and hunters and they're just so happy. They're all like dancing and hugging each other and yeah out there living off the land and teaching each other how to How to survive this it's really it's an amazing movie. Yeah, he's a genius man. Yeah He's a bad motherfucker and also I heard black fish is really good too. What's black fish? Black fish is I think it's called black fish. It's about sea world and it's about the way they kidnap orcas and bring them in and how The orc is like you know every once in a while the orca will like grab one by the arm or kill one of them That killed the norca killed one of them, but you know it's the these are super intelligent beings They you're keeping in a swimming pool swimming pool basically and it's just torture and a hellish existence for them and yeah, they're like what I can't understand you I guess you're gonna have to keep doing tricks If you want fish. Yeah, you want this fish. Okay. You know what I want from you. I want you to flip Yeah, I don't know what you're saying. Do you want the fish you have to flip? Yeah, you know they found out the dolphins can will they believe rather the dolphins have names for each other? Yes, yeah, it's so cool, and I'm sure orcas do too. I bet. Yeah, they're they killed dolphins though They call them non-human people in India. That's what they've started calling them as non-human people Yeah, they're it's it's really obvious. They're smart as shit. There's no way that they should be in swimming pools That's it's so horrific. Did you see that woman in front of the dolphin Aquarium doing backflips for them and they stop to watch her and it's like they're really into watching it They both two of them are the sort of sitting there watching one of them seems to be like grinning It seems like they're really smiling like they think it's funny or weird Have you seen when they look in the mirror? Have you seen those videos? Yeah, that's amazing. They like pose and like they like they really are into themselves They're very aware of what they are. Yeah, and I think it's cool to them to see themselves like they don't get to see that under the ocean Ever so all of a sudden they have a mirror. It's got to be a weird thing to have that sort of branch of development where they are cerebral cortex is very evolved They have this very complex language and dialects and so complex and so different from ours that we don't understand it We are like are trying to pick out patterns and bits and pieces But as far as anyone been able to translate dolphin into like a code that you could read as English text No one's been able to do that. They can't do it But yeah, they understand what you're saying when you say hey you want a piece of fish You want a piece of fish do your flip and they'll do the flip like they know what you're saying They they they can understand what you're saying, but we don't understand what they're saying It's really kind of interesting. It's fascinating man I think a lot of what they're doing. I saw some documentary on them I wish I could remember what it was, but it's how their language is a lot of its movement too It's not just the sounds they're making but on top of it is the movements that they're making with the sound and it's also Relational to though to it's like a more of a dance that they're doing with what do you call it a pack of dolphins What do you call it? I think it's a pack yeah, it's like more It's like they have more of a unified consciousness than human beings do they're more of one thing And so the communication is something that's not as much It's a school of dolphins school a pod pod pod. There you go Yeah, plurality of lives they move in very strange ways together like that That is kind of cool and they also they they're they're capable of using sound to like to like measure where they're at and their Distances from each other. Yeah, you know, they're their languages are really incredibly evolved and complex and they're really beautiful in the fact that they're like very friendly to human beings And they're playful with human beings, but what's really freaky is their root is shit to each other They're regularly rape like they have these rape caves where they'll tuck a female dolphin in and just fucking a Raper forever that's right they kill babies on a regular basis and then orcas were killed dolphins Orca's were trouble target dolphins and kill them often talk yeah Best we're talking about they found that dolphins can they have names for each other. Yeah Crazyness, did you see that cartoon someone did scientifically accurate duck tails You It's like duck tails, but the way ducks really are that cartoon duck tails remember duck tails. That's so cool You got it. Yeah, it's so just it's really violent and it's funny into serving is a violent Well ducks are like all creatures are kind of fucked up. I mean all creatures are not like innocent and It's interesting, but ducks ducks rape too Jamie those glasses over there right behind your butt are those dirty glasses or clean glasses I think they're clean Lick it tell me what's up don't do it those look like clean glasses. Yeah, bring those bitches over it. That's my I think what they're doing right now with the with zoos and dolphins I think this is the last generation that does that that's my prediction My prediction is that they're gonna realize in a few years that what they're doing is really evil It's evil and it's unnecessary and they're not allowed to do it anymore The United States is not allowed to kidnap dolphins and take orcas from their families They're not allowed to do it anymore So they have to be bred in captivity or they have some other they're realizing this is scientifically accurate Duck just got run over Another duck ran over and it's fucking the dead duck And they're shitting their pants I wonder if Various feminist movements have gotten a hold of this making fun of rape Right, it's quite rude. I think this is rape culture. I am not even The one reason where in us about the fact that ducks are raping each other and that it should be stopped. Oh, that's cool You're cool, man. Thank you. It seems like I mean the way this is This happening it's almost like a rape apologist video. That's why they had a woman do it Well, you know, she's like the uncle Tom of the feminist that she's saying it. Yeah, she's saying it. It's not amazing. I mean they ducks rape Can't believe you said that again. You would you would about a trigger alert, and I think ducks deserve to rape Why is that why I'm in the rape culture, man. I like it. What do you what's your favorite part about rape culture? Ah the paintings the way the guys breast smells I like going to your neck. Yeah, no, I like the symphonies It's like it's funny to call the culture. I'll have a tiny bit. Please. I'm very tiny bit You the culture well the idea of calling it like rape culture That's some people protest that because when you put something into that sort of a box. Oh, it's rape culture Well, then what is there a murder culture? Because there kind of is right. There's a gun culture whenever you want to like define something as being negative You call it a culture. Oh watch it that follows but full. Oh, thank you. What are we drinking here? I don't know. That's a Company who gave it to us. I think yet somebody gave us that whiskey. Wow. Yeah, I think this might have been the Armenians Oh, yeah, we got this from run to Rousey. You want some? Oh, no, I'm good You're still drunk. How dare you Brian's living the crazy rock and roll life He really is I really caught up to him like over the last couple of years like if you follow his Instagram or his Twitter What you guys were insane when you knew her in San Diego for Comic Con It's all just drunk in rampage is and girls sticking their butts out the whole thing was a mess That was so much fun man comic Have you ever been to Comic Con? I will do much. I even went down there was with you Is when we did shows last year at American Comic Co But I didn't go to the Comic Con thing at all. Oh, it's sort of be too too chaotic people like the guy from breaking bad He wore a mask of the mid lead's guy wore a mask of his character So what do you know who he is? Yeah, and it was like a super realistic mask like it was a kind of like mission impossible Mask so he's like walking around there was like oh, can I get a picture with you? Yeah, yeah, and then When they had the panel they called his name and he came up out of the audience and and sat down And I was like what the fuck who is this weird guy with the mask on and he just takes off It's masking it's so weird because he's like taking off his own face Yeah, maybe I'll go next year. Yeah, and check it out. It seems like something you have to do I heard Patton Pat and recorded his his comedy special there you do dude Seriously, I went to me and jam band when that wasn't you Benji Like we went from the beginning of the line and walked to see how far it went and went around the whole entire place When down the street around this other building a down this other street like it was the longest line I've ever seen for Stand up comedy where was the venue? What was the venue? It was a it was a theater that was down the street like a big theater I don't know but it was a this is the one that I did last time did you go? I didn't go through that the last time now. It's San Diego's badass. I like it a lot There's a lot of great spots. I forget with a Pandora. I want to say I did the Pandora Yeah, I think that's that's it. Yeah. It's a beautiful theater, too. It's pretty dope Yeah, there's there's a house of blues there. That's a great place to perform American comedy company like it used to be that there was no Comedy clubs in San Diego. There's two there's madhouse right now Yeah, madhouse and American comedy company together and then there's the theaters, too It but we used to be the San Diego had La Hoya they had the comedy store and that was it but now it's like it's like a genuine comedy Community down there. Yeah, yeah, fucking love it down there. I love that. It's comedy club, too Right next to Mexico American comedy company is great. You go to ask. Oh no, but you know she almost was it Yoshi Yoshi Almost talked me into it because I guess people are saying that it's not as bad as everyone saying that like right when you go over You just get in the taxi telling to take you to this one place and like there's like 200 hookers You just pick which ones you want out dude. Let me just oh before anything on my show I was interviewing a disease specialist right I interviewed some new guy who scared the fucking shit out of me There's a new form of gonorrhea that they cannot cure here in the Philippines They're finding it in Southeast Asia and this this this form of gonorrhea Okay, that's the warning shot folks. It's making its way over here And you can't cure it and it kills a lot of people good luck So you just have like green shit coming out of your dick for life. I don't know. I don't know what happens You're just gonna say rots off falls off. Yeah. I don't know what happens. I really don't know what happens Well, and someone says he can't cure gonorrhea that ain't good that can't be good That's not good. No, that's fucked up. That's scary one of the things about the show It's been fucking terrifying is talking to disease specialists Duncan and I went to Galveston Texas We went to this level four lab which is like the highest level. That's like where they deal with like Ebola and like you know Hemorrhagic viruses that those hemorrhagic flus they tear apart your body. You just bleed out of every hole and I was scared to go I was scared to go and Duncan and I missed our flight So we went we had like zero hour sleep the next day we slept for one hour. We missed our flight like Just from talking just I think what were we weren't even stoned now? We were just having fun talking we just Airport Drinking beer eating pizza and talking and then we like casually forget that there's a time that flights happened Well, I was wrong I thought it was 20 minutes later than it was and they it was 10 minutes before the flight they had locked the doors Yeah, and I was like oh no like why can't you let us on like we've already locked door I go but it's right there. You can't just let us on like is it that really that hard to open the door? I'm not a terrorist. They didn't like call your name over the intercoms or maybe they did You had to take a tram to this place. Yeah, it was it was a crafty situation But the bottom line is Duncan and I we waited at the airport and then we flew there and then we went from there Would no sleep got some coffee and went to meet this disease specialist at this creepy fucking lab where they keep you know rabies this is a this lab is a This this lab is straight out of every movie where like a plague starts. It's the it's like guarded It's you and it's got an outside shell around it. It's got a shell that's basically around another building that has within it different Security levels and in the deepest security levels. That's where they keep the hemorrhagic fever That's where they keep the Ebola four foot thick cement walls and the whole deal Happensilters. Yeah. It's though. It was really they showed us the filtration system I mean they really have it locked down But it's in Galveston Texas and it's where tornadoes hit her keys hit It's like right next to the ocean right and they it's like all the good shit is way up high So if the water comes in theoretically the water will never reach the areas where the the diseases are But it's oh it's so crazy like when you really stop and think about what our what a gamble that is like Montana used to be underwater Did you know that like the whole fucking thing used to be under the great Western inland sea? So they're just banking that Galveston is gonna stay above ground Like what what if a massive shift in the in the earth's crust happens if there's a giant earthquake right off the coast Guess what that fuckers underwater now? Yep Like how how well do you have that lockdown? But look man, they claims totally locked down completely say I was thinking about it And I was you know thinking of like the outrage of the like in the hubris and all that of having like a zoo of Deadly viruses But then what freaked me out even more as I realized that's necessary We need that because of the gonorrhea that you're talking about and all the countless other things that are happening all over the planet All the time that's some that of that is definitely a The thing that creep me out the most doing this show was Bio wet the bi apocalypse. Yeah, that shit is real and scary and Provable and a matter of time and when you see the look on these people's faces They look like people With a burden There are people who are operating under the burden of the knowledge that it's only a matter of time before the right duck Shits in the right farm yard and the right kid eats that duck meat and that kid sneezes on the right person and 20 million people die It's only a matter of time. It's like the earthquake that's gonna come to LA Like it's not a matter of if but when and these people are Desperately trying to understand how to create vaccines for shit that maybe doesn't even exist yet That's scary man. Well, they've got a hold of it so far. What's really it's it is scary But it's also really incredibly fascinating that we're our bodies are essentially ecosystems They were not just a person you're a whole bunch of different life forms co-existing together Yeah, and there's more bacteria cells and you're body than there are human cells. Yeah, like the whole thing is it's a mass a mass of life There's E. coli and all those different flora that lives on your skin and that's one of the reasons why probiotics Why you always see me drinking kombucha? I drink this stuff every day. I drink it like crazy And I never get set filled your immune system. Well, it doesn't just build your immune system It actually creates troops it creates healthy bacteria troops that fight off aggressively fight off incoming troops Wow That's so if you come in contact with like funky colds or weird shit on your hands the acidophilus and And probiotics various probiotics will actually go after that stuff and keep it from taking hold whereas if you have an unhealthy Skin flora and you know ironically what gives you an unhealthy skin flora using antibacterial soap no shit Yep using antibacterial soap is bad for you because yeah, you most stuff you can cure with just soap and water unless you're a surgeon You're about to cut someone's heart open and you're worried about my up using antibacterial soap is bad for you because yeah you most stuff you can cure with just soap and water unless you're a surgeon you're about to cut someone's heart open and you're worried about MRSA what you really want is good soap just soap and there's in fact soap that actually fosters healthy skin for there's some stuff called defense soap that a lot of grapplers use and if you go to defense soap dot com they sell this healthy soap that has tea tree oil and you caliptis and all these natural remedies for healthy skin flora promote healthy skin flora and cleans off all the negative shit you shouldn't be fucking with antibacterial soap unless you have a real you know doctor prescribed issue for that's crazy I didn't know that because when I go to the airport I'll buy one of those little tubes and slather my hands that's okay that's okay that's not that bad putting it on your hands is not that bad when you wash your body with it that's when shit gets weird when when you wash you can wash your hands then a bacterial soap and you'll be fine but regular old soap and water will kill anything that's bad you should wash your hands should wash your hands on a regular basis especially when you're touching a lot of things in public places then you touch your eyes you face I mean that's how things get spread you but washing your hands just with soap and water can fix most of that but when you wash your body with antibacterial soap you really fuck up the whole like ecosystem on the surface of your skin I knew a dude who had he had like chronic ringworm you started getting ringworm from grappling and started getting it everywhere and you know I think it was Andy Bravo who schooled him on it who said like okay what are you doing like how are you getting this all the time like what are you taking do you use lammasil lammasil like something that kills it do you take probiotics like you got to not use antibacterial soap you got to figure out how to like bring your body back to health because this is like a symptom of an issue these what ringworm is is an invading army and it's got a stronghold in your system and has a stronghold in your system because your systems weak so let's figure out why your systems weak like what is it and that's the holistic approach to very few people take they just go I'll go put your man back to your soap on these back to you probably it's not just that there's you're a whole system you know it's but it's really hard for us to wrap our hands because I'm not a system of me you're dunking trustful that's you know that's Brian like we're people right I'm a person I know I am and you're not no you're you're you're there's like a consciousness that's moving the school of cells you know in the school of cells is guy there's a lot of shit going on that's fucking crazy man that's a crazy thing to think about that we're just like a tightly woven school of bacterial fish swimming through the coral reef of matter well do you want better the each individual cells almost entirely space so we don't even know what the fuck we are we're just we're we're this combination of different cells that share some sort of a strange relationship with each other you know each cell is mostly just nothing yeah it's a harmony and by the way it's a harmony that's destined to fly apart into a million pieces eventually that's the other definitely maybe maybe they figure out a way around that dunking trust all maybe that's what we were talking about but when we did the the robo pocalypse show where we deal with robo sapiens all these when went to dunking iron r a went to this global future 2045 conference in New York City and met with all these futurists are we gonna get in trouble saying all this stuff I thought we were supposed to keep our litt our we're not we're not giving away any any secrets we're just talking about how bad asset was that was bad conversations we got to have with these people yeah it was amazing we're in strange times people strange fucking times and getting stranger every goddamn day yeah it's true every day it's yeah we're doing weird or beautiful and weird and and I wish it's just an interesting thing man I'll tell you if you keep doing this show man you're gonna stumble upon something fucked up I don't think so I think so that's you man you always go to that did babies Nancy Grace you're gonna stumble on some demonic possession thing you're gonna be in the woods you're gonna find some people they're gonna be sacrificing virgin you're gonna have to make a decision man and it's gonna be like a star track thing or star craft thing you're gonna have to move your dongles into a certain parent dongles out there you there's no dongles and star craft yeah anger you got oh it was real that was real folks it was real it was beautiful but it was real docket trussle is back on the comedy horse he would be appearing tonight at the ice house with lovely under the comedy horse I don't know what this is gonna be like Tom Segura why do you say that how dare you don't be negative you're creating your own reality this is the secret okay I've been on stage in two months secret you used to see every comic I know hasn't been on stage it's gonna be great there goes it's gonna be the great comment that you know that hasn't been on stage in what says what says what if you have been on stage in two months that sucks you get a spanking from the gods of comedy I took three months off once yeah a long time ago I got it just it was burnt out and I just decided you know what I'm in the middle of so much shit let me just take some time and it was a long side ever taken off a comedy and then I remember getting back on stage was like oh oh this is nice like immediately fell right back into it I miss it first set back was weird second set back was comfortable yeah man I'm I'm excited about it but I know I've got it I've got to pay the piper a little bit and I'm willing to pay that price you're still performing see that's one of the things that I found about doing podcasts and doing them on a regular basis especially like you get used to talking in front of people you get you get you the like the anxiety that fucks up your set that right that's alleviated you're always going on these rants I mean you're doing these rants when we do the podcast for the show in front of like just the suits and the camber people and the folks that work on the show and you're going right into it going right in the flow you're not being self-conscious you know you're you're completely in the moment and I think a lot of that has to do with doing a lot of podcasts yes for sure it's a yes it's definitely a skill that you develop and you get you get you get better you're right man it is a form of performance and it's yeah I love it it's really fun it's a lot less anxiety provoking than getting on stage but I'm excited about getting on stage again I want to get back into walking around the ice house you know just like being in a comedy club this thing starts rising in me like fuck I miss this man that it it becomes such a huge part of your life you know but it's like sometimes you do have to take a break I had to take a break I there's just yeah I couldn't go on stage after my mom died or just too weird it was like I just I didn't I didn't just don't want to spend any mental energy dealing with that I told you about the time I went on stage after Phil Harmon and died I had one of the worst sets of my life like after Phil Harmon and died where I fucked up and I I was just starting to get my stage legs back under me and then I was at a gas station I ran into a friend who's a police officer and he gave me some details about the case that I didn't know and it was I'll spare everyone the more of a details but it was enough to really freak me the fuck out and then I went on stage and just I couldn't be funny it was impossible and nothing funny to say I just ate shit and I knew in the middle of it that I was never going to pull myself out of it I knew I shouldn't have been up there I just had to take it more time off you know whatever whatever amount of time I remember how many weeks it was that I took off it just wasn't enough sometimes I think you got to do that and I think in comedy sometimes a more of a athletic mentality gets applied to it which is like you just got to keep constantly punching the bag no matter what no matter what just punch the bag no matter what just go through and I think if you're going to be doing stand up your whole life shit's going to happen that's going to make you have to take some breaks from time to time well even that as an athletic point of view is a bad point of view because one of the key things to athletes is don't get yourself in a rut and keep going recognize what you're doing step back assess reanalyze go back into it and also if you get injured don't keep going rest up okay give yourself some recuperation and I think that a life injury like you know losing a loved one that's a life injury yeah and you got to recuperate from that injury and you have to deal with emotional damage the same way you deal with the damage to a ligament or damage to a muscle yeah and it and it all and you can agree grief has its own pattern yeah it's really curious because you can see that there's like a cyclical thing or like it's it's terrible in cycles but it gets better and better and better and it's really interesting man it's a very natural thing but I don't know how I'm not heard of comics who after their folks die like you keep doing stand up I just don't know how you do that it's like you got to sit on the bench for a while and I just bought a bird feeder I bought bird feeders and just sat on my porch and you know like I was like feet eat right after it happened I was sitting on my porch and I bird feeders and the birds it started showing up and like oh this is great man this is really nice and peaceful and the birds are showing up to the bird feeder and then there's this whack and a fucking bird flew into the window right in front of me I can't escape that I just killed a fucking bird stop getting so comfortable bitch and on that note I love you buddy I love you too hey thanks for putting me on your show Joe it's so cool is so cool having you you made the whole thing much better thank you really fun we had a good time as it already should fear thanks to legal zoom go to legal zoom dot com use the code name Rogan save yourself some money thanks also to stamps dot com use the code word JRE and get yourself a special offer thank you to on it dot com go to on and IT and use the code name Rogan god damn I say these same thing so often it's impossible to do it any other way folks use the code name Rogan stick it up your butt and put mushrooms on it it'll grow spores no spores will take over the universe and then those spores will eventually be housed in gals in Texas behind 15 miles of glass maybe that's what the earth is for humans we love the fuck out of you guys the west coast version of the new show Joe Rogan questions everything starts in six minutes hope you enjoy it if you don't enjoy it that's cool too it's tough it's tough out there for a pimp I'm not pimp he's pimp you're a love you guys what does that mean what a terrible way to end it we were doing so well and I just ran out of words yeah thanks everybody we'll talk to you soon we'll see you next week and I'll see you this weekend if you watch the UFC fights or if you live in Seattle and you go into the more theater hello bye see you soon love you a big kiss