Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. What's happening? How are you? Good. Been really good. Just got an awesome lesson. I watched these videos of you describing this intravenous DMT experience. And the first thing I said is I need to talk to the sky about that. Like, that seems like one of the most insane descriptions of anything that anybody's ever experienced that I've ever seen online. Yeah. So tell me about this experience. So it's DMT. And this guy makes it and they put it into a pump. And it's like an anesthesia pump that you'd have in like an operating room. And essentially, they can adjust your like milliliters per hour dose. Like they would use for anesthesia. And like they launch you off, you're laying the space is beautiful. They hold the space really well. And they can eat what do you mean by that? They hold the space really well. Like it's a beautiful space. Like there's this amazing place where you lay down in the middle of the room. It's like on a really soft pillow thing. And great music on. And it's very calm. And these people are just unbelievably calm and good human beings. To take you through the experience. And the cool thing about this pump is that you can adjust your altitude. So like you could be in the middle of this and say, I need to go up more. I want to come down. If you need to take a P break, they'll like pull you down. You kind of go onto the runway. And then you go P and you come back and you launch right back up as high as you want to go as fast as you want to go. So it's five and a half hours. And I did one P break. But it's DMT. And like the highest you can feel on DMT. Like the most you can see on DMT, but it's five and a half hours of that. And the next time I go back, we're going to mix Alzheimer's drugs with this. Why? To see how much I can bring back. To see if it improves like the retrieval. Like because you know like when you're in the DMT space, or like I have access to all this stuff, like oh my God, I wish I could bring this back. I want to bring this back so bad. And it seems like we're protected from bringing it back. It does. It does. Like a dream. Yeah. There's there's real similar comparisons to the dream state. Yeah. The dream state is very strange. I've had like profound dreams and or really bizarre dreams. And when I wake up, they're so crystal clear. And with I go to take a P, I have a cup of coffee. Yeah. I can't remember them anymore. Yeah. I barely barely can grip them. Yeah. They just slide through your fingers. It's like we there is a protective layer there. It seems like it has to be because if there was anything that you experienced in the regular conscious state that was that profound, you would remember it forever. Yeah. Just think of a great thing. Just USC fight this weekend. I remember everything. Oh my God. It's so like drilled into my brain. And that is like nothing compared to a DMT experience. Yeah. And it's it just seems like I've never met someone who's done DMT that would just call. Oh, yeah, it's a psychedelic. It's a hallucination. I've never met anybody that's actually done it. And then we'll we'll just go back and say, I hallucinate at something. There's a few people that say that I've actually read this one piece by this guy. I forget his discipline. I forget what was serious academic and his his position after I think he did like a hundred DMT trips. And his position was that this is all being concocted by your visual cortex and your brain and your imagination. Those his position, but I mean, why wouldn't you why wouldn't you go to Walmart on a DMT trip then? I don't think that's what I just think, you know, because it's very disorienting and you know, you really should sit still. But I think that there's contrarians. No, I mean, like in the DMT space, why don't you just see a target or a seven eleven or something? Right, right, right. I see what you're saying. Something that your imagination could can cause. It's like a dream. Like in a dream, you might be a target. Yeah. And you had on Andrew Gallimore. Yes, I hear it. He talked about this world making part of our brain. Yes. Man, that really hooked me in. And during the six hour journey experience, whatever you want to call it, at the end of I mean, it's DMT like you're like, it's just reality's gone. Like you like everything. Oh, yeah. You see all the stuff that you think is real? Goodbye. It's like everything's gone. And at the end of this, I on camera, I asked about his dead 39 times. I wasn't concerned what the answer was. I just was like, am I dead? And coming toward the end of this experience, I was balling. I was crying. And it just felt like I had to wrap myself in some kind of ego in order to just return back here to come back. There's no way for me to come back and not have some little ego thing. And it made me so sad coming back that I just didn't want to come back at all. You know what I'm talking about? It's like Avatar Depression times a million. I'm talking about it. I'm talking about people that don't know what I'm talking about. When the movie Avatar came out, it was so wonderful. And they experience, these people seemed like to live such a righteous, peaceful existence in the forest that people came back and they were depressed that they don't live in the Avatar world. Yeah. So like a psychological condition that was, it was happening with so many different therapists that people started calling it Avatar Depression. That's brilliant. It's got a name like in the 90s, there was a Truman Show syndrome. Right. Right. Right. Right. But I mean, how badass is your fucking movie? And it creates a psychological condition in people that wish that reality was like your movie. Yeah. I love that. I did feel like that times that. Times that. Times that. You know, whatever it is. Yeah. And one of the things that I didn't know happened was my wife was with me, Michelle. And the night before when we were at their house, they just said, you can pick a violin. I said, let Michelle pick a violin. And I was in the other room and Michelle was with this guy who makes the DMT. And he said, would you like to pray over this DMT? And Michelle did that. And I didn't even know she prayed over it. And the next day, and I'm not saying there's anything here, but when it started, the first thing that happened was like these alien beings or whatever kind of pinned me down on this table and ripped me open like from pelvis all the way up to my neck, like all the way open. And I could hear my organs kind of moving around inside my body and they're doing something in me. And the second thing was they pushed my head back up on the table and this big drill bit went up inside my nose like all the way to the back of my head. It didn't hurt. There's no pain or anything. And they were doing that for probably 45 minutes a long time. And it was freezing cold. And then after this journey, I told Michelle about this and she's like, that's what I asked them to do. I asked them to fix your heart and your brain. So I have a heart thing going on and I have a brain disease, which is why I was doing this in the first place. And that was the first thing that happened on that journey. I'm not saying there's causation. Did you get looked at afterwards to see if they did anything? I haven't because they have to do a pet scan and it's so much radiation. It's like it's so much radiation. I can't even hug or sleep with my wife or my or two year old for like 48 hours. It's a ton of radiation. But fuck that. What is the condition that you have in the brain? I have mesial temporal sclerosis. Yeah, we talked about this the last time you're here. Yeah. And I had a seizure like the night before. Our last thing that you said that methylene blue is really helping you with. You know how many people have ripped that out of our show and like made commercials for their company and stuff out of them. Oh, I'm used to that. There's somebody ads for me selling everything from coffee makers to hard on pills. And if I don't take that sling blue for a couple of days, I'll go back into seizure territory pretty quickly. Really? But I will say just to go back to this dream thing that you were talking about, the way that I like get people to help like understand this, like if you're in it, I'll walk you through this really quick. Let's say you're in a dream right now and I'm just here in your dream. We're chilling out hanging out and let's say you don't know it's a dream yet. And I look over and I say like what is that UFO spaceship over there? How far is that from your face right now? And you look over at that flying saucer thing, you'd be like, oh, it's eight feet or something like that. But then if you know it's a dream and I ask you how far is it, you're still going to say, oh, it's eight feet. And then I ask what is it made out of? You're going to say, oh, it's aluminum or whatever that thing's made out of. But there's no aluminum in your brain. Right? So like, and then I ask again, like what is it made out of? And you eventually you'll get to a place where you say it's made out of me. It's made out of consciousness. Then I say what is the distance made out of that entire eight feet of distance is also made out of your consciousness. And then I say, well, why did you have to manufacture eyeballs in your dream to see out of? And then what are the photons like you're seeing colors and all this stuff in your dream? There's no photons bouncing off of stuff in your dream. The entire body is fabricated. Your eyes are fabricated like you're seeing all this stuff without your eyeballs at all. that you made up eyeballs to see it all through. And then the distance, like from you to that flying saucer, you say it's eight feet, the distance is zero. Like there's not eight feet inside of your brain. So kind of walk people in to show that everything that you would do, like not in a dream, like sitting here in the studio to prove that this picture of water is real, you could do identical. You could do everything in a dream that you would do in waking reality to prove that something is real. And then you realize that the distance between you and that thing is a, made up of consciousness and b doesn't exist. Whoa. That makes sense? It does make sense. It does make sense because we assume that because we have tools to measure distance and sound and touch and all those different, different senses that we've possessed that this is what the world's made out of. Yeah. And it makes sense. Like, and there's dream logic, right? So like if you're all of a sudden riding on your rhinoceros to the pizza factory, you're like, oh yeah, it's normal. So that if you look at like a galaxy, it matches the shape of DNA. If you look at the toroidal shape of like gravitational stuff, it matches the shape of a red blood cell. You look at an eyeball close up. It looks like a nebula. And if we just look at as above so below, like any of that is even remotely true, then dreams might tell us more than we think about what's going on here and in this, what we call reality. Have you ever seen the comparison between the universe itself and a human neural tissue? No. It's bananas. Like a identical image. Yeah, it's like an image of the known universe with an image of, is it a brain cell or a human neural cell? I forget which one it was. But when you look at the two of them together, you're like, okay, is this whole thing, a giant fractal inside of a fractal inside of a, if that's what infinity is. You know, we'd like to think that like this is what it looks like. That's a brain cell and that's the universe. Good Lord. What the fuck? I mean, it's the same thing. So it's, if at least it looks like the same thing, right? You know, when we think of infinity, we think of what we are here on earth, that there is no distance that you could travel where you find the end, that the infinite universe just keeps going on. But it's way crazier than that. It might be that the entire infinite universe that doesn't have an end is actually a part of a cell that's in another being. Yeah. It's in an infinite universe that has no end that's actually just a part of a cell. Yeah. And infinity, and it goes on and on and on and on. Yeah. And we have some evidence that that might be the case just in the weirdness of these supermassive black holes that are in the center of every galaxy. So these supermassive black, we had Michelle Fowler on the podcast, so they're fascinating woman. She's an astrophysicist and just discussing all the strangeness of the universe, the more that we experience it, the more, the deeper they look, the crazier it is. It's like the further the James Webb telescope goes out, the more shit that they find like, what is going, what is that? How is that there? This is not supposed to there. They think that there's a real possibility that inside every black hole is a completely new universe, that it's some sort of a passageway. So if there's hundreds of billions of galaxies, just in the known universe, and every one of those galaxies has a supermassive black hole inside of it in the center of it. You go through that and you are in hundreds of billions of new galaxies, all with black holes. And then you go into those fucking universes and you find creatures with brains and you get to their brain and their brain looks like a universe. And if you get closer and closer and closer, you might see hundreds of billions of galaxies each with black holes inside their fucking brain cells. Yes. That was well said. That needs to be assured. But it's infinite. So there's no end to that process. It's not like there's us and then we are a part of a brain cell of a creature. Now we're a part of a brain cell that's a part of a creature that's a part of a brain cell that's a creature that's a part of a universe. And that's what real infinity is. There is no end. Yeah. I agree with that. And we need less certainty about this shit. There's so many people who say, well, I have this bigger down. Well, you said about coming back from the DMT trip about how your ego tries to kind of reclaim reality for you. I think that is a genuine problem with human beings today in which they cling to ideologies, to political parties, to ethics, morals, religion, whatever it is that they connect themselves to inseparably. And I think part of that is just being afraid of the vastness of what this experience really is. And the way that shield yourself from it is to pretend to be sure. That's it. Yeah. It just gives me a little blanket of I've got to figure it out. I know what's happening. Kid, you know, you're a security blanket. Yeah. And it's we need less certainty in the world. We need more people to say as far as we know before they say some shit. Yeah. Sounds sciencey as far as we know. Why can't we just put that phrase in front of more things? If you're doing DMT, it just, or if anyone does DMT, maybe it's a hallucination. But Terrence McKenna described it so well when he said death by astonishment. And there's no words at the moment you try to label anything that you see in the DMT space, it's like your destroy. It's an active destruction almost. There's no words for it. They don't exist because words, words are sounds that we make with our face to describe known reality. And that there's no words for that experience. Yeah. And we invented language for trading chickens and spices and stuff. That's what languages for. And if you just look at like one little sciencey thing, like that's weird, like quantum entanglement. And then somebody says we can't explain how this is like faster than light or anything. But we can explain it if we go to a dream and then say the distance doesn't exist. Distance isn't real. So I think that's, I want to know about the UFC fight at the White House. To get away from super will for a second. It was insane. This episode is brought to you by Blue Choo. The number one brand for better sex. Blue Choo just drops something crazy. Blue Choo gold. Blue Choo has made it easy for five million men to get hard. But now they've made it easier to get horny too. Blue Choo gold gets your brain and body on the same page fast. Other options just help blood flow. But gold combines four ingredients into one tablet that works fast. Two ingredients increase blood flow and two boost arousal and intimacy. So for a good time, go to bluechoo.com. And we've got a special deal for our listeners right now. When you buy two months of blue Choo gold, you get the third free with promo code Rogan. You'll also receive an additional 10% off plus free overnight shipping on your first order. Visit bluechoo.com for more details and important safety information. Blue Choo is number one for a reason. Was the temperature made make everything different? It was perfect. No, the temperature was perfect. I was very concerned about that. I was really concerned that these guys are going to have to fight and heat, but that was not an issue at all. It seemed like it was in the 70s. And it was the storm like miraculously just passed us. Like there was all these weather warnings at one point in time. The fight was supposed to start at 8 p.m. And at one point in time, one of the weather experts wanted us to start at 10.30. Yeah, because the 10.30 that which would have been a disaster. 10.30 at night would have been a disaster because it's a six hour show. Yeah, you know, or close to it, whatever it is. XA 9.10. Low to one. I guess it was five hours. But somehow another storm just like almost like went around the White House. I mean, I don't know. Mysterious. I don't know what that is. I don't know if that science or if that's consciousness. I don't know what steered the storm or if it's just random luck. It could have been all the above. But all my fears of the weather getting in the way of the fights were there. No, it did mean anything. And then there was this long sort of ceremonial thing. What they had jets fly over and you know, they played music and all this different stuff. By the time we got to the actual fights dark out perfect, the weather was perfect. So that that was an issue at all. And it was just the magnitude of the event. I know people saw it on television and looked insane. But the magnitude of the event being their alive. So there's the event that's taking place on the lawn of the White House. And that has 4,000 plus people. The main event. Yes. Yeah. So the actual UFC. So there's there's a bunch of military guys that are standing up in the back. There's like a thousand of those and there's 3,000 plus that are seated. All these people are seated. But then behind that, not that far. Like a hundred yards, 200 yards, whatever it is. I guess it's more than that. Maybe 300 yards. There's the ellipse. The ellipse has 85,000 people. This is gone for free. Yes. It's like in the whole White House ecosfer, whatever it is. Wow. Yeah. So this area, they have giant screen setup. And they have huge speakers in sound. And so 85,000 fans are watching the fights live on the screens. And they can see the lights of the fucking this claw dome in the distance. And they can see the White House in the distance where the fights are taking place. But they're watching it on massive screens with commentary. And it was insane. And you could hear them roar. So you hear the crowd from here. And then you hear 85,000 people in this fucking rock. You could hear it in the distance. It was insane. It was insane. Just the magnitude of it was insane. Unlike anything else you've ever done. Be on. I mean, I'm a hyperbolic individual. And I'm always like, this is the greatest. This is awesome. Like, that was the wildest experience that I've ever had in my 20, whatever years of calling combat sports. There's nothing even close. Nothing even close. It was the greatest night of fights of all time. And it was the only night in the history of the sport where every single fight ended by knockout. Did they all? Every single one. Seven fights. Seven fights. Every one of them ended by knockout. Wow. Which never just unprecedented. Unprecedented. Wow. It was like the perfect experience for anybody that had never watched the UFC before to see it that way at the White House like that. I mean, it was nuts. A huge experience for the fans that got to be there in the ellipse. And I mean, I saw videos. These guys, they were having so much fun. And it's like, everyone's in there for free. You don't have to pay for the tickets. There's 85,000 people out there. They're all screaming and cheering and the drinks are flowing. And it was wild. I mean, just absolutely wild. What a 250th. Yeah. Wow. And it's a sport that was like banned just what? 15, 20 years ago or something? 20 plus years ago. So when the UFC, so when I first started work of the UFC was in 1997 and back then, you had to watch it on direct TV. I had direct TV just because that was the only way to watch the UFC. That's why I didn't have cable. And then, Zufa purchased it. So the Fretita brothers and Dana White, they started running it in 2001. And that's when I came aboard it again. So I had quit in 1998. I worked from 1997 to 1998. And then I quit. And then they brought me back in 2001. And when that was going on, it was banned from cable. And they slowly started working it back. They got it on Fox Sports Net, which was the first time I ever had commented for the UFC. That was UFC 37 and a half, a very special show that they put on for Fox Sports Net, tried to introduce people to the sport. And so that was the first time it was on cable again. And then they started getting pay-per-view buys and it started growing and gathering steam. But even back then, it was like you were doing porn or something or snuff films. So you were doing something that was damaging for your career. And people would look at you like, why are you working for the cage fighting organization? Why would you do that? Cut to 25 years later. It's on the lawn of the White House. And it is one of the most watch sporting events in the history of the world. I don't know what the total overall views are as of now. But I know that it was like well over a, I think it was 150 million just by Monday. Unbelievable. Just by Monday. So that's like the night of and then people that watched the replay that weren't there when the fight took place because they heard about it. But now between now and between then and now, now we're dealing with Tuesday, like it's probably another 50 or 60 million people watched it. I'm not Paramount Plus just to just to watch it on YouTube. I'm sure. I don't know. 13 bucks or something. And then it was. But man, what a hell of an event. Yeah, it was just amazing event. I wish I would have stayed up longer. But I watched the first few fights. It was fantastic. The main event was the greatest fight of all time. It literally was the greatest fight of all time because the guy that won it just engaged he was in many books, uh, six to one favorite, uh, six to one underdog rather, which is crazy odds for a guy that was a interim lightweight champion fought the best, the best, one of the best to ever do it. B M F champion. I mean, just super durable, real dangerous guy. And that's how good Ilia to pour is. That's how good Ilia to pour is. Ilia to pour. Yeah. In many people's eyes is the most skilled of the new generation and the new generation is the most skilled of all time. And Ilia was like the top of the mountain. And most people thought that he was going to be too much and he was too much for a while. And he almost took Justin out in the second round. And then Justin rallied and then Ilia. It looked like he got really damaged in either the first of the second round. And he was having a real trouble seeing out of one of his eyes. And then Justin started landing bombs in the third round. Ilia had slowed down quite a bit. It looked like he had really tried to finish Justin in the second. And sometimes when you try to finish a guy, you just hit the gas way too much and you can't recover in between rounds. And Justin recovered and just to start battering Ilia in the third and fourth. And by the end of the fourth round, Ilia quit on his stool. But he couldn't see how to either eye. He had got knee into the body real bad when he was on the ground. Like Justin literally just didn't have him down with his two hands and just smashed a knee into his ribcade. And he could see him go like that. And that was the end of the round. And then he had to retire on his stool and made like, I think he broke a rib. That probably could have happened. But I think maybe more significantly was the eye damage. Both of his eyes were swollen shut. His nose was fucked up. He had taken so many punches to the face and it looked like perhaps orbital damage. Like maybe he had a fractured orbital. Because his whole thing had just swollen up on both sides. He was unrecognizable. And you know, the guy hung in there as long as he could. But when you can't see, you can't see. And when you're that battered, sometimes it's smart to stop. And he's a very smart guy. And I think you realize like, there's, I can't defend myself right now. I can't see. This guy is smashing me. It's called a day. This is what it is. It's preserved my body and my brain and rebuild and come back another day. But for Justin, it was like one of the most epic things I've ever seen in my life. For him to win like that, when everybody had counted him out, he was saying he was going to be his last fight. It was like a retirement fight. Thirty seven years old. It's been in the game forever. You know, who's who of all time greats in the sport? And this is going to be his last fight. And he's like, what if I can win the title at the White House, what an ending to a career? And that's what everybody was saying. Like yeah, but you're not gonna because you're fighting Elliot to Poria. And he was like, all right, we'll see. Wow. And he pulled it off. He pulled it. It was, it was insane. It was epic. Absolutely epic. What do you think that what do you think the mindset is between somebody who you know, you walk in as an underdog and wind up winning, even though your skills may not be more proficient in the other guy, what do you think the mental differences between that like somebody who loses or wins? Well, there's a lot of factors. One of the factors is that Justin has always been incredibly durable. I mean, it might just be a genetic thing. He even joked around about it. Like science needs to take a look at this hardass skin I have. Okay. See, very rarely gets cut at all. And he's like, I got these hardass bones and hardass skin. He was joking around like science needs to study this. And it's true. I mean, he really is insanely durable. He's been rocked and hurt before. And he's been stopped in fights before. He was knocked out in the last second of the last round by Matt, Matt, excuse me, Max Holloway in the BMF title, which was an insane fight. But the guy is just, he has zero quit in him. It doesn't exist. Like if you're looking for quit, you go into a room. It's empty. The quit room has no one in it. There's nothing in there. He's not going to quit. He can lose because he's a human, but he's not going to quit. And he's also been into the deep trenches before, the deep trenches of these five round chaotic insane battles. And oddly, he thrives in those kind of battles. He's described as the most violent man in the most violent sport. That's we've all talked about him like that for years. Since the moment he burst onto the scene when he fought Michael Johnson, in the UFC at least, he's a extraordinary dude, just a very extraordinary dude. And not the most technically skilled, like Ilia looked technically. Well, in the UFC at least. He's just, he's an extraordinary dude. Just a very extraordinary dude. And not the most technically skilled. Like, Ilia looked technically better than him. But it didn't matter. Justin found a way to land shots, found a way to like, persevere from the early, early rounds where he was in real trouble. And just shocked the world. It was amazing. One of the coolest things I've ever seen in my life. That's cool. It was fucking amazing. The show was there. Oh, my God. I talked to a bunch of people into going. I didn't want like Shane Gillis was thinking about not going. I'm like, bro, you gotta go. It's gonna be epic. It's gonna be once everything. Not a once in a lifetime. Once in anybody's lifetime. So that ever happened before. It's probably never gonna happen again. Probably not. Not a good deal. That's something you have to see and experience. Yeah. And so many people are trying to make it a partisan thing. Like they're mad at people for being there. Like, oh, you're support-trying. Like, it's a fucking fight at the White House. Doesn't mean you endorse foreign policy. Like shut the fuck up. It's pretty much. Just please stop. And again, it's this thing, the ego thing, where people are just, they just want so badly. And on both sides, for sure. You know, the right celebrates this as a win for masculinity and patriotism and all these different things. Like, okay, settle down. Everybody settle down. You should all be together. And I mean, one of the things that I wanted to do when we went to the White House to try to push through psychedelics for therapy, for veterans and people, you know, first responders, people struggling with PTSD, is you need to take these steps to give people a path to change their mind. I think that's the title of Michael Pollan's book. And it's a great way to describe it. Change your mind. Yeah. Change your whole perspective. And there's no better way to change your whole perspective than a complete dissolving of your ego momentarily. Just at least for a while, just lock it all away, push it out, and then you get a chance to see what it actually is doing. And the effect that it has when you let it back into your life. Yeah, how much of these clothes do you want to put back on? Right. I described it as like control, all delete for your brain. And then when your brain reboots it as one folder, and that folder is just labeled my old bullshit. And you have a decision to make. They go back into my old bullshit. And most people do at least a little. I do a little. But for sure, you recognize that it's your old bullshit instead of thinking you are who you thought you were. Yeah. And it's a lot of stuff that didn't really belong to you. It's like we act like decorator crabs all throughout our lives. We're just kind of grabbing these little things. Yeah. And you realize that. And I think that just talking about this politics thing, I think separation is the number one greatest deception of all time. The biggest problem with the biggest problem that we have and the biggest deception that we have. Like we are separate. And the one thing that you see, and you do it something, and I mean this therapeutically. I don't mean you're taking mushrooms and going to a concert. When you do this like psych therapeutics psychedelics, the first big realization you have is like, oh shit. This is all me. We're all kind of connected. We might be one thing, but there's something here that's connecting all of us. Yeah. Whatever that is. Well, you want to call it consciousness, or our souls are connected or something. Yeah. There's something where we're connected that we're kind of denying for some strange reason. And I think that that's one of the reasons. I think you maybe would agree that we're in a loneliness pandemic right now. We have more rampant loneliness around the world than we've ever had before. And if you look at how this is evolved, I sh- I didn't know it was coffee. Thanks, man. Gotcha. So if you look- Cheers, sir. Thank you, man. If you look at this loneliness and people are, you could stand in a room full of people and still feel lonely. For so many people, the majority of the world right now is in this loneliness pandemic. So what's really going on, and this is my opinion, feel free to toss it. But we're in a place that's becoming more and more performative on a daily basis. Just fake artificial. Let me say what people want to hear. Let me act how people want to- How I want to be perceived. Sure. And what means that if I'm even- If I'm a little bit performative, no matter who it is, my best friends, they put their hand on my backs, it chases you a great guy, you're a good person. But in the back of my mind, I know that I'm performing. I know for a fact that probably not even my spouse has ever seen me. Right. They can't like me. They can't love me because that's not me. Right. And I think this hyperperformance world of, I don't mean performance. I mean, let me act out this thing. I'm going to act a certain way. And because if you look at our ancestors, I had to worry about- You and I were maybe eight, nine years apart. But when we were in elementary school or middle school, we did some stupid shit. We had to worry about 20 people making fun of us. And now we got to worry about 20 million. And that is an existential difference between those things. So we get better at hiding shame and pretending like we don't have it. And then what if now going back to separation? Now this is what I call the disease of specialness, of I am special, which means I'm the only one here pretending and everybody else has got their shit figured out. And then that isolates you even further. And not realizing that everyone has this. Everyone has this little crap going on. And the fear that people feel of, like, if I just be real, then I'm going to get made fun of. I'm going to get rejected. I'm going to be kicked out of the tribe. It's not real. It's not real, but it can be real, depending upon your circumstances. So if you are in a very enclosed ideological tribe, and there's no tolerance for any deviation from whatever the narrative is. This is a real problem with social media. This is a real problem that it wasn't like that. I mean, I know I'm like one of those old people that's like back to martyr. But when I was young, you were allowed to have different opinions. It was normal. I had friends that were conservative, and I would make fun of them. And they would make fun of me. And it was normal. Like you kept those friends. Because no one was telling you to get rid of those friends. There was no pressure to be a part of a group. There was no silence as violence bullshit. There was a bunch of people that thought differently, and you talked about stuff. And we weren't as informed. That's a fact. We didn't know as much about how the world works. That's a fact. But now that we do, one of the things that we should all be acutely aware of with spending so much time interacting with each other online is that a lot of the people that you're interacting with are not real. And not a small number. If you are on X, there was an FBI analyst that he before even not real. The bots, like an actual not human. AI bots. AI bots is a big percentage. And then there's actual humans who work for organizations that push narratives. You can hire an organization to push a certain narrative. You can hire them to support you. Or you can hire them to attack your enemies. You can hire companies that will artificially create a movement of people that agree that this person's a bad person, that this project's a bad project, that this is a good idea, that he's a good person, that he's a good politician, whatever it is. So you're not dealing with genuine thought. You're dealing with bullshit. And here's where it gets really weird. I think it's natural. And I think everything is nature. And I think this idea that this artificial communication that we've developed through social media is what's really fucking everybody up. I don't think that's the case. I think this is a natural progression of nature. The idea that our stupid fucking creativity and intuition and technological ingenuity, it can bypass nature, I think it's horseshit. It is nature. And I think nature is creating this convergence. It's creating this very bizarre convergence of humans and artificial intelligence through a bunch of ways that are unproductive and a bunch of ways that are productive, but all of it like gathering together in a device that's like almost impossible to resist. If there was anything else that you use six hours a day or eight out, if you're a good person, if you're good with it, like a lot of kids are seven, eight, nine hours a day. Like, is there anything else like that? You would think that person's got a horrible addiction. But for us, we've accepted it as a normal part of society. And that, whatever that interaction with it that we have, that deep connection we have, is only gonna get deeper. And it's ultimately going to lead to some sort of hive mind. And it'll probably not be a hive human mind only. I think it will be a human AI hive mind. And I think one of the things that's happening to us is there's this weird like movement to, this is a weird move it to discredit traditional feminineity and traditional masculinity. And there's this bizarre over celebration of outliers of weird gender people, of people that are confused with their gender. And I think that's because if you play that out, this is a new thing. Again, I'm an old man. But when I was a young guy that would, there was cross dressers, there was guys that got off on wearing women's clothes. There was, there was always stuff like that. There's always been people with gender dysphoria. But there was never like this. And this is also coming at a time where microplastics are disrupting our endocrine systems. Big time. Big time. So testosterone levels are dropping. We're like, oh my God, it's a crisis. What do we do about it? It's natural. Are you simplistic is probably natural. It's probably all somehow or another connected to take us out of our territorial, primate bodies and move us into some new stage of existence. Like some post biological. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. I think it's inevitable. And I'm not fighting it. Is it Elon agree with that? Like we're moving toward that direction. Well, he most certainly thinks that we are moving into a direction where we converge. And I mean, he said about, this is what, I mean, the dude's literally cutting holes in people's heads and just shove and fucking circuits in there. And doing a lot of wild shit with it. I mean, people are using their eyes like aim bots and a paralyzed gentleman that we have on the podcast was the first neural link patient. I'll watch that. Yeah. He said it's like a cheat code. Like he, because he looked where he looks, that's where the cursor goes. And he just shoots people. Wow. You know, like he's shooting people with his mind. Fortnite. Yeah. He's playing video games with his mind. And he's like, excellent at it. Well, you've got to think, well, eventually, you'll be able to move your body that way. And then eventually, you'll have all sorts of other tools that didn't exist before. And one of the things that Elon has famously said is you are going to be able to talk without words. That's the hive mind. We're moving towards that. And this gets us into all this weird UAP shit. Like what are these aliens? What are these experiences that people are having? Like what is this all a mass hallucination? Is it us from the future? Is it us from the past? Is it another species that's far more advanced than us that's come down here to monitor us and shepherd us through our very difficult time? Whatever it is, they seem to be what we're going to be if we keep going in this direction. Our brains are far larger than monkeys. Our bodies are far weaker. Pound for pound than any of the other primates. So what do they look like? They look like these fucking spin-lit things with no muscles and giant heads. And they communicate telepathically. And universally, like everyone from all over the world, every planet or every country rather that's experienced these creatures, they all say the same thing. They all say they communicate with them telepathically. Which that's where we're going. Which is exactly what you experience on DMT. Right. And like you can get a test drive of what that's like. Do you know that the original, when the original scientists, or I guess were anthropologists, or what kind of people were studying ayahuasca when they first went down to the Amazon, they wanted to call harming telepathy. They didn't know that it had already, because the rules of scientific nomenclature, it had already been named. So they didn't know. So this substance that these people had created, one of the aspects of it, they wanted to talk to it as telepathy that they want to refer to it that way. So that was what they were gonna call it scientifically. Wow. Because they had experienced these telepathic moments while on it. But because it had already been named, they weren't allowed to rename it. So they just stuck with harming. But harming had a real chance of being called telepathy. That's beautiful. Why? Yeah. Yeah. And it just seems like consciousness is coming to the forefront of every debate right now. Yeah. The telepathy tapes shot out of a cannon. Like nobody's ever heard of that stuff. And I think you had the director or something on this show. Yes. And it just seems like the level of certainty that some people have about consciousness is adorable. Yeah. Adorable to me. It's like, where these little hairless monkeys and we're like, every generation is like, oh yeah, we didn't know 100 years ago, but now we know. We know now. Right. It's just ridiculous. Yeah. But that's the ego. That's the certainty. Yeah. We need that certainty. And I think we're at a place where curiosity, and maybe except for politics, curiosity isn't really dangerous anymore. It's like people are scared to be publicly curious or to be public question something. Like why is this here? Why is that there? Do you know who Ignat's symbol of ice was? No. He was a doctor back in the day. No idea what year it was, but it was very, very early days. He was the guy who said, hey, maybe in between these operating room patients, what if we washed this blood off of our hands? Oh, right. Or do this next operation? And he got laughed out of the room and then eventually thrown into an insane asylum where he died for questioning this thing. And it seems like so much of what's going on with like psychedelics research, even though like document after document is showing it's the most effective thing for PTSD and anxiety and depression and addiction and all this other stuff. And I'm not a champion researcher in any of this stuff, but it seems like kind of coming out, people are getting the same treatment as this guy did when they're coming out, even though it's been documented so well. Yeah. And it's still a schedule one drug. Well, I think now that's changing and I think there's, and I think one of the things that's changing it is the acceptance of it by the right and one of some of them at least, the old boomers, they don't want to let go. But the young guys, like especially special forces, guys, seals, Rangers, those kind of guys, they come back. So many of their buddies have had experiences and then recognize when one of their friends is struggling and take them to have these experiences and that word's getting out. Sean Ryan's responsible for a lot of that because he's talked really openly about it and obviously he has a huge platform. But Marcus Lattrell, him talking about it and then Rick Perry, the former governor of Texas, Republican governor of Texas who hated marijuana, hated psychedelics, thought it was all just a bunch of hippie bullshit. Well, he had brain atrophy, natural age-related brain atrophy. And the doctor said, oh, it's just pretty normal, standard, you're fine. Ghost and does this Ibogaine session comes back. Rick did it himself. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, a couple. He's done a few. Ghost and does this Ibogaine session comes back. The doctor says, you've got to be 25% approval improvement rather in your brain atrophy. So then six months later, he goes back again for another scan. His brain atrophy is gone, it's gone. He says he feels different, he thinks different. He feels better, like his mind works better. So it's not just an experience I became in particular. It seems to be neuro regenerative in a profound way. But if this was a drug that you could patent, pharmaceutical drug companies would be all over this shit. And it'd be that it's proving to be one of the most effective drugs ever tested. If you're looking at efficacy versus a sample size, it's one of the most effective ever tested. Andy Stumpf and I just did a show about it, talking about this stuff. And he's brought a lot of awareness to this. And if I think if we could get a little bit of awareness to it, I think we could cure a lot of this stuff. But I think the number one thing is like, is there a way that we can help to get this faster to people? And they're working on it. Brian Hubbard and Rick Perry, I mean, Rick Perry said openly that this is my life's mission now. Really? Yeah, former governor, Republican governor of Texas. His life's mission is to promote psychedelics. I'm so glad. Oh, I'm so glad. And this is another, I begame is the best one to start out with because I begame has zero recreational use. It's zero. It's not fun. Nobody likes it. It's not a good time. You throw up, you shit yourself, you freak out for 24 hours. But when you come back, you're a different person. And if you're willing to do that, if you're willing to do that, you can change. You could do a lot of fixing all that's, and maybe even more importantly, be aware of what these little traps, these little, these little deeply carved grooves that you're conscious and it seems to comfortably slip into over and over again, whether it's alcoholism or gambling or whatever it is, it seems to just shut those down in a very profound way that you can't get anywhere else. Yeah, and it's just, I think it zooms you out to where you're like, oh shit, I thought all that was important. Like you're talking about zooming out on these galaxies within galaxies and black holes and stuff, but it gives you that perspective like, whoa, I thought I was really special. I thought I was super important. Yeah, I mean, that is one of the things that most psychedelics do is they remove that idea completely. I go, this is, you gotta get rid of this. This is tripping you up. You're carrying this fucking weight around everywhere and it's really stopping your progress. Yeah, and it's kind of like you're in a video game and then somebody comes back and be like, hey man, here's the way that here's the shit you need to actually worry about. You don't need to do all this other stuff. Right, right, right, right. Yeah, like a little helper guy in the video game. Yeah, guys, gotta come with me. This is the wrong room. They're coming, we gotta get out of this room. Don't do that quest. Yeah, that's what it is. And I mean, I'm a hypnosis guy, studied all the brainwashing, interrogation, kind of stuff. This is the fastest way I think. And I've studied every possible way to change you in behavior that probably has ever been researched. And this is bar none the fastest. And I think one of the reasons that it helps people so much and I don't wanna, this is gonna turn into a two hour psychedelics discussion, but it's your show. I don't care. Okay. I think it's because perspective shifting is what happens. Like if you're looking at life and you have this little GoPro as your consciousness and you're looking at this level, it just snatches that thing up and zooms it out and puts it in another location where you're like, oh my God, I had no idea it was like this. Right. And it seems to be that perspective, just the shift in perspective, seems to be the number one thing that psychedelics produce. And therapeutically. And that's the thing that like cognitive behavioral therapy is trying to get done over the course of like 10 or 12 years or you know, have a long it takes. But it's just seems like it does it so fast in a profound way. And the stuff is non-addictive, non-toxic. You're not gonna, it's not a street drug. You're not gonna see people out there on the street selling like DMT capsules. And DMT, I would say similar to Ibogaine is not recreational. I think it is. Do you think DMT's recreation? Yeah. I think there's a lot of people that recreationally do it. I think that would be your thought, you know, oh, we'll just do this and have fun. And then once you do it, it's no longer recreational. Once it's too profound to be just purely recreational. Yeah. You've heard people getting banned from us? Yes. I have. Jamie and I were just talking about this. Yeah. I knew a guy who's a tattoo artist who got banned. And you can keep taking DMT. Like you can go take 10 hits on a DMT vape pen or something and you're not going anywhere. And that nuts. It's insane. It's like they just decide. Yeah. No, no, no. You're doing this for the wrong reasons. Yeah. I listened to one guy describing. He's like, it's basically like you're knocking on the door of a nightclub and like the little thing opens up. It's like, now you're not coming in. You got to think like what are they doing wrong? Yeah. I think maybe going in with ego seems to be one of the things I see is in common. And people just trying just treating it like a little recreational thing. The ego thing is a problem even within psychedelics because there's sort of a carve out that happens, which I always refer to as spiritual narcissism. There's a bunch of people that do it that somehow and other want to be a guru or a leader and to show you that there's somehow or another better because they have had these experiences they know more and they pretend they know more. They pretend they know more and then they get a whole bunch of people that are very suggestible. And those people sort of listen to them. And then that's how you start a cult. And there's something to that. There's a specific type of narcissism that occurs from regular psychedelics when people want to lead groups of people. Yeah. And I think if you go into a journey or two with no ego, do you know what you learned? Less. Like you're less certain every time. Oh yeah. About the world. From the moment you get in there, you're like, oh, how does this reel? How is this available 15 seconds away from normal reality? Yes. Yeah. And I definitely think that we're moving forward. If we move forward with psychedelics, our species is going to move forward. Yeah. Yeah, I agree. Yeah, I agree. And I think all the time, what would have happened if that sweeping psychedelics acts, the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 hadn't been enacted. If this stuff had been available to people for the last 56 years, what would that be like? Yeah. What would the 94 Ford Taurus actually look like? No. It would look like a 69 Mustang. Yeah. Because those people that were doing drugs. Exactly. I mean, there's no, there's no other explanation in my mind why cars started looking like shit. And music. Yeah. Put down a lot of things. Always to change good music. We had some good music. But there's a bunch of people that still did drugs. But there was a giant change between 1950 and 1960 with automobiles, with music, with everything. And I think a large part of that, if you really being honest, a large part of that is psychedelics. Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, if you ever gone into a huge mosque and looked up at the ceiling, it's incredible. It looks like exactly like what you see on all this stuff. I'll go no further on that topic. But just all the ancient artwork, it's so psychedelic and beautiful. It's like they got written out of history somehow. And I think there's a difference between drugs and medicine. Can we take a pee break? Sure. Go ahead and take a pee break. I'm good, but I'll hold. I think it's their coffee. Yeah. We'll be right back. This episode is brought to you by Uber Eats. This summer, soccer is here. And the watch parties will be going back to back to back. But don't worry, Uber Eats has your game day essentials covered with 30% off all orders from Aldi, Kroger, and Dollar General. All the snacks and groceries to keep your crowd happy, delivered straight to your door, like chips, dips, wings, quack, and fresh ingredients for the perfect game day spread. Order in so you can stay locked in on the game, all the hosting, none of the hassle. Order now for 30% off your game day snacks and grocery order only on Uber Eats for a limited time. Offer eligible for 30% off entire order, taxes, fees, and terms apply. Offer valid through July 5th. Product availability varies by region. Exclusions may apply. Pull it up, Jamie. So we're looking at Jamie pulled up a bunch of photos of inside of mosques. And that in particular, that is absolutely a DMT experience. So here's the question. Like I feel like I've been to that. Right, how about this question? I mean, that looks super DMT. I've spent time there in that mosque in that dimension. What is that one, Jamie, to the upper left? Do you just, you scroll up left, upper left, left, right? Yeah, I just, that's it. What the fuck is that? Is that 3D? Yeah, that's it. Oh, you know what that is, dude? I think that's Alex Gray's place. Is it? It says it's an IRA, you're on. Oh, okay. Oh my God. Well, you know what Alex Gray's doing? Do you know Alex Gray? The visionary artist? Yeah. So his Chapel of Sacred Mirrors, this, he has a real church that they built based on his artwork. Wow. It's incredible. Non-denominational. Yes. Like a Rothco, but the Rothco Chapel. You know, he's one of those guys, you know what I was talking about with spiritual narcissism, running a group. He's the opposite of that. Yeah. Like, is he's pure and his place, like this is his artwork, but this is his place. And I feel like the outside of it. That's the outside of the place. That is so cool. So the outside of the place is basically like 3D printed artwork of his that they've constructed into a building. I don't even know how he did it. It must have cost a fuckload of money, a bunch of people donated. The inside of his, I think that is, so he used to have a place in New York City that was like a gallery that was the Chapel of Sacred Mirrors. So where does that? He's done it. That's a lot of painting. He says that is it. That's on the Hudson. Yeah, in Hudson Valley. I mean, he's an incredible, incredible artist and his ability to capture that experience. Like that one, if you go, oh, actually scroll down to the lower left right there. Egyptian looking one, lower right there. Bam. I've seen that, dude. I've one hundred percent seen that. I've seen that too, but go back to the other one that we just looked at. No, that's not the same. That's the one I've seen. I've literally seen that. I've seen that those, and they move and change and morph. Yeah, he's just able to nail it. I don't know how he does that. He's incredible. Great one, he's a good artist. But too, being able to bring that back with coherence, where you can kind of show someone what it's like. I remember seeing that face and I was like in the DMT space, I was like, is that me? And right when I said that, the mouth moved exactly like my mouth and I was like, that is me. Well, you're it and it's you and you're everyone. Yeah. You're everyone and it's everyone. Yeah. It's the weird thing with the mosques. If you go back to some of the images, please are the mosques. The first one that you pulled up, the ceiling. What were they doing? Not that one. The original one that you pulled up, that one. Yeah. Like that's very, very DMT. So like what were they doing that they saw this and is that was that a part of their religion at one point? That one. Yeah, like that's very very damn day So like what were they doing that they saw this and is that was that a part of the religion at one point in time and Has that been forgotten like what is it? Like why why did that exist go back into one of those one please it had to that one this color seems Oh really you think it's AI. Yeah, I just have just seen so much of that stuff last year Right could be the rest of them Well go to that website. I mean the photo just looks so I say go to that website where it says 50 Mess browsing mosques if it says where it is then I told you there it is That's in Iran. We probably blew that up already God I hope not I hope not do I mean didn't Israel blow up a bunch of like ancient Christian Places in Lebanon Believe they did I don't know place this is the same place. So that's whatever that places Is that the same place? Yeah, that is a very psychedelic place. Okay. Look at that one. That's nuts. What what were they doing? Is that three days? It's like it's like a 3d photos. It's Manipulated in a weird way. Okay, so that's like an official eye right but either way Just the designs themselves are the actual design So like what were they doing that they wanted that to be represented and is that missing? Because there's a great book called the sacred mushroom in the cross. Yeah, you read that John Marco lego book Yeah, so John Marco lego who's an ordained minister, but he was agnostic And he was a guy that studied theology and his conclusion after year I mean even being an ordained minister his conclusion was that like it's probably not any one religion doesn't have it right yeah, and so he was one of the people Was brought on to decipher the Dead Sea Scrolls He decipers it for 14 years he works on it and he writes this book called the sacred mushroom in the cross where he believes that the entire story of Christianity is connected to the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and fertility cults. Yeah Have you seen like Jamie am I allowed to ask Jamie to pull some sure? Yeah Like one of the original paintings of Jesus was him with a bunch of mushrooms Right and yeah, well the Adam and Eve the fresco in France So that Adam and Eve fresco that's painted on this God on I want to say it's at least a thousand years old. It's painted on this wall in France is Adam and Eve in the tree of life and the tree of life is mushrooms Yeah, yeah It's the tree of knowledge. Yes the fruit of knowledge right Right it's not the tree of life. It's the fruit of knowledge, but this the story of it like that Like what is the actual reference to why in the Bible? I don't want to paraphrase it as to why God told them not to eat from the fruit of that tree Pulled put that in the perplexity. What did God say to Adam? By the way everybody blame an Eve Adam was the only one to talk to God We don't even know if Adam told Eve He might have forgot to tell her and then blamed the whole human race suffering forever I didn't know that. Yeah. I Look read that read that over and over again. I'm like where does it say that Adam told Eve? It doesn't anywhere God told Adam he eat from any tree in the garden except for the tree of knowledge of good and evil and that if he ate from it He would surely die You are free to eat from any tree in the garden But you must not eat from the tree of knowledge of good and evil for when you eat from it you will certainly die Okay, and where does that mean? Right you will die of what you go deaf because if that's what it is yeah, and then the weird thing is that the whole connection between the Amanita, Mascaria and The psychedelic book or rather the sacred mushroom in the cross cross book is that the Amanita, Mascaria is a red Mushroom that looks like an apple and in fact the term like there's like confusion as to whether or not the term apple is actually the meaning a red thing and then it might not actually be an apple But it might actually be the original version of it might have been the Amanita and then you have to think How many thousands of years has this been around that it took how many different people have translated it? How many different people have passed on the story like what was the source? What was the original story and why deleted? How does this get deleted so Like pervasively oh, yeah around the whole world it ever heard the Christmas traditions as well. Oh, yeah. Yeah, Santa Claus is a mushroom Oh my gosh, and it's the same mushroom the Amanita Mascaria the weird thing about the Amanita Mascaria is it doesn't Like not a lot of people have had psychedelic experiences on it It's very weird mushroom. You think it evolved maybe over time. It very well could have Makenna had some thoughts on it. They said that it could be Seasonal it could be location. It could be like where it is. It could be genetic variations Could be very there's could be a bunch of different factors and if you consume it by way of reindeer piss right Yeah, well not only that people drink their piss when they consume it and it gives them like the second dose The second burst so apparently the psychedelic compounds come through the urine and if you drink it You just get a full straight blast. Yeah, and reindeer or have been known to like knock shamans out of the way to drink their their piss Because the reindeer are addicted to this mushroom. Yeah, which is why they fly in the Santa Claus story. Yeah And I heard the story the shamans would go around pulled by dog sleds or something and The snow was so high that they would drop the stuff down the chimney To these people and they was fresh mushrooms or fresh almond meat or something and in order to dry it out You'd have to hang it by the fire Right and you hang it over the trees too that people would put it on trees. That's where the Decorating the Christmas tree is also those mushrooms. They have many to mascara as well Michael Rissel relationship with coniferous trees. I don't know this. Yeah, so that's where they grow They grow underneath the trees just like the brightly packaged Presence that are underneath the trees on Christmas This story is it's a crazy story It's like what did we what did we forget? Yeah, how much did we forget? What's been revised right? We'll just think about what we're just talking about inside of our generation. So the 1970 control substances act now that is a That's a government that's Restricting its citizens and trying to control its citizens and one of the ways it does it is limit their psychedelic experiences Yeah, that's not the only time that's happened right. That's the ilesinean mysteries. That's from Brian Murriskus book The mortality key like this this is what they did back then they banned these rituals Why because it's very difficult to control people when you realize that we're all one? Yeah You know, it's almost impossible. It doesn't work. They don't want to listen you don't want to do it You know you start getting your lawmakers and your military people start doing it well then wars becomes impossible Absolutely impossible at that point is that's me. I'm hurting myself right doing all exactly. Yeah And it's insane it is insane I want to I wish there was like on a Google doc how you can look at revision history I wish there was something like that for our race or species right right Just so much has been changed and modified and We have historians, but we don't they're they're studying Something that's been permitted and something that's been officially released and This is more certainty. It's just more certainty like oh oh that reindeer story That's bullshit because I got this book from yeah, they don't know. It's bullshit Lichtenstein or you know whatever from the historian is plead to authority that you have the answer is bitch You don't have the answers. Yeah, you definitely don't you can't it's not possible. You can't have those answers Yeah, and We're in an age where This is proving to help with So many other things and it's not just depression, but it's like Alzheimer's dementia Parkinson's myesthemia gravis Multiple sclerosis Autism it's helping with yeah Would you see that woman that had dementia that took five grams of mushrooms and slept for like 19 hours and woke up and then she could talk No, you didn't see that story. No. Yeah. There was a recent story. There was a woman She was non-verbal. She couldn't communicate. She couldn't dress herself couldn't walk couldn't do anything Took five grams of mushrooms slept for 19 hours came back started communicating Look people in the eye was able to change herself as they would walk around How beautiful crazy and then with subsequent doses or condition improved even more Yeah, and you had uh I think it was Paul Stamets on and he helped his mother through cancer I think like stage three cancer with Turkey tail or something. Okay. I can't remember what it was. Well, there's a bunch of mushrooms that help with inflammation there's a bunch of mushrooms that help with cognitive function You know lion's mane is famous for that. Yeah, you know, there's there's some weird relationship that we have with fungus And one of the interesting things about fungus we think of it as like a plant, but it's not it breathes air Breeze air like people do. It's a weird thing and it also can survive in a vacuum It can survive in the vacuum of space. Yeah, which is the Panspermia notion that mushroom spores Where came here riding on an asteroid slammed into the earth And it might be one of the reasons why we're people in the first place. That's McKenna's idea. Yeah of how we like Separated from our Ancestral like chromagnon yeah roots. Yeah. Yeah. I mean this whole idea that people were created by aliens Yeah, maybe maybe those aliens are mushrooms. I mean or maybe mushrooms is the way the aliens created people Yeah, you know it might be just how you add a little bit of fertilizer to tomato plants to make them awesome Yeah It's just every generation like this generation says oh, we're in this Computer simulation right now, but you know during the industrial revolution the universe was a machine and Right we started doing electricity and the universe was energy and vibration Yeah, we invent computers and all of a sudden the universe is a computer. It's just every iteration So I tend to think that any theory that assumes humans are super special I'm a little skeptical. Yeah, because it assumes that a Like these ancient like way up high beings Have like a MacBook that they're trying to run this shit. Right And they're like all the hard drive would need to be the size of the solar system Like just assuming that they have the same shit that we do. Right. It's unbelievable Yeah, that's a that's a funny comparison. They used to think the universe was a machine It's apt So dead on It's we always want to try to figure it out. I think it's way more complicated And I think the more we figure it out the more we realize it's way more complicated and It is all connected like people are super special. We really are but so is it everything else Exactly everything super special. Yeah, this is uh and everything is weirdly connected Yeah, and even if you look at regular ass science just basic ass science And you look at an Alan Watts quote of like we are the universe experiencing itself That's just regular science if we are the big bang then we are the universe and we are experiencing it itself And you don't need to do any stretches of imagination for that to be true and Roger Penrose Doesn't even think the big bang is the start of the universe He thinks it's a series of big bangs. Oh really? Yeah, I think it's like it's never ending cycle. Did you have them one? Yeah? Long time ago Wow, well here we have Roger Penrose on Isn't it sir Penrose now? Yes, didn't he get sir knitted? I'm American though. Yeah, I tend to shy away from those so right full foolish Night to see that's another thing. Oh, he's a knight. That's a king. Oh You know if did I I don't know if we talked about last time Have I told you like I figured out a way to edit memory? No, like you can do it with hypnosis So I know that you can introduce false memories into people's heads Yeah, and I know that people create their own false memories. Yeah, so you found a way to do that different than that. Yes and I make videos similar to this on my YouTube channel But I wanted to walk you through this process because I think you would love it. Okay So if I want somebody to be Able to edit a memory. I need to make them good at that skill first So and we already edit memories every time we touch a memory like I think back to my wedding right now I'll edit something and I'll do it unknowingly Right so if our brain is already an expert at making these changes and then like before I stop thinking about that wedding My brain automatically clicks file safe Right and then so the next time I look back on it the memory is going to be there But it won't I won't see it as an edit I'll just see it as that's the memory no matter how many times I change it. Does that make sense? Yes. Okay So first we need to get them to start doing some of that stuff consciously So if you take somebody back to let's say a childhood bedroom when they're seven okay And you do it very vividly with hypnosis so like you're you're going in their file cabinet You let them explore the bedroom the details all this kind of stuff you make it extremely vivid and coherent And then you have them pick up like a pencil a really sharp brand new pencil Maybe from there's pencil box from school or something And they go over by the light switch in the bedroom and just make one dot on a wall And I figured this out talking to game developers And I was talking to game developers about how people figure out ways to exit the map to exit the playable area of the game Because it kind of feels like that's what psychedelics do There's like it let's just kind of exit this little playable map Temporarily so one of these game developers said oh you just if you can get somebody To modify one pixel then they can modify the entire map So if one pixel is glitching then we can glitch they can glitch all kinds of stuff So I thought maybe we can do that in humans So I've done this hundreds of times So you just make a mark on the wall With a pencil and then you kind of fast forward their life So like you bring them to like say there were six Now we're gonna bring them back into the room when they're eight The bedsheets are different. Maybe the wall color changed something like that But the one thing they can do is walk over there to the light switch and see that that tiny little dot Is still there So something and now you're starting to see that there's permanence through time It makes sense so long So if we can get them to do that like 50 times tiny change You're doing it through hypnosis? Yeah I mean hypnosis is such a loaded crazy word They're relaxed they feel safe and their brain is in theta brainwave state most of the time Which is around seven hertz. Yeah, I've been hypnotized And I thought it was gonna be like I didn't know what was going on I was in another world. You know, it's a very odd state of mind. Yeah It's kind of like guided meditation or but you feel very conscious It's not and I remembered it. It wasn't yeah, it didn't wake up my pants off Pretty normal. Yeah, it's pretty come a mancher in candidate as far as you know as far as you know right so If you can do this 15 20 30 times of one pixel at a time and show that it's permanent through time Then you can go back to other events and instead of editing the memory itself You teach them how to shift perspective So you now you take them through 30 more events really quick a true events a birthday party a dinner adult life children doesn't matter And now like let's say I'm at a dinner party Cannot jump from one body to another and experience the event through that lens. So first we make them an expert at editing memory and seeing Permanent's in time Second is perspective shifting in real memory so I can jump across the table I can be at my own wedding and maybe be somebody in the front row and like just shift their perspective in memory The final layer is exactly what psychedelics do So the final layer is go back to that event when you get kicked in the nuts and everybody laughed at you in elementary school or whatever and You can reprocess that memory in a very short amount of time as an adult With the perspective of an adult So meaning like so if you had a traumatic event in high school with somebody beat you up in front everybody Everybody mocked you and it's just like destroyed your year and destroyed your confidence You can go back and shift this person's experience Yeah, and instead of modify the memory like oh that never happened The memory stays the perspective changes so now and now you show permanence over time So that that has downstream effects for all kinds of stuff later in life So this is when a script got written of I've got to be tough I've got to be loud or somebody's gonna hurt me or you know what? I mean like one of these little childhood scripts So you get the downstream effects so you can go in there and there's probably you could probably edit memories I've always been nervous to modify stuff that's way more than like a pixel or something insignificant But the memory stays the same the perspective is what changes and you can show that it's got a demonstrable effect Downstream of that their whole life can be different after that day It is just like a mushroom. That's exactly what psychodelics do Is this massive perspective shift on memory? And so is this something that you're actively doing? With clients. I'll do this on occasion But now is anybody else doing it? Maybe a few there's probably a few people doing it And is there any like times where you guys get together and discuss techniques and what's effective? What's not effective and should be? We don't right because it seems like this is it's kind of a big deal and it seems like someone could Fuck it up like it has the potential for Delusional perspective shifting There's a yeah, I mean you got to be responsible about it But nowadays I think that that Psychedelic can achieve a lot of that without having to go through some like I need you to go back to the original event And like having me vocally take you back there using this archaic stupid ass language That can't even describe a psychedelic experience with this language. So This is what I was doing mostly before psychedelics. Then you know how I got into psychedelics was The spirit molecule movie that you've even the voice over for it And that was what kind of introduced me to the entire the field of everything where I thought wow this It just doesn't seem like a recreational drug and that was the big shift was watching that that documentary for me Yeah, my big shift was reading Rick Straussman's book I still haven't read it. I need to. Yeah He was the first guy to get FDA approval to do psychedelic studies and the way he did it was very clever He did it to prove that these are damaging and dangerous. That's how he framed it It's so brilliant. He's a very smart guy. I mean you were talking about a guy who taught himself ancient Hebrew Oh wow. Yeah over 16 years Taught himself to read and speak ancient Hebrew So that he could really read the Bible in its original form. Wow. Yeah he's fascinated by prophecy and ancient religious stories and You know he like a lot of people that have had DMT experiences you Once you do you look at those old stories and you go okay, what what are these stories? Really what was the original what was the original event? Like it's so hard when you're like Moses in the burning bush Well, there's scholars in Israel that think that burning bush was the Akashitry that the Akashitry is rich in DMT And that might be what it represents this experience of meeting God through a burning bush is he smoked DMT Yeah, which for anybody who's done DMT they go. Oh, that makes sense Yeah I mean these scholars I don't think these scholars are freaks. I don't think they're psychedelic heads I think they're just religious scholars and trying to like figure out like what was the origin of that story. Yeah I've never heard of that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, Akashitry very rich in DMT but a man a Full-airus grass very rich in DMT. Oh, Mosa. Yeah, and for people that don't know The reason why will DMT exists in probably thousands of different plants But you can eat those plants and not experience DMT because of mono aiming oxidase so mono Mao is what your gut makes to break this stuff down so it doesn't become psychoactive But when you take an Mao inhibitor and the psychedelic then you get ayahuasca That's what ayahuasca. That's why it's an orally active version of DMT. Yeah, which methylene blue is in it mayo Oh interesting. It's a pretty light. It's a pretty light form of it But if you're on methylene blue and you do psychedelics, it's gonna deepen I could imagine a lot of people are very hesitant about methylene blue. They don't like the idea of it I think it's very dangerous or potentially dangerous that we don't know enough about it. We've been researching it since 1890 Something and it's in every emergency room. Is it really every emergency room? Have you ever heard of anybody having bad experiences with methylene blue or side effects or There are some contraindications. So people that are on a high dose SSRIs Okay, and if you're taking an Maoi you can't eat aged cheese and wine because of this chemical called tyrosine That's in there. Oh aged cheese. Yeah So something about the fungus? No, it's a mold. Yeah, maybe there's red wine and aged cheese both have tyrosine Which when you mix tyrosine with an Maoi it could can cause a hypertensive crisis. Oh, so like a super blood pressure Yeah, but I haven't heard anybody having a bad time with it But you got to stick to the right dose talk to you obviously you got to talk to a doctor about it. Well, let's ask AI Put that into AI put that into perplexity see what is the negative consequences of taking methylene blue Maybe there's something to know. We don't know Huberman's a little bit hesitant about it You know, yeah, you see and I've talked to other people that say it seems like for a certain metabolic conditions It's very beneficial, but for people that have a normal metabolic Like your your whole system is working fine and perfect It might not just not be necessary, but might cause harm, but they were very vague about what that harm would be I don't think it's for everybody. It may not be for everybody It saves my life for sure Which I mean I could stop taking it today and I'll have a seizure within 48 hours. That's wild. Yeah You said you had a seizure at last time after you visited here the night before I came on the show Wow Okay, methylene blue. This is our AI sponsor perplexity Methylene blue can cause a range of side effects from mild nuisance symptoms to rare but life-threatening reactions Especially at higher doses or when combined with certain medications Common short-term side effects headaches dizziness nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Nothing. Don't be a pussy. Yeah, my soil is actually stained From the pea. Yeah, it does make your pee blue sweating feeling hot or cold muscle twitches harmless blue green discoloration of urine Sometimes stool or skin serious risk serotonin syndrome when combined with antidepressants just like you were just saying or other serotoninogenic drugs SSRIs as NRI's MALIs some opioid St. John's ward G6 PD is a big contraindication there So methylene blues and ERs because of meth hemoglobinemia Which is like when you your hemoglobin can't bind to oxygen really well Mmm, and it's also there. They only cure for cyanide poisoning is Methylene blue really yeah Cyanide it will stop cyanide in its tracks. Wow It probably says that on air Oh Interesting safety for chronic low dose experimenting for anti-aging or cognition is not well established and is current not currently recommended without medical supervision Mmm I know a lot of people that take it. I know a lot of people that take it. No Bobby Bobby takes it. Uh-huh. Yeah He's one of them A lot of people that take it that say it improves cognitive function. It's supposed to Also when you take it with red light therapy. It's supposed to greatly increase the effects of believeably so. Yeah Really? I mean number if you want to go into it for just a minute here Sure Methylene blue has what's called a neuronal affinity So they used to like you stick it on a microscope slide with a brain cell. It sucks into the neuron Like automatically and it does the same thing in your body So if I know that I'm basically dying all of my neurons blue And I'm not just talking about in your head like we have neurons everywhere our whole body So if I'm dying a lot of my neurons blue and I see something that's blue Methylene blues blue because it reflects blue light which also means that it absorbs Almost all red So if my neurons are dyed blue and then I go into a near infrared and infrared light I know that I'm getting way more absorption in there. That's fucking go and that makes sense in the third stage of stage of cellular Breathing We produce this chemical called cytochrome ciocidase and cytochrome is like cell color cytochrome Where our cells can start running essentially running on photons which is Beautiful and amazing and if you get a good red light system And I have no plug But you get a good red light system it'll penetrate through the skull up to like four inches through your skull in good systems Whoa Even lasers and they make laser beds and all this other stuff Yeah, I have one of those red light bed. Those looks like a tanning bed. I bought it up from Gary Breckett's company It's very expensive, but it's pretty profound. Um, I don't need Reading glasses anymore. I used to have these fucking things everywhere all over my house I used to need them to read my phone if I wanted to read an email. I don't need them anymore. Wow. Yeah It's nuts and I don't bring them with me anymore If I would go on the road before and know I had to do a trip for the UFC or whatever And I didn't know I reading glasses like fuck now. I'm gonna make everything big. I can't read anything not anymore No, my vision got better from red light therapy. I don't doubt it for sure I also don't close my eyes. I keep my eyes wide open saying like all you need goggles. You like like your fucking staring at the You know some nuclear bomb or something. Yeah, it's not no So it doesn't seem to bother my vision at all. Yeah, and I've heard so many doctors And obviously none of this is advice for anybody Um, I've heard so many doctors say throw the safety. I was in the trash Look right into it if you want to it. It's gonna help your eyes There's so many stories of people with macular degeneration and glaucoma and eye conditions and stuff that's gotten Multitudes better than than it was obviously my story is anecdotal, but my vision was shifting In a very real bad way. I was using three Those three power ones you know those cheap these things cheap. I buy them off Amazon But I use three and I started with one like one power And then it got to two power and then I'll get the through I'm like Jesus Christ I'm fucking going blonde. I can't see shit Yeah, I don't need any anymore now my vision's not perfect. It's not 2020. It's not what it used to be So what I read things it's like maybe slightly blurry and if I put reading glasses on it Look a little better, but I don't need them anymore and it keeps getting better. I also take luteen and a bunch of different supplements I take this No affiliation. I don't work with them or anything, but it's called pure encapsulations Macular support they have a supplement for it. I take those I've been taking those steadily at the same time. I've been doing the red light therapy and It works The least it works for me, you know, it worked for Whitney Cummings same thing with her At the same time I've been doing the red light therapy and it works At least it works for me, you know it worked for Whitney Cummings same thing with her her vision got way better She's very diligent about it. She does it every day. There's something there. Yeah something there. Well There's for sure something about staring at a fucking phone all day. That's really bad for your eyes Yeah staring at a phone staring at a tablet staring at a laptop staring at a computer screen It's not good for your eyes period. There's no way. There's no way. Yeah when I look at my phone in bed at night If I do it hurts my eyes. Yeah, you know like if it's dark in the room, and I'm like, let me check my aim I'll cook I get to my email. It's like it's like it's bright if I go to a website that's like a white website like It hurts yeah, and did you know you can change your iPhone? Like if you go into Accessibility it's like color overlay. I forget the name of it where you can make the whole screen red I have seen people do that. I have not done that. I've tried to do it on mine It's tough, but I did it on our two-year-olds iPad and Nothing is addictive anymore like she won't sit there and stare at it for more than three or four minutes anymore Wow, yeah, and it's just like I didn't buy some special device or anything You just go into accessibility and make it red and it used to be it She would just sit there and hold the iPad. Yeah, I'm an anti Electronics guy so I wanted to try this experiment and The moment I turned it red she didn't complain about the red she got used to it within 15 minutes and never complained again It her iPad has never gone off of the red mode and that she doesn't get hooked into shows anymore Whoa, so watch it for a few minutes. I'm like, okay. That's great. Put it down and then go show go play Wow So it's it's worth an experiment. Anyways, got little small kids out there or do it to yourself It's amazing that they provide you with a tool to escape the addiction that they've created It's so true man because it's a pretty intense addiction. I think they feel like Good luck. You know, you never gettin off this hook the hook is sunk in deep and the barbe is strong big done It's so strong and that It's the it's the production tool of Reality right now if I want to alter reality. I just got to engineer how you see it and that's that's the way that we see realities What's on my phone? What's yeah, and that's the problem that a lot of people have with tech companies is that you're giving these people that aren't particularly Wise they might be intelligent they figured out how to code these things and make these things and market these things But it's not like they're Monks they're not these like profound visionaries that are Much more educated and enlightened in the general population right no a lot of them have autism No empathy rather fucking minds and they're optimizing the software continually to Get people to engage with it They want you to I mean that's that's the ebada. That's the bottom line revenue comes from ads and how many ads can I show you and? If I know I know data much data of yours. Can I sell yeah, it's nuts? Which is why like I think it's so important for people to be literate extremely literate in What's going on with your phone? What's going on with your brain and cyops like this shit that we see coming out of the news right now And I'm the guy that trains cyops in two days after I leave here I'm going to Fort Bragg to train the United States Army cyops division. I'm the guy What do you train them in a lot of say in cyops? Just train them how they work and how to do it. Yeah, like how I'm the body language like people reading guy I don't know if you've ever seen our YouTube channel the behavior panel. Yes, you know a couple you got a great YouTube channel It's awesome really good. Thank you. Thanks and I have another one with three other behavior profilers where we break down videos of people in interrogation and stuff like that and I think it's so important to be literate in a lot of this stuff and how does our brain work? How can I be compromised and so I created a tool and I gave it to Jamie before we started the show that that will give you a one to one hundred score on how likely something is a Cyop and Is an app or is it like a what's the PDF and you can run anything through it and see you can run it historically and see what what's Society of them what's not oh and it's it's kind of subjective But at least you get a standardized score for everything and you can see like if you went to Like the invading Iraq Initially, okay, that's a good one that would score a 98 out of a hundred for for asylum Just on this tool here So like it kind of goes in layers So step one is like this pre-ignition like I have societal stuff going on. There's moral panic Then operational are there drills happening that are kind of similar to this military ramping up the regulatory Obviously, it's pretty there like bills getting passed at two in the morning and right Bill's yeah In alignment so like people suddenly aligning different news agencies and then authorities celebrities are starting to come out with the same messaging and stuff like that And then media like just kind of flooding little slogans and stuff So if that kind of scores kind of high and you don't even need the numbers right now They're moved to the next one so has this happened before the precursor anomalies like Have they done this before well matter of fact? They gave people LSD against their will in him Kulture, you know, whatever like is there some precursor? And then identical phrasing across unrelated outlets So we see something on MSNBC and Fox saying the same kind of phrasing or something That's kind of suspicious and then introduced villains that are pre-packaged pretty obvious injecting symbolism and then the Manufacture urgency like if this bill isn't passed in the next 72 hours. We're gonna face a national crisis All this kind of stuff and then you could just kind of go down the go down the walkway and It'll give you a predictive score of how likely something is a sign up and one of the biggest things is if you don't want to like this is a lot of crap to like to memorize but are you seeing authority figures resonate with each other and are is Nuance not being presented to you and that's like if I'm not seeing nuance if I have a left versus right issue And there's a prepackaged villain That's a sign up if you just look at those couple of things is then for nowadays We have a death of nuance or no one's getting presented any nuance to anything It's right. It's either you're on this side. You're wearing this jersey or this jersey Which is really toxic to our our whole entire country? The whole world and it's accentuated by clips and these weird little things Yeah, and if you're on the way out nuance. Let's say I'm on the left when I log into social media whatever it is They're gonna show me the dumbest shithead morons on the other side that they could possibly find Yep, and the same thing if I'm on the right. They're gonna show me the biggest idiots and they only goal is being like Me thinking oh my god these people are insane and it's me thinking that's all of them Right, but like if you go to target right now and see somebody that voted differently than you you want the same shit You want your kids to be healthy. You want safety you want to pay less taxes You want the government less and less involved in your life and They're not all insane But the goal is to make you think all of the other side is insane right that's the ultimate sign up sort of then at the end to you kind of get a one to a hundred score and I Started a I bought a TV station. Did I tell you about this? No, I was gonna text you or I was gonna send you an email about this I bought a TV station. We started our own a daily news show Where we run the days of events all the way through the Syops index every single day And we show here's how you're being presented Here's how you're being made to feel about this issue Here's where nuances been taking out every single thing that's like truly going on Here's the bill that got passed that nobody's talking about that has a lot to do with this Here's the they're saying the straight of hormones is gonna open But here's what Brent crude is predicting oil prices at so the insurance markets will has a lot more info than than the news is gonna Give you so like try to give you every single day. Here's how you're being made to feel here's the actual news Here's what they're gonna left is gonna say He's the right's gonna say and here's where they're killing nuance. Here's where you're being presented a binary choice and I think I'm trying to like I want to make Syops irrelevant And what we have to do what are the steps we have to take to not really inoculate people from Syops But just to make them so fucking visible that it's just obvious and Yeah, they're gonna have to invent something else and they will but at least for a few years people are really Wise to everything like this is very obvious because like all the things that were up on that sheet right there If you look at that a few times it it starts to become irrelevant and Like my goal is to make people more expensive to influence I Mmm, I think it's possible. I think if this gets out there The more people are aware and just can piece it together and the more that narrative starts getting pushed If people start repeating it like yeah, let's pay attention this when you say you bought a TV channel or a TV station What do you mean like an actual station? Physical station with a news desk and where does it air? It's on YouTube right now. So where'd you buy this place? Where was it? Just like ten minutes from my so was a former TV station that was like going out of business. Yeah We retrofitted everything upgraded But it's they probably fire sale on TV stations right now. Yeah It was we got a good deal No, what is a watch of TV and that's great. Yeah, we retrofitted it and like equality Up there with like Fox or anybody else like we have a daily show. What's the daily show on YouTube called station one station one? Yeah Surprise that wouldn't take it. It's a new channel. Yeah. Oh perfect brand new channel. We have like Most of the subscribers were my mom. I think for the first month For growing now so you just started it off and no fanfare just try to get the feet on the ground Yeah, turn it off and it's you know, I do it with my YouTube channel, which I've got two million Something subscribers on YouTube and It's cool that I can make these documentaries, but you know on YouTube like you can't change it up on people like there's the algorithm Punishes when you change things so we had to start a new channel like you had to stay like you guys started JRE clips Mm-hmm because you can't like back in the day the algorithm said you can't do short form and long form stuff and the algorithm Kind of punishes you for that so you had to make a new channel for it probably what Jamie did or the team did I Don't remember what the initial reason was I think we decided it would be good Just to have a second channel as well Anyway, just in case because there was always the threat that YouTube was gonna remove us Okay, which I do think that if it wasn't for Spotify and it wasn't for the fact that I was primarily on Spotify I probably would have been removed during the whole COVID thing. Oh my god Yeah, yeah, because we were regularly questioning a bunch of different things that could have got you removed We were regularly questioning regularly questioning the COVID lab leak We were regularly questioning whether or not there was any dangers taking these vaccines regularly questioning alternative medical care. Yeah That's that was maybe the the biggest sign up of our lifetimes for sure and now Now confirmed that woke up normal people. Uh-huh that woke up average people. Oh, yeah, because it was so obvious Well, come a lot some of them like they just can't shake them. They're on 15 ambience fucking Yeah, they're just they're gonna stay. I've got family members that are very trustful of government and they're like no Chase if if it was gonna go bad or if it was this thing They would tell us. I was like these are the people who gave you the food pyramid Right and told you to eat 16 loves a bread every day And and yeah, it's it's the idea that the government is here to help you. It was like That's the dumbest. That was Reagan's best line. Yeah, that they're the five. Yeah, we're the government and we're here to help. Yeah Yeah, that's um It's interesting how people will believe in the government if it is convenient But then if the other people are the government then it's 100% negative Yeah, it's like what people are so ideologically captured and that's why people are completely unwilling to look at anything positive that one of the other members Someone from the other side Proposes exactly which is what what I found really fascinating about the response to the Trump thing You know that Trump passing the psychedelic initiative and trying to push through Ibogaine and the civil side bin and all these different Methods that people have used to overcome addiction and treat all these different things that we talked about before they didn't know what to do with that That was a weird one because they tried to find all sorts of negatives I saw people trying to find negatives because it's him. Yeah Which is so crazy and there was also negatives because it was pushed by me and The idler was Joe Rogan helping mental health policy in America. Is that real? You're the green guy who takes horse-paced. Yeah And a dragon believer Yeah, it's uh, it's an interesting time to be alive. You know really is so Emotionally for you if I think if I saw myself edited like that on CNN or something I feel like that would wreck me. I feel like that would emotionally make me feel like shit for such a long time Were you just like over it? Oh, it didn't make me feel like shit for a second. I started laughing. I thought it was hilarious Okay, I was also very aware that they weren't aware that my show was way bigger than them See the thing about mainstream media is that mainstream media had ruled for so long that they had gotten delusional They had been like a champion that didn't think that he had a train anymore And then some new contender came along that it had been you know in the mountains of fucking Siberia Yeah, you know, I mean Someone came out of the blue and just fucked them up and they were They're so bad at this thing that they think they run and they're also they also are very They're very unaware of the actual playing field So the actual playing field that they exist and is so limited that they cannot ever achieve the kind of acceptance or interaction or trust that Alternative media can yeah, so there's too many people involved too many people will most certainly Move things and water things down to like what you were talking about before like here's what I want people to think I believe right yeah, which is most of what mainstream media produces It's here's what I want people to think I believe you don't believe any of those people reading that teleprompter because none of it seems Since here you're your mind registers. This is a person reading something that's been written It doesn't register and then when you see them talking Freeform like on those panel shows on CNN. You're like oh you guys are fucking retarded like this You guys know some of the dumbest opinions. You're so uninformed You're so ideologically captured. This is so not compelling. They've turned CNN into a fucking group podcast That's a lot of the shows on CNN or bad podcasts with like shitty guests who You know, they're no nuance and they're yelling over each other exactly it's a terrible form No nuance whatsoever. It's also the problem that they have to break for commercials. Oh, yeah, and then there's the problem that The funding for those commercials a giant chunk of it is pharmaceutical drug companies huge. Yeah, and and has mic bends and cally means a lot of people have talked about they don't do that because They want to sell drugs They do that because now the news will not criticize the pharmaceutical drug company The pharmaceutical drug companies responsible for enormous part of their income. Yeah and I mean I wouldn't say definitively that that's happening, but I mean if you're the CEO of the president You know exactly where the money's coming from 100% and if you get a phone call that says hey, you know what Maybe not mention that. Yeah, or man. Maybe attack someone who's got a narrative and turn them green and do all that out of so but Like I said for me it was making me laugh. I thought it was funny I thought it was funny. I was like this is such a classic mistake Like you guys are completely out of touch. Yeah, just delusional not understanding the backlash of that of just doing open Like in your face like there was no like hey look over here. Right. It was just in your face. Si-op Not just that. They're also You you're making a green version of a video that exists on Instagram first So it's already out there. You don't think the internet is gonna see that there's a difference in my skin tone on CNN On Instagram on Instagram. I look rosy and healthy. I wasn't lying. I was making a video I was told if I was really sick. I was outside. I was outside. How's outside? How's like I feel good about shitty for a day? I was being completely honest Nor did I ever think that it was gonna be controversial to talk about I ever met and I had no idea So I've remekton was not a controversial substance before I talked about it in that one video. Yeah, it was It was normal. You could get it at a pharmacy your doctor could prescribe it to you mine did But he also prescribed to me a ton of other stuff exactly. Yeah, it's so much other stuff like Finn Bend is old That's now getting a in the end of the same category as I ever met it was And Mel Gibson talked about it here with you. Yes. Yes of that combo and there's a study now that shows I think it's from 2022 that it's a cancer treatment like a new cancer treatment right What the hell I know it's not patented so it's it's a demon It's a demon and these news stations are all complicit They're they're all in bed with the pharmaceutical drunk companies who again are responsible for a enormous part of their advertising Budget and that's where they make their money. Yeah, and they don't have a lot of people that believe them anymore I think they lost a lot of their credibility during the COVID epidemic Who medium news media yeah, yeah, yeah, I think the government and the government but most people are aware like oh This is a sign up and then of course the file straw was Elon purchasing Twitter and then the Twitter files so when Matt Taebi and Shout Michael Shellenberger and all these different people got a hold of these files Where you could see the emails between the federal government and these social media companies where they're asking people to censor True stories And you like what and then when Zuckerberg was on my podcast and explained how the FBI had contacted him and told him That they wanted him to censor stories and censor the Hunter Biden laptop story terrifying It's fucking crazy. This is this is literally banana Republic shit. So have you heard of project mockingbird? Yes Operation mockingbird and I mean it's not new So I mean somebody says like oh, I can't believe the government's doing this. I mean wait a second Just go just look at history right and Dr. Phil Says one time is a pattern and if you go back there's way more than one time This has happened an operation mockingbird Walter Cronkite Was a CIA yes, yeah legit CIA s so's Anderson Cooper Is he Anderson Cooper worked for the CIA when he was in college? I didn't know that yeah Looked that up. Make sure that's true. I'm not even nine percent true not in percent shore rather Julia Childs Whoa, did you know she was She was in the CIA teaching people how to bake I think she did that hand-to-hand combat course Fuck people up at a rolling pin does the Anderson Cooper thing correct? I believe he worked for the CIA in college Anderson Cooper interned the CIA for two consecutive summers while he was a political science major at Yale University He did not pursue a career in intelligence wink wink after graduating later describing the agency's deskwork at Langley as Less James Bond that I hoped it would be Yeah, well, I think it's all less James Bond. It's it's more money It's more money and influence and what are the people in power? What people to believe? But he's not the only one Walter Cronkite. There were hundreds. Yeah hundreds and yeah so much it was every network and There's no direct there's no declassified document that says here's what we told them to say or here's how compromised they were but they were compromised completely and and Most likely told exactly what to say or what stories to suppress does Mike Wallace have some sort of a connection I don't know See if Mike Wallace had some sort of a connection with the CIA But it's it's a bunch of prominent respected trusted News anchors Yes, yeah all over the place. Yeah, this is a 50 60s I think in the beginning of the 70s until this thing called the Mike Wallace's famous for his probing investigative reporting on CBS's 60 minutes regarding the CIA most little notably in landmark 1993 report called titled the CIA's cocaine Exposed so he's the opposite so he worked to expose CIA stuff the report exposed to covert CIA Anti drug operation in Venezuela that allowed hundreds of millions of dollars in cocaine to be smogled Okay, this is Iran contra-fair Yeah Yeah, okay. So it's the opposite But it's with so many things like somebody's like oh, I can't believe co-pids doing this. Yeah. Well Look at history again like we dosed millions of people with LSD against their consent against their was it millions I think well there were experiments with aerosol Forms of LSD that were in cities and what yeah? I didn't know about that Jamie aerosol LSD in cities somewhere near like for mom or Boston It was somewhere up in like the New England area Um Dude look how the psycho do you have to be till I get a crop tussor plane and fill up a tag of LSD and just spray it on kids I don't I don't get it and then you go back to when we we dosed I don't know. I don't know how many african-americans with syphilis or we like grouped them together They had syphilis and didn't treat them and gave them fake treatments and stuff US government has never openly sprayed LSD from their air over entire cities However during the Cold War intelligence agencies in the military did conduct covert aerosol and mind control experiments on the public What does that mean? It means you did it. Yeah, not from a plane. Then was likely they were like they probably had a fan and a bucket Yeah Ci is notorious project MK ultra sought to weaponize LSD and use it for mind control Ci operators are sent to San Francisco to spray the air with LSD 25 at an unwitting party of guests Oh, I did hear about this the result the agency ultimately abandoned the specific aerosol tests at the last minute Because the summer weather was too hot to keep the windows closed and their specialized aerosol device malfunctioned There we go number two the army sprayed thousands of unsuspecting Americans with aerosolized chemicals. Yeah military released a fine powder called zinc cadmium sulfide over 33 rural and suburban rather and rural areas Scroll up a little bit please Yeah, the targeted cities affected cities included St. Louis Minneapolis Winnipeg Corpus Christi and Fort Wayne St. Louis was deliberately chosen because of its population density and the terrain were similar to the Soviet targets like Moscow I was looking up something else Did you know about this? Why the fuck the Dan Rather and Donald Rumsho by a new ex go new Mexico ranch together in 1981 That's the same year he was promoted a news anchor at CBS evening news It's also like right next door to the Epstein ranch in Mexico right an Epstein The famously got that to be close to Los Alamos right so he could lure those scientists over with pussy unbelievable. Yeah But I mean like you go back through history. This is Everybody's like oh the COVID was crazy. It's not new It's just we hadn't experienced it so blatantly before because they had never tried something like that during the age of social media Yeah, and they used a playbook that relied on on putting a letter in the mail sending a telegram. Yeah, they used a playbook also that were required having control over the narratives that were being pushed out by the media And the media had lost its lost its lost its impact on people at the same time the rise of podcasts that happened Kind of under the radar and they didn't recognize it. They missed it. They they just overestimated their position Yeah, and during COVID you had more viewers than then seeing it I'd not only that when they turned me green and all that cancellation I gained two million followers on Spotify in a month Wow. Yeah People just like what is going on that everybody's trying to cancel this guy like what is he doing? And then they'd listen and go oh, it's just a show where they talk to people What are they trying to hide from us? And then you have guys on like dr. Peter McCullough and Robert Malone and all these different people that are Peter McCullough is the most published doctor in history in human history in his particular field of study And they were trying to make him out to be a quack and then you see what they did with Jay about it Charya and all these different people and one of those guys was the inventor of MRA Robert Malone has nine patents on the creation of MRA technology and he should never be out there Telling people that it might not be safe. Not only that he took it and had a fucking serious horrible reaction We're almost died Really? Yeah, which is what prompted him to try to figure out what the fuck is going on because he was assured by everyone that it's Stayed local. It's not gonna cause massive inflammation and you know Myocarditis and all these different things that it eventually was absolutely causing You know, and then there's you know, they're trying to hide now the impact that it's had on children You know the impact that it's had on children that took it and how what giant percentage of them that died after taking it died within days of the injection yeah, and they're trying to ignore the signal and There's so many gaslighters all over Twitter. There's people that are paid to gaslight on Twitter That's a fact they there's pharmaceutical drug companies just like a lot of other companies will pay people to post They'll pay people to attack they'll pay people to be the voice of authority and reasons So you can assure all the brainwash boomers that they're right all along and everything's fine Yeah, and if you just look at Basic manipulation and in mind control The number one fear of human beings is supposedly public speaking right Um, but that's not it. It's the judgment that might come from public speaking. It's not the being on stage Right, it's like it is something gonna judge me. Am I gonna get ostracized? So the way that they control a lot of this and and gaslight people is to use the fear of social punishment and social enforcement and If I can get one celebrity to go out there and call these people a name And just give them a name as if it's a group of people You know like anti-vaxxer conspiracy theorist dragon believer That kind of thing we give it a name and that makes it easier for other people to socially enforce And it comes from an authority figure So you get the tribe involved and all you're gonna do is Is fuck up a few people Yep, like Robert Malone And and they're like hey, I've got I can I can take this guy down Yeah, what do you think I'm gonna do to you? Yeah? And you just get that fear out there and that's all you need to do and you kind of gaslight people because now like I'm scared enough, but I won't say I'm scared. I'll say now I'd rather not just say my opinion. So now my identity gets tied into it now It's part of who I am I'm just not gonna say anything and it gets normalized like the the absolute just let me mute myself and And take my mouth shut so I don't get punished and there's a bunch of people that attack And it gets normalized. Like the absolute just let me mute myself and take my mouth shut so I don't get punished. And then there's a bunch of people that attack and do the work for the man because they don't want to be lumped in with the other side. So they'll go on social media and call the anti-vaxxers, you know, playgrats and all these different things. Yeah. And also say the wildest shit like their children should be taken from them. They should be locked up, isolated from society. And this is something called category warfare. Have you ever heard of this? I know the expression. This guy, I can't remember his name. He wrote a book called Women, Fire and Dangerous Things. It was the first language categories that we had for language. It was women, fire and dangerous stuff. I think his name was Laken. George Laken or Laken. But if I frame something using a category, I can change what the allowed behavior is. So if I say that me and this other person are having a disagreement, your brain automatically has a list of what a disagreement is and what's acceptable. But if I say we're having a fight, now there's new stuff on the table. And all I did was change how something is defined in your brain. And we don't consciously process that our brain is getting permission to do things because of a category. But if I say I've been at war with these people for a long time, now a war is way different. Or if I say like I disagree with Rogan, that's one thing. But if I say Rogan is a threat, what do we do to something that's a threat? Right. We have to neutralize a threat. Right. So just small words like that change what our brain says is permissible in that moment. And that is really what's going on here. So actually two layers, if I can go into this for a sexual war. Number one is this category. Let me just get a category out there to make your brain think one thing is permissible. The second thing is I create the idea in such a way that you get to feel morally superior for adopting it. And you don't have to have any new morals or anything else. You just have to adopt this idea and you get to feel better than other people. And that's it. So it changed the category. It means like I can do something differently. So in a legal argument, if somebody says we're at war with the other side, this is my opponent instead of the other person. What do we do with an opponent? We have to take them down. It's a fight. There's a winner. There's a loser. There's always assumed competition there. So that is one of the biggest things that I hope everybody can look out for as the influence, scyops expert. And I'm not immune to any of the stuff. I buy stupid shit on off of an Instagram ad as much as the next person. But it's important to know when it's, when something is clearly presented to you and it's easy to feel emotional about it, you are being manipulated. Something's clearly presented. And it's just like, here's this one thing, and it's really clean. And it's easy to get pissed off about or it's easy to feel comfortable about or whatever it is. If the emotional thing is easy without having to dig into it, you're being manipulated. And that's a giant percentage of what most people consume. It's, yeah, all day long. Yeah. And it's, it's compounding. So if I just consume a little bit, that's, that's one thing. But now I get a little bit more, a little bit more, a little bit further into this rabbit hole. And we get in these, obviously everyone says this online, but you get into these echo chamber of social media. All of a sudden, you can, you can find your people anywhere. You can, you can connect with your people. If you'd like to make knitted yarn vest for hamsters, you can find other people that do shit like that. So back in the day, if you had a bad idea, you couldn't find a lot of other people that agreed with you. And now it's easier to find people who agree with you when you have a shitty idea. So there's a niche, there's a whole separate niche. And on top, while you're there getting told that your ideas are relevant and normal, they're not abnormal because there's so many other people. It normalizes bad ideas. The second part of that is I'm with all these people, but then I go back to normal social media. And all I get told all day is I'm right about those people. I'm right about those people. I'm right about those people. And it's just, it is so sick. And, and which goes back to what we first talking about how performative our world is and like, all of us concealed a shame so much that we can't ever be seen by anybody. Like we'll go to the grave and and feel like my wife is never even seen who I truly am. You know? And the other thing is nuts is people have this complete inability to admit when they're wrong or change course. They have connected themselves. They've connected their, their whole being to whatever their thoughts are, whatever this thing that they've agreed is real. And once they've defended it, they never want to go back and objectively look at and go, wait a minute. Oh, I believe this and that's not the case. Oh, this is the case. Oh, I'm wrong. Oh, no, I got a, I got a course correct. No, they dig in and they try to find other echo chambers that agree with their initial position and other people that this and there's plenty of people that provide those services for you. Plenty of people, if you want to live in your echo chamber, plenty of people real and digital that will provide you this escape from your ability to learn and grow. And in a, in a sycophantic AI will do. Well, help people with other best. I'll tell you, you're wonderful darling. You're doing the best. I always tell people you're not your ideas and it's one of the most important things that I've ever learned. You cannot be married to your ideas. Your ideas are just ideas and as soon as you defend them and as soon as you connect yourself to them and as soon as you connect your identity to them, you're in a fucking trap. You're in a real trap and it's very hard to get out without admitting defeat. Most people don't want to admit defeat. That's how they look at it. Look at it. It's like a battle for their ex to existential existence. Their existence is completely tied in to their belief system. Yeah. And then we call it cognitive dissonance. Right. So I either have to say, I'm a dumbass or those other people are stupid. Right. So like when Biden won the election, it was the same thing people on the right either had to admit, wow, I'm stupid and I underestimated what our country's doing or the other people are just idiots and they don't know what's going on. Same thing, having when Trump got elected. Either like the whole country is stupid or I have to admit that I didn't know what was going on and I'm out of touch a little bit and maybe there's something good. I'll just say they're all stupid. It's protecting our identities. So it's ingrained into us. It's the ego thing. I don't want to be wrong. And if I am wrong and I'm wrong in public, then I risk ostracism again. So it's like getting kicked out of the tribe again. It's going back to the same fear. And people love to do that too. They love to attack people if they're wrong. They love to destroy people. And ruin all credibility that they've ever had, that you could have been a public figure for 10 years putting out great information. You fuck one thing up. People want to ban any forever, especially if you don't admit it, especially. Oh, you're running for office. What about that? You took a nude when you were 19. You took a naked photo. And that goes back to everyone's pretending like everyone else has got their shit figured out. And that's why everyone thinks everybody's got it figured out and I'm pretending. I'm the one hiding everything. I'm no, everyone's got that shit. Everyone who thinks like, oh, they're going to find out my skills. Everybody's got skeletons and everybody's got stuff like that. And it's we're in the age where we're comparing ourselves to highlight reels and you know, Dr. Phil talks about this all the time. And but we have to realize that there is people want you to be human. And we don't enjoy fake shit. This is why people are attracted to your podcast. This is why stuff that's real is trending so much more now. Like we're attracted to things that are human and flawed. That's why we buy shit that says handmade on it. We don't buy like, oh, machine made. No one celebrates that, right? We like the humanness of things. And even when I say there's a loneliness epidemic going on right now, everyone will nod their head. No one will raise their hand. Everyone will say, oh, yeah, it's affecting all those people. But no one will say it's affecting me, but they'll all not alone. And I think we're getting to a place where like maybe we're coming out of that. It just maybe it's me. Maybe it's my echo chamber. But I feel like people are waking up and I feel like more people not just through COVID, but just now just the way the world is. They're like, what, you know what? This doesn't really feel it doesn't really it feels weird for me to hate and feel hatred towards one of my neighbors who didn't vote like I did. That feels weird. Yeah, just to hate someone for that reason. I think people are waking up that maybe the plan is going too fast. Maybe they're taking it too quickly. They're trying to go through all these steps too fast. It's what it feels like to me. Well, also, I don't think they're competent. I don't think they're good at it. And that's part of the problem. Good at what? Good at projecting narratives. I don't think the people that are necessarily in charge of propaganda, at least people at a government level, I don't think they're particularly slick. No. And that's part of the problem with all this. It's like when you're at a middle school sleepover and the dad comes in trying to be cool. It's like, hey, kids, what are you guys doing? That's the government trying to run this shit. This is when you get syringes dancing on stage on a late night TV. Right. That was nuts. Well, it's also a person who seems completely insincere. Yeah. That version of him. It's weird because the version of him that was on the Daily Show was awesome. Like it was this character. And irreverent. Yeah. And he was raw. Yeah. But you realize, oh, that was just really good writers. Yeah. They have really good writers. They created a fun Republican character that was a buffoon, but like a hilarious buffoon. Yeah. And then he went and did a TV show and you're like, oh, the really was weird. But I think our saving grace is what you're talking about, is that they suck at this. Like, yeah, when your teacher announces there's going to be a pizza party and expects everybody to be super freaking out about it. Like, yeah, it's pizza. But the government's like, hey, guess what we got for you. Yeah. We got this new data coming out, this new data. And the silops are working less because of the spread of information. So people say, oh, social media is bad. You shouldn't be on social media. Well, some of that is what's exposing this stuff. Yes. And we have people out there that are like you. And I'm not kissing your ass here, but you're willing to say, shit that sounds preposterous at the beginning of something and just make an observation that's real. And you're willing to just, the way that I've phrased this in a lot of our training at my training is called NCI. The way that we phrase this is like the first ingredient of confidence is the willingness to receive social injury. And we need more of that. We need more people willing to receive social injury. Well, the position that I was in during the COVID thing was very unique. So it was almost easy for me because I had already, I'd gotten such a head start. I was so far ahead of them. They didn't realize that my ability to say, wait, this is, this doesn't make any sense. None of this makes any sense. And also why my green and also why you guys line, why you lying about all sorts of different things? Why, why are you measuring troponin levels? We're talking about myocarditis and not the actual scans of people's hearts when you realize like young people are getting legitimately fucked up from this vaccine, not all of them, but some of them. Why aren't you looking at that? How come you guys aren't looking at vaccine injuries? It seems like a significant thing that people are talking about. You've got soccer players drop in dead in the middle of the field and no one's bringing that up. You're trying to gaslight us into thinking that that doesn't make any sense. I was in a unique position to be able to do that because I had like almost like quietly snuck up to this, it had this large audience that they weren't aware of. Yeah. So when it happened, it was just, it was like I couldn't do anything other than what I did. I had to just keep doing it the way I did it. And it was, the blowback was crazy. They tried to crush my sponsors, the organized campaigns, there was packs involved. It was, there was really, oh yeah. Oh yeah. Thank God I was on Spotify. And thank God Spotify is not an American company. And also it helped that I was number one in like 90 countries and not number 90 in one country. Yeah. That helped. Yeah. That helped a lot. The size of it was, it was like it was so big that as big as they were, they're like, like, and then there's the Streisand thing. Like you try to silence something. You're, you're just going to make it bigger. I went to say, if they, it kicked me off a spot of fine, I had to go to rumble. It would have just blown rumble stock up and it would have, it would have helped everybody. Yeah. I didn't know that there was that much shit going on. Oh, you're like, I can't even talk about it. But there was presidents involved and former presidents involved that were contacting Spotify. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Trying to get me removed for vaccine misinformation. Yeah. Well, and the turnout to be right. All of it, not a single fucking apologize interviewing the dude that invented mRNA. Oh yeah. And the most published doctor in this field. Now single Paul Jai, not a single apology from anybody, not a single retraction, not a single, you know, Mia Kulpah, not a single we were wrong. And you know, I lost the lost sponsors. I lost a lot of a lot during that day, those days. It was interesting. It was, there was a, there was a time where it was working. Wow. Yeah. I didn't know there was that much coordination. Oh, there was a lot of coordination. People are going to be, I don't know. I don't talk about it too much because it's, it's pretty, it's pretty deep. It was nuts, but it didn't work, right? But they tried and they tried it out. They spent a lot of money. A lot. It wasn't a small amount of money. It wasn't a small amount of people. It was a lot of people and a lot of money. Good Lord. Yeah. That part was spooky. But the turning my face green was hilarious. That didn't bother me. It's good. It's also, I'm a comedian. You're going to mean like, I'm a shit talker. Like that's what I do. If you talk shit to me, it's like you're not going to hurt my feelings. I'm much. It's like, I'm used to it as normal. It's a part of the game that I play. So, you know, especially if you're doing it and there's a video that's the real video that's available for anybody that goes on my Instagram page like fucking retards like it is crazy. It's a, it's a, it's a, it's a dumb. And I think that what we see is authority hasn't changed in 200,000 years. But I think that what we consider to be social authority has been modified just kind of in the human side of things. Like it used to be, oh, this guy's got a suit and tie on. Now, all these CEOs are wearing a hoodie or a t-shirt or something. Like the visual definition of authorities changed and the, the social definition of authority is started to change now, where it used to be mainstream news and now we're moving into like a post news era of, of something. I don't know what the next thing's going to be. I mean, what Elon always says is you are the news now and the, the rise of independent journalists and what you have, what, what you're selling, what, what is your currency is authenticity and honesty. Yeah. And as long as you don't break from that, as long as people don't find out always, secretly getting all this money from APAC, you secretly getting all this money from Russia secretly getting all this money. And you know, oh, there's meetings where they've had where they've told people what narratives to push. And then you see people on Twitter that are, you know, supposedly new influencers. And then you see them almost cut and paste the exact same message over and over again. And then you find out, oh, this actual campaigns where you're paid large sums of money, if you have a large following, large sums of money, like significant amount of money to be a person who pushes narratives online, that's your job. You are literally a paid propagandist. And one people find that out, you're going to lose a lot of your people that are paying attention to you that take you seriously, but there's going to be enough that don't know about it that just see the tweet and like, oh my God, is that true? Like, oh my God, that's crazy. And enough casuals where you're going to get some traction, but you have sacrificed the one thing that you need to survive in this environment. And that's authenticity and honesty. If you don't have those two things, you're fucked. Because when the mind reading software gets uploaded and everybody knows, you may be all right. Yeah. They would probably look in some of our brains and go, dude, you're fucked up. But you're fucked up too. Everybody's fucked up. We're all fucked up. It's like, how do you behave? What do you do? How do you manage your fucked up in this? What do you do? What do you do with your time? What do you do with your life? Yeah. We're going to know. We're going to know. Yeah. And we're going to know a lot of people online are just demons. They're just demons, like in the real sense of the term. Like if you thought of what, if you had a demon, if you were a demon, if actual demons were real, what would they be doing? What would they be doing? Well, they would most certainly be trying to ruin people's lives. They would most certainly be trying to spread hate, spread misinformation, confuse people, to compare yourself to other people. Oh, yeah. Destroy you psychologically. Get you to take medications that you don't need. Make you think that you're not enough. Yeah. Yeah. Make you think you're not enough. Take money to, and sacrifice other people's health and safety just for whatever financial compensation you've got. You've been given to push a narrative. Yeah. Yeah. It's demonic. And it's separation. All of that is like you are separate from these people. They don't matter. You shouldn't care about them. You're separate. There are different things. You're not connected. You're not the same thing. And that's how people justify bombings. Yeah. You know, that's how people justify war. That's how people justify all sorts of horrific behavior that human beings still engage in. What did George Carlin say? I think he said, conspiracy is not required when interests all align. Right. That's a great quote. Yeah. That's a great quote. He had so many things. He said it's a big fucking club. Yep. And you're not in it. You're not in it. You had so many bangers. Yeah, he did. But there's a few people that are in the club. That's what's interesting. You know, some people that get in that fucking club. And you know, and then also in their opinions change. Yeah. Also in this soften up on stances or they get killed on a campus. Have you had somebody on your show that you thought was compromised? Oh, yeah. You have been named names, but yeah, yeah. 100%. I've had people on my show that I guarantee are here to try to push a narrative. Yeah, 100%. No doubt. And my own, you know, my it's, I think in some cases, obvious. And my job is to just keep them talking and let the internet do its job. Can I teach you a tactic right now? Sure. That will be good for these people. Yeah. All right. How much time do we have? Well, that's okay. All right. So this is a CIA method called elicitation. And it was invented by this guy, John Nolan. And so the basic premise is you're going to get more sensitive information you need out of a person, the less questions you should be asking. So here's how it works. You can get sensitive information out of people better with statements than questions. So there's, there's a few different types of these statements. So the first one is called a provocative statement. And the provocative statement is just making a commentary on what somebody said. And so let's say I just went through X and Y and Z and you're like, so, so basically, and then you kind of recap what I said. Right. And so no question. And then I'll kind of, yeah. And so I'll kind of, I'll keep giving you a little bit more information. The second is triggering a need to correct the record. So let's say you and I are in a grocery store and I say, Joe, let's say you don't get recognized. Let's say go over there. I want you to within 60 seconds. I want you to find out how much the girl that's stocking the shelf over there makes per hour. So you might go over there and be like, Hey, how much do you make an instantly you're weird and that feels like an interrogation, right? But if you went over there and you said, Hey, I just read this article, everybody that works at Whole Foods got bumped up to $26 an hour. That's fantastic. Congratulations. And she's like, what? We only make 22. And now she doesn't feel interrogated. And the answer came from correcting the record. Does that make sense? So now you're not a weirdo who's asking how much she makes. Yeah. So now you got the sense of information and it felt like it was just a flowing conversation. So the third is disbelief. So somebody says something and you don't get jamming to pull up anything. But the disbelief is like they say, Oh, and I've even worked with X and Y and zero. I've done this one thing. You're like, what? There is no way. That just sounds impossible. And then they're like, no, no, and and they'll keep going because there wasn't a question. So imagine if someone started telling you something sensitive and you're like, yeah, tell me more, tell me more about that. It seems like you're kind of wanting to pull things out. So the more that you can use statements, the more they're just going to keep feeling completely comfortable giving you stuff. What's interesting is I don't know those methods, but I do all three of those. You do a lot of that stuff. Yeah. I just wanted you to be able to consciously grab onto it. I just do it instinctively. Yeah. I just want to do it. But I mean, last my bullshit. Yeah. My instinct is going to hold on. So what you're saying is and you just give a touch of incredulity, just a little bit of a little bit of skepticism. Yeah. And then allow them to kind of like expand on it and go, okay. So you're saying that this. All right. So are you sure that that's the case? Because a lot of people think this no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, and I do it sort of naturally. Yeah. Because the most important thing is to listen as much as possible and keep them talking and don't interrupt too much. But sometimes you have to sometimes you have to though, like your pushing. So hold on. This is horseshit. Like this is like, I'm going to get grilled for this online. If I don't like stop this right dead in its tracks because I know and you know that you're lying. Yeah. So let's and then, but you also got to like keep on a hook. So like like you don't want to submit them yet. You got to like, oh, yeah, look, you got out of the arm bar. Crazy. And a couple of those you make them correct you. And you also say like, well, that had to be challenging or that sounds fascinating. And just those tiny little comments that just kind of of keep them pulling along. The Russians did this to America during the Cold War. The submarine would pull into Singapore or Thailand or something. And one of the some KGB guy would go up. And there's a 19 year old sailor at a bar and say like, well, we just Russia already has all these specs. And it's amazing that Russian submarines are faster than US submarines because our propellers are 19 feet wide. And they say it was like, yeah, ours are 21. Like just correcting the record. Just a tiny little thing correcting the record and some 19 year old kid gives away top secret information in 35 seconds. Wow. So that's where this stuff came about. And when you're like a if you work in the nuclear field, you have a top secret clearance, you have to go through anti-allicitation training before you leave the country and go spend time at it with some foreign national coming out. So yeah. And you know what? The number one thing in the first day of counter-intelligence school, the first thing they say is if you're a four and she's a 10 and she's interested in you, she's a spy. That is the most primal and effective of all tactics is hot women. It is. And also, we see with James O'Keefe, chatty gay guys. You see a lot of like hot guys. Yeah, you get chatty gay guys give up a lot of data. Yeah, to give up a lot of fucking information way more than I would ever think. Oh, it seems like the chatty gay guys are worse even than the guys that are trying to impress the women. Yeah. Yeah. I wonder how far they have to go. I wonder how many guys they have to sleep with. I don't want to know. I wonder, I mean, for sure there's been a straight guy or two unless they recruit gay guys for the job. You know, because gay guys wouldn't feel nearly as bad for having sex with another gay guy to get information out of them. I think then a woman would, a woman would feel like a whore, you know, a man who fuck some other guy that you probably fuck anyway. It's probably no big deal. You know, guys, O'fiels bad about that. And have you read Red Queen? No, it's about biological behavior. It talks about like adultery and females occurs during ovulation most of the time and really fascinating stuff in there. But one of them was that women are reluctant about sexual activity because they face the risk of raising a child alone. And it's not a conscious thing. But like there's some biological driver that says, if I am not careful here, I'm going to be stuck with this child alone. and if I had, and 200,000 years ago, if someone abandoned you and you're pregnant and then you're raising a child and you're kind of off the market for and no one's bringing you meat, no one's bringing you, you know, fish out of the river and all this kind of stuff. So I thought that was interesting. And that may be one of the reasons that it might be easier for dudes to go do something like that. Yeah. Well, we'd have to ask James, there's gotta be a reason. Well, it's also I think especially in politics, there's a large amount of in the closet gay guys that are in all sorts of levels of politics, all sorts of levels of government. Yeah, I'm no doubt. Yeah, I think it's been that way since Rome though. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, it's a very peculiar kind of person in the first place that wants to control all the other people. Yeah, well, you know the difference between today and Rome is the concealment of the shame about it. And I think most people don't know the difference between shame and guilt. I think that shame is a destructive force. There's nothing good about it. There's nothing positive about it. Guilt is focused on understanding the behavior and shame is focused on the person, the identity of the person who did it. And there's nothing productive about beating the shit out of yourself emotionally. It does not make the other person who you've harmed any better. It doesn't make the world any better. It's a down. I made a video on my YouTube channel. Basically giving a review and a tutorial of Planet Earth as if it was a video game. And like what's that video called? I think it's called Earth is a game. So it's basically like a 20 minute like I'm without breaking character. Like I'm giving a a review. I'm actually in the game right now and I'm making a tutorial and a review of this video game that we call Earth. And one of the things I said in the video is like the developers don't tell you like what the main goals are of the game. Like how do I get on the leaderboard? What's the way that how do you win? And we went through like 10 different metrics. But at the end of the day, I think what gets you on the leaderboard is where you an upward force on most people's lives that you encountered. Did you leave people better than you found them? That's about it. That's about fucking it. Wow. It's like, am I a downward force on other people? Am I pushing people down? People better than you found them. That's about it. That's about fucking it. Wow. It's like, am I a downward force on other people? Am I pushing people down constantly? Or am I just doing something else? And you remember like the moment you launch into DMT, you're like, oh my God, I was worried about taxes? I'm 17 black holes away and I was worried about my I-9 former. Right. I thought that was such a big deal. And it's the same thing that people like, I think if you want to learn the number one, and this is my my rambling, but the number one lesson I think most people can learn is from people that are dying. People on their deathbed, there's no better book you could read about how to add a master this game about how to get good at earth is reading the regrets of dying people. Because there's so much clarity at these moments where you know you're going to die. Like, oh my God, I thought all this shit, I thought that Lexus, I had to impress everybody at the country club who didn't give a shit about me. And I didn't spend time with my grandkids, I didn't spend time with my kids. Everything gets so crystal clear in those moments that I think those are the best books in the world. Like, you've written, I think there's a lot of nurses that work in hospice that write and it like collect a lot of these things and it's just so much perspective on what we think is so important. And then at that moment like, oh my God, I can't believe I prioritize all that shit. Absolutely. I think this is a perfect way to end this. Yeah, man. That was awesome. Thank you very much. Okay. So, um, station one is up, but it is channel one or station one station one, station one on YouTube. Yep. And then your show is what's the channel or chase use on YouTube chase use and station one. Yeah. Thank you very much, man. Really appreciate it. It's awesome. It's really, really good stuff. Thank you. Thank you. All right. Bye everybody. See you.