The Jerogan experience. Thank you to whoever gave me this this weekend at the Ice House on dude gave me Hunter S Thompson's the rum diary a nice paper back. Just wanted to thank that guy. Did his share drugs? Yeah, he did. He's like a delix. Have you done your share yet? No. No, yeah. Just mushrooms. I took a four hour shower on mushrooms once. Nice. And then I was hiking in Big Whiskey Mountain on mushrooms with my buddy. We decided to take a back route which you never do. I was climbing up a landslide. That's smart. And I was like to my buddy, I go, dude, here's what I go. You got to move at the mountain. You're not moving with the mountain. And he's like, okay, he's a real mountain man. So he's climbing like, oh, still not moving the mountain. Okay. I'm going to stay here and talk to this rock. And I had to have a conversation with the rock. And then as he tells it, we're on top of whiskey mountain which is a very big mountain. Okay. Luckily it was in the summer as well as with I was dating Patty back in the day. And they were waiting downstairs. And he turns back around and I'm not wearing any clothes. And I mean no clothes. And I'm on top of a mountain that takes like a really long time to climb up. And I'm naked. What'd you do with the clothes? We never found my clothes. Oh no. But I did stop and eat a lot of blueberries. Oh, yeah. And by the time we also took a shit squatting and then as I was doing that naked, my buddy moved some branches pretending it was a bear. Jumped up and started to run and that caused a problem. And then I came back down. The mountain all scratched up. No clothes. And I cast up and he had blueberries. My buddy got you stopped eating blueberries. I had a blue mouth. A shit ass. You walked barefoot down mountain. That's right. My feet walked cut up. My feet walked cut up. I don't know a day. And I literally probably four hours or something like that. I'm so brought up at any point during the walk. Yeah. When I finally got down, I had a blue mouth from eating blueberries. And I was all cut up and Patty was like, what are you doing? I was like, I need to dip my ass in the lake. I have shit ass. Because I didn't have, I couldn't wipe it. So yet another one of my shit stories, thank you. So she was like, wow, that's attractive. You're my man. I'll take the skinny guy with the blue mouth and his shit in his ass. It was coming down off mushrooms. So that was my experience with mushrooms. How much did you take? Dude, my buddy gave me just a handful of big handful. He goes eat him. I was like, OK, I want to have an experience. You got to eat him when I'm just stomach. I didn't eat him, of course. That's really good. And we're climbing, man. And I just started literally just hallucinating. You're better off than he didn't eat anything. If he had eaten this, you'd probably throw it really bad. I took the shower one time. I wouldn't get out of the shower. Patty was banging on the door. And I was like, I'll be there. I'm trying to figure something out. And then it's hard to explain. But I believe I kept seeing my profile. And the first thing I was like is I kept saying, oh, I have a fucking wish I was barrel-chested. I'm not barrel-chested. I grandfathered, barrel-chested. I'm not barrel-chested. I have a sunken chest. This is horseshit. And I was like, that's a terrible profile. So then I resolved. I resolved while I was in the shower, to just spend the entire summer on a bench press. I was going to hire a coach just to bench, which never happened. And then I came out of the shower. And then I had this experience of somebody standing, like watching me and judging me. And I felt like it was the devil telling me that I was a phony. So I was like, I'm a phony. I'm a skinny phony. Why did you think it was the devil? I don't fucking know. I just felt like that's what it was. That was so mean. It was just the truth and so mean. I was so raw. I came out. It's probably really God. Maybe he was. Maybe he was. It just felt like the devil, because he didn't want to admit the truth. Exactly. That's what the bad trip was. That is, bro. I can always tell with people. You can just see. It's so interesting to watch how people, like I was thinking about this the other day, how people basically as adults. Like I would call a adulthood and what they call maturity is the slow acceptance of what you will never be. That's kind of what it is. So what happens is you saw a little girl's dress like princesses. And that's their ideal. They grow up with these ideals. We stick these ideals and children. You're going to marry a prince. And he's going to be a prince charming. And that shit gets whittled away. You start settling for simulation and simulation. It's basically your life becomes I'll take what I can get. And until finally, you're dating some guy with hair and his ears and a pop belly. Well, at least he pays a fucking bills, which is what I like to get him, by the way. I like to get him when they're just going through a divorce. Had their heart broken two, 300 times, their 40, they work out way too much. That anger and frustration is combined into this fucking what creates like a freaky that I can really work with. I don't know how to tell him. The 39 year old crazy ones. Oh, my favorite. Stacking for attention. Is that what you like? Yes. Yes. Look at my ass. I'd work out all the time. That's fantastic. I like him old. Not even old. Old. That's young for me. So you're coming down the hill. You're totally naked. Your highs are tied out of mushrooms. Do you at any point realize you're starting to sober up at any point in time? Like what's happening as you're sobering up? What was happening as I was sobering up and because I'm such a freak is I had read a lot about how when you can be on a mountain in the summer, a winter storm can brew up. They can pop up. You can get caught in hail storms. You can go to a recent death actually sometimes. And so I was like, I got to get the, and I'd read about K2. And I don't know if you ever read about climbing K2. It's one thing to climb on Everest. It's quite another thing to climb K2. I believe there's only one side of K2, one can climb. And for a while, I believe, and you can check this on fact check, one in four people wouldn't make it on K2. People died all the time because one in four people wouldn't make it like you're in survive. Can you do fact check? Because I believe that was a case for quite a while. Jesus Christ. And so what happened was it was the holy grail of mountain still is. Because what happens is storms whip up really fucking fast, like really fast. And you die. Yeah. So what happened was I started thinking of storm might whip up and I suck in the cold. Whoa. What does it say on fact check? It's just talking about there's been a bunch of disasters up there. Oh, a lot of people have done on K2. Yeah. You don't climb K2 very few people climb. When you meet a mountain climber and they said I got to the top of K2, that dude is on the all-star team. Wow. That's a very rare dude. And you have to go through Pakistan. I think I'm a Pakistan side. What? Yeah. No bodies. And you pass bodies all the time.