Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night. All day. You know way before the change my mind. Change my mind. What does Charlie would have Charlie say? It proved me wrong or something like that. Yeah, it was something akin to that. My understanding was that essentially T.P. USA ripped that idea off. Yeah, it's rather. Yeah. And then he would, I think he feels a lot of like responsibility for what happened with Kirk. Because is he the most hot? What's that? Is he the inside? Exactly. That's so funny. I don't know. In case you got you got Kansas. There's no where we can ask him. We can ask her. Kansas is getting, uh, she's getting dragged on Twitter today because, uh, she's like, I've lived in Connecticut. I've never seen this much ice on trees. And it's 30 degrees out. And everybody's like, yeah, 30 is freezing. Yeah, that's so funny. That is not crazy. Do you see all the little Cleo memes? And it's Cleo. It's so funny. It's just Cleo. You remember, you don't remember the mis-bleed. Oh, the psychic? Yeah, the psychic. They keep on putting the mis-cleo memes out for Kansas. It's like, you know, that's hilarious. It is funny. I think this lighter just shit the bed. Could have brought that one one. Thank you. Yeah. It's really funny. Well, Kansas is painters, self-intill weird corner where everything has to be wild conspiracy. Like it has to be Bridget McCrawn's a man. Oh, yeah. Eric, a Kirk killed Charlie. It has to like one up the last one, you know? Yeah. I was, it was really funny. He came to the same conclusion that I did. So it's like, I've seen those conspiracy channels come up before. And then they come up and they crash out. And the reason is is because like for her, I think she, she had the whole like, um, she was involved with this, right? She was involved intricately with Kirk. She knew him. Yeah. And so that gave a lot of credibility to a lot of the things that she was saying. But then when she started moving back into like Mandela effect stuff and, you know, time travel and some of the people were like, Oh, I mean, you can do that if you're that guy, if your art bell. If you want, well, you know, but Bell, I, I remember, I used to listen to Bell. He's the goat. Oh, yeah. He was great. You remember that intro boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom. Yeah. So he, the kingdom of not. Yeah. I remember listening to him for years. When I've drive around with my dad, yeah. He was like, like it was a big deal. And I remember the very first episode I heard from him who was something about the nim. It's like, what's the nim? The nim were like that's guy called in. He was a time traveler. All right. And he came back in time because his whole, his whole thing was like he had to stop the weather patterns from destroying the future because the nim and alien race of grace had come. And they were heating up the planet slowly to change it to be the conditionals that were necessary for them to then live on the planet. And you know, art Bell, he's always playing into it with the lunatic. And he's like, and does the CIA currently know that you're there doing this? You know, and it's just like, uh, yeah, art would give you all the rope. Oh, yeah. You call art. I'm aware wolf interesting. Yeah. Oh, do you ever have a big foot episode? No. Oh my guy. That's the funniest episode over here. It's really that calls into art Bell and talks about how he killed Bigfoot where he buried it. And it's like, I don't know if it was early trolling like before trolling was trolling, but it was like this guy. He was like, yeah, you know, me and Timmy we were we took him out back there shot him right and just twice and some young and they spread out a little bit. And then we, you know, we packed up the big foot and buried him back here. Yeah. And Bell's just like, and you said there was young ends. The Bigfoot people are the weirdest. Like a trussling I went hunting for Bigfoot once. We did this, I used to do this TV show for a while called Joe Rogan questions, everything. And I were like, all right, tell me about chem trails. You know, I got to go meet with all the wounds and all the people that are like really involved UFO, anything like that. And we went and hung out with the Bigfoot people. So we went Bigfoot hunting for like two days in the Pacific Northwest and talked to all these people. And they're all like the same person. So I just said it's like a team of unfuckable white guys. It's like that's what you find. Like these guys are just like they found they're calling. It's just like looking for a mystery in the woods. You'll never solve. Well, the, there was a guy used to have on your podcast and he was, he was huge for a long time. And I think it still is. It's a, remember those missing cases. Mm hmm. Right. Yeah. That was a big deal. And I was always like anytime I heard anything about that, I always was enthralled with it because some of the stories were demented. Yeah. Like kids appearing 500 miles away and all this. Uh huh. But that guy always had you edged because people would always go, what do you think is going on? You know, and he goes, I can't remember it. But he, it was like missing. Yeah. Four, one, one, one. Yeah. Missing four, one, one. I've seen him on Instagram or on Twitter. Yeah. Yeah. He, but he got all the park records, you know, and he started going through and he was like, there's some really weird stuff going on. here for how many people are missing in national parks. There is, there is. But the reality is if you die in the woods, you get consumed pretty quick. That's the reality. That's why you don't find mountain lion skeletons. Mountain lions are a real thing. I've never found a dead mountain lion skeleton and all the times I've been hunting. Never, not once. You'll find elk bones, you know, you'll find stuff like that. I found some coyote. Yeah. I've seen a lot of the other skeletons before. How the matter desert. But mountain lions are a real thing. You very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very fine. A dead mountain lion. And there's so many of them. Now think about how few people actually go like hiking into the deep wilderness. Your body just gets consumed. Sure. You know, there's so many animals that come along, rats, all kinds of things, eat your bones. Oh, yeah. It's a free meal. Yeah, it's so easy. And they can smell it from miles. Sure. Bears. They're all pigs. And then it's over. Then there's nothing left. Yeah, they can smell that stuff from miles. But it's like people always want to attach some crazy, deeper, weird, you know, UFO Bigfoot meaning to it. It's like, no, you're in the wild. And nature has a whole plan for dead things. And it does a really good job of seeing a known last. Not at all. Well, that's the thing. If you live out in the country, you see this all the time. You know, raccoon will be around getting in someone's trash. They'll walk out. Bam. They just go throw it in the bushes. Mm hmm. That's it. That's it. Problem solved. Problem solved. And it disappears quickly. And plants consume it. Yeah. That's it. It's true. Rots and things eat it. Doesn't even take that long to rock. It's just pretty quick. It's pretty quick. Have you ever seen those time lapse photos where they take a dead animal and they let it sit there and you watch it get consumed by maggots? It's very quick. Yeah. There's poor people that go hiking. You know, like if you go hiking and you buy yourself and you break an ankle in your 15 miles in and you don't have a compass and you're kind of like roughly judging which hill you came over. And it's a lot of people that just get ahead of themselves. They really shouldn't be that far out there and they just die. How does all the time? Yeah. You know, so like this idea that it's like, you could, if you look at all the data and you try to find a pattern to it and you start imagining that there's some grand conspiracy that some watcher in the woods is consuming people, some demon that's out there. You can get pretty coo-key with your idea. I think the popular theories it's wild men. Oh, wild men, wild men. Oh, like humans? Yeah. Well, or some human variant that are... That's what this guy, this 411 guy, I believe so. I'm not sure because you won't say they don't. He doesn't actually give his... Here's what I think is going on. But people ask him and he's like, well, I have my theories, but he never tells you actually what the theories are. Interesting. I wonder why I just want to tell. Maybe that's why he's not more popular. If you just came out with it, like Candice, maybe it would be huge. Yeah. Like those guys that used to be in the 90s who were saying that we were going underground and killing the Nephilim. Oh, yeah. Those guys were great. They were going down and he's like, oh man, and they were giants. They had three rows of teeth and your special forces are going down there and taking them out. They're like, oh, no. Yeah. There's a whole group of people that believe that there's underground creatures that live underground and come out at night and there's always been like... Cryptids? Yeah, whatever they are. People think the graves live underground. There's not a lot of mystery left outside of places like the Amazon, the Congo that are super deep to get to. Not a whole lot of mystery left in terms of life. Maybe ocean depths? Yeah. Ocean depths, for sure. That's like the whole new unexplored frontier or ocean depths. Yeah. Say how many times I turn on the TV, it's like, look at this crazy creature. I'm like, that doesn't exist. And I'm like, wait, that's it. That's it. That's not one the other day tweeted out. It was like, I'm a Dell Effect has to be real. It was a... It's called a Siberian Mule Deer. You ever seen a Siberian Mule Deer? No. They have fangs. Oh, right. I have seen a fanged deer. I forget what they call it. Apparently, that's the... Do you know what elk ivories are? Yeah. Yeah. That used to be like a tusk, like way, way back on the day. It's so retarded looking, dude. Yeah, that's it. It's a fanged deer. Yeah. Very strange. Yeah. We're there for. Yeah. Well, I found a video because I was like, no way. I do these things. I thought I was being memed, you know. So... Oh, look. And this thing is real. So I found a video of them fighting. And they use those things as weapons. Oh, that makes sense. It's just the only thing that makes sense. Like gorillas. The gorillas don't eat meat. They have these massive fangs. You know, it's nature's weird. So much variation. You know, there's so many different types of life. And the fact that they all sort of synchronize, like this one, that one, and that one, this one, and this one, people's there and that one lives. It's like very fascinating when you really look at the just a wide variety of species that exist. Well, most people don't know anything about it. Like most people have never, we live in such a comfortable world. That is completely guarded from everything that's out there. And it's like people had a taste of out there. Yeah. And I think that the worldview of many, many people would change very quickly, especially feminist. I think that feminists would immediately stop being feminist if they just had a taste of like, well, you know, people you actually did have to shut themselves up at night from wolves. Yeah. That was a real thing. Wolves would come in and eat you. And so you would shut yourself in so that that didn't happen. Well, that's gone so far the other way that fucking retards are bringing wolves into place. Yeah. It is so dumb. You know, I have a good friend. Then they take it over like in Yellowstone or someplace. They reintroduced wolves. And it just decimated the deer population. Well, the elk population, but that's actually arguable that that might have been a good thing in some ways. Because it was getting to help need natural predators and mountain lions can only kill so many elk. But what's really interesting is mountain lions kill way more elk when wolves are around. Because the wolves find the mountain lions and take their elk. And so then the mountain lions have to go kill another deer or whatever. Why like just issue more hunting elk permits, though. Why do I do that? Well, you have to have some natural predators in a good, healthy ecosystem. And there's a good argument, particularly in Montana, that at one point in time, it had gotten to a point where you're going to have like rampant disease. Because they were issuing these, they're issuing like unlimited or a large amount of tags for people in the mid winter so that you can catch these elk in deep snow and just peck them off because they were having so many of them. And they weren't sustainable. That they were hitting these massive populations. So their populations are down to like, want to say less than 40% of what they were at their peak when they brought in the wolves. But the problem is these wolves, like what they didn't call a rattle recently, is the dumbest of all time. Because they brought these fucking wolves outside of Aspen. And they took wolves from Washington state, Washington state or Oregon. But whatever it was, these wolves from the Pacific Northwest were wolves that already had been killing cattle. So they captured these wolves instead of killing them. And then they relocated them to Aspen, where they're killing cattle. So they relocated them onto my buddy's ranch. Like there's five of them. And he had a cattle ranch, did he? He doesn't have cattle on his ranch, but it's fucking neighbors, do. And his neighbors are losing cattle left and right. So now they've killed off a couple of them and they're trying to, it was a disaster. And it's because the governor, the governor's husband, he's a wildlife lover. And he thinks it would be amazing if we had wolves. You ever talk to those little deer hunters in Michigan? In Michigan? Yeah, they've been pissed off for, like every deer hunter I know in Michigan has been pissed off. It was a native for years because they all, they all used to shoot fizzin'. That was the big deal in Michigan was fizzin'. And then here's the story I heard. I don't know if it's true or not, right? But the DNR, the Department of Natural Resources, imported a bunch of Western coyotes in order to thin out the deer population because the deer population was basically mangling all these farm crops. Oh, boy. And now that's an all you can eat buffet for a coyote in Nevada, these ground birds that are just these fat, fat little ground birds and they decimated the population. So you'll talk to these old deer hunters. Have you seen any fizzin'? No, shut up. Shut up. The interesting thing about that, those fizzins and invasive species. That's not a natural North American species, right there. They brought those fuckers over. And they are delicious. And it's fun to hunt them. Well, they would always just walk those train tracks. Those old abandoned train tracks, you know. And they'd have the dogs, dogs kick up the fizzin'. They'd shoot them from the track, dog, and ring it up. That was like a Michigan past time. Yeah, the coyote thinks a real problem because coyotes are now, they used to be a Western animal. And now they're in all 50 states. Not only that, they're in virtually every city in America. Well, they've been wiping them out in Michigan pretty good. And in rural areas, oh yeah. Well, what they do now is they have the GPS trackers that put them on the dogs. Oh, boys, we'll get in with AR-15s. Those dogs will run them for 200 miles. And then they finally take a shot. And they just will do that all winter long, man. That's good. But it's hard to wipe them out because what they do is, you know, when you hear coyotes calling, it's like roll-haul. Well, they're letting, sometimes there's a lot of confusion with what they're doing. Some people think that they're letting the other coyotes know that they've killed something, that we have food. But it's also a roll call. And when one of the coyotes is missing, the females have more pups. Really? And we're at Natural Reaction. Also, they have natural enemy is gray wolves. And when they evolved, they evolved to, when the gray wolves kill them, because the gray wolves don't breed with coyotes. But coyotes do breed with red wolves. That's why you have these like coy wolves in the east coast. Because coyotes wolf. It's a wolf. It's just a small wolf. And so their natural inclination is when they're getting chased, they move to a new area and then they have even more pups. So that's how they've spread out through the entire country. So if you go back to like the turn of the century, like the 1900s, coyotes were exclusively a western animal. Yeah. Now they're in New York City. Yeah, they're everywhere. Just as crazy. They have them in Central Park. They have fucking coyotes running around Central Park. Some lady this morning posted on X, a mountain lion in San Francisco, sitting on a porch in the city of San Francisco. A big one, just sitting there. It's like, just having a good time. Well, that's just because California has the dumbest fucking loss when it comes to those things. Yeah. Well, they have terrible gum loss too. They have terrible loss. They have terrible loss. They have terrible loss. Terrible, terrible, terrible politicians. Yeah. You know, it's shame too. Like I grew up in San Rosa. And that's the most beautiful area. The Napa Valley area. It's the most beautiful area on planet Earth. Yeah. The weather's always perfect. It's January 15th. It might as well be July 15th. Yeah. It's always perfect. It's always gorgeous. And they fucked it all up. They fucked it all up. They fucked it all up. Yeah. And they fucked it up real bad too. Oh, it's almost un fixable now, especially like San Francisco area. Like the whole Pacific Northwest is almost un fixable. It's like they double down and they keep going. Like Seattle now has a communist mayor. Yeah. Who's been living with her parents? When we work at the Alcat County, it's the mayor's name. Black Lives Matter had, they were, their head organizers. They were communists, the vowed communist. Like until it came to buying property with Black Lives Matter money. Yeah. What's happening with that? Well, then they're, then they're very much capitalistic. I mean, they're not in trouble. I don't understand that. Like they spent millions of dollars of that money on real estate. Yeah. There's only one UFC 325 this Saturday and on Draft King Sportsbook, the number one sportsbook for live betting. Once it's over, you're shot to get it on the action is gone. Draft King Sportsbook is built for live betting, not just pre fight picks. Because in the UFC one moment can flip the entire fight. One punch, one kick, one take down. New to draft Kings, new customers can bet just five bucks and get $300 in bonus bets. If you're bet wins with code, Rogan, down though the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code, Rogan, that's code, Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets. If you're bet wins in partnership with Draft Kings, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1 800 gambler in New York called 877 8. Open wire text. Hope in Y 467 369 in Connecticut called 888-7897777 or visit CCPG.org. On behalf of Budhill, Casino and Resorting Kansas passed through of per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction. Boy to Ontario restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinema Moms required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources CDKNG.co slash audio limited time offer. What's going on? No idea. I have no idea why. Well, I don't I don't know why the heads of many of these organizations aren't being rounded up and summarily arrested. Yeah. I mean, if we're watching these, I've been covering the riots nonstop. I'm sorry, protest that the completely organic protest, which are totally organic. And it's been interesting to watch. I was watching one the other day. We were live and it was Don Lemon. And he had showed up in Minnesota. And first thing Don Lemon does, right? I hate Don Lemon by the way. He is one of the dumbest my fuckers that has ever gotten on television. He's terrible. First thing he does, he drives up in this car. He's in the back seat and he jumps out of the car and he has this shitty lemon smile on his face. You know, and he runs over with Starbucks to these people. And he's like, here you go. Yeah. And then he jumps back in the car. Right. And they drive off. Now here's here's what's interesting about this. He comes back and he's in there with the protesters. You know what I mean? And he's interviewing most of the protesters saying we're coming from out of town. We're from this state. I'm from two states away. I'm from three states away. And you know, for this totally organic protest. Well, the cops, what they start doing, they have these guardrails on the sidewalk from the ice facility. And there's gaps inside of that barrier. And so they pull their police cruisers in just to fill those gaps. So that they stay behind the barrier. And lemons like why would they do that? Why would they why would they keep us compressed? You know, behind this barrier. And I'm thinking because you just stopped your car in the middle of the street to run across the road and give these guys Starbucks. You idiot. You know, they want to keep the roadway clear so that they can get their people in and out. You literally stopped your car in the middle of the road, ran across the street to give these people Starbucks and then got back in your car. And they're like, why is it that they're trying to keep us from getting into the road? Yeah. Like, what are you talking about? I just could believe it was like, what? It's amazing when these people that are so smug, where they're protected by a large organization by CNN. And then they get fired. And then they get, they're basically like a dog, like Carl getting released into the woods. And then they have to fend for themselves. And you see them in the world of podcasting where you don't have anybody riding things for you. And you have to express your own opinions. You're like, Oh, this is the real you. It turns out you're a moron. That. Well, I didn't know. Whoa, you know, the whole time, imagine you think in the whole time. You know, I never thought I'd be an entertainer. I didn't think I'd do anything with podcast. Never never in a million years. I'd never would have thought that. You were a who you an engineer or robotics mechanic. Yeah. A robotics mechanic. Yeah. How did you get involved in that? Well, I was a, I was a gunsmith for years. And there's no real applicable skills outside of that for anything. Actually, it doesn't really carry over in anything. It's really its own thing and a blueing things like it just doesn't carry over. Um, a friend of mine said, Hey, look, because I told him it's like, I need a job. Um, you know, I'm, I'm not making it. What do you think he's like, you know, you should apply to be an industrial mechanic. And I was like, I don't know much about it. And he's like, we'll just go apply. So I did took nap to test. And so the guy was like, well, I want to hire you at a level three, which was high, you know, it was like mid range was the highest wasn't the lowest. I was like, damn, okay. You know, what's the pay? He's like, it was like 30 an hour. You know, that to me was, was life changing. So I took the job and I got, I didn't know what the hell I was doing, but they trained me up well. And then there were some robots on the floor and I started working on those. And then from there, they trained me in robotics. And so, uh, it was, it was all done on. Like, what kind of automation like caught in a certain automation. And it was all food related and food related. And then all food robots. Yeah. So we weren't dealing with Johnny five. We were dealing with like vacuum systems and ovens and various robots, which were associated with those. Like for instance, there was a packaging machine that would all it would do is form boxes. That's it. All it did. It was just, that's it. But it would form, you know, a thousand boxes a minute. And it was, it was a giant robot and it had a huge sequence of functions on it. You know, when people think robot, they always think humanoid, but almost no robot is in any way humanoid. They don't know. Right. You know, they're, they're, that's just not what they're for. It is weird. Right. Then we think of robots as like movie robots. We think of eye robot. Yeah. If you came across a robot in a factory, you would have no idea what the robot. You'd be like, what the hell was that? So how did you go from that to debating people online? COVID. Something like that. Yeah. The lockdowns happened and I was laid off the, all the food plants in Michigan were shut down, especially the meat plants. And that's where I was. I was in the meat plants. And they all shut down the, because of the draconian restrictions of one Gretchen Whitmer. And anyway, while she was out with it, you know, on a boat partying with, you know, with her honey, we were all locked out of work, right? So we were your story. Yeah, we had the stay at home orders and I would argue with these dumb liberals on Facebook and they, man, they best be off. And so I started crashing their panels and I would debate with them. And I lots say and those things started to become more and more popular. And they would move over to YouTube. People would clip it. Then I started getting invited on to do debates with other people. And I didn't know who these people were. It wasn't my world. I didn't know who any of these podcasters were, you know, stuff like that. I'd listen to it maybe occasionally online, but like I couldn't have told you who like Vosh was or destiny or any of these people. Like I didn't know who any of them were. And I didn't care to me. It was just some other dumb smug liberal, you know. So that's where I got my start. I never would have foreseen at all that I'd be sitting here with you. That's so in July. I never would have foreseen. No, it'd been here either. It's weird. Oh, it's weird. And I'll never get used to it. And you know, people walk over and they're like, you're Andrew Wilson. And I fucking know, buddy, you know, but it's nice to meet you. You know, shake their hand. You have a chat with them. I'll never get used to it. No, you probably shouldn't. It's probably better to not get, I'm not used to it. Yeah. Yeah, you still do it. It's probably better to not be used to it. Keep you saying and maybe keep you humble. Yeah, you need something to keep you humble. We all know people that did not have something that kept them humble and they lost their way. The wheels fall off. Yeah, those are marbles. Yeah. Yeah. Especially as you get more and more famous, it becomes more and more unmanageable. I was, I feel like I'm pretty well grounded due to the fact that I didn't come from a political background. There's no famous people in my family. You know, there's just none of that. And so I feel like the grounding's always there because, you know, even even from the family, you get the call like from my brother, for instance, like he's been calling me the, I don't know if you can say the absolute or here. So I won't, but he's been calling it. Yeah, faggot. He's been, you know, he's been like the phone calls inside 15. What are you doing, faggot? That's not changed. Good. It has not changed. You know, it's a 42 is a happy birthday faggot. That's normal. Yeah. I remember you were having a conversation. I think it was on Pierce Morgan, who was the best cat wrangler in the business. That's what he does. He cat wrangles. Yeah, I just talked to him briefly. Is he okay on it? Well, that's what I asked him. I said, yeah, I sent him a DM and I was like, people don't know. He fell. Yeah, he fell. And really fucked up. And it was the hip. Yeah. And his age, the hip, you know, you don't want to, you know, nothing with the hip. Every time I see anybody who's 60s, they get the hip injury. It's, it's bad. Yeah. It's not good. I think they think your lifespan at post hip surgery is like 10 years. It's right. And that will probably be better than that. He will. And I think he's mobile. Oh, that's good. He's mobile. But I really good at hip replacements now. I was like, what's, you know, are you, are you doing? He's like, yeah, you know, I'm, I'm doing okay. And, and I was like, don't fuck around with the hips. Dude, it's crazy that he had to have a hip replacement. Like how bad was that fall? Yeah, I don't know. I don't know what the details of it were, but. I felt like a suck of spuds. Well, I'm needing a new hip after fracturing the neck of his femur. And is recovering from surgery in addition to being on crutches for six weeks. He won't be allowed to take any long haul flights for at least 12 weeks. He tripped on a small step inside of a lust, a London restaurant. Wow. He's doing the tumble. He think he's drunk. He could have been a little fired at a little drunk. It was also, you know, not the most fit or agile guy in the world. True. You know, yeah. He's only two years older than me. No way. Yeah. Really? I'm not crazy. Yeah, damn. Yeah. So people don't take care of themselves. Yeah. He got, he got the crack. Yeah. I got to quit these. But yeah, he got the crack on the, on the hip. And I was like, man, do you think that American spirits are better than marbles for you? Probably. Yeah. But they taste like shit. Do they? Is there a difference? Yeah. I really like the marborotape. Yeah. I don't think you get used to American spirits. I think I could. Um, I've been trying the cigarette lows. Those are helpful. Like the little mini cigarette cigars. Oh, yeah. Ron, why used to smoke those? Yeah. He just quit totally. He went to a hypnotist quit instantaneously. But those are loaded with nicotine, like way more nicotine than a cigarette. He was smoking those. Yeah, good. When little tins we have those, what are those tins, Jamie? Do you know what they're? It's like a, like a famous cigar company sells tins of these little tiny cigars. And it's great. If you don't have the time to smoke this, like you get out of a flight, just want to have a small, but he inhales these motherfuckers. That cigarette. That's brutal dude. That'll do you. And then it washes it down with whiskey. Well, he doesn't drink anymore. No, he quit drinking. Yeah. I think he went that was always in his bit though. He was always up there smoking and drinking. And I always thought I love that. And I was well, he did it. He did it till the wheels fell off. And then the drinking was the big one. smoking and drinking. I always thought I love that. Well, he did it. He did it till the wheels fell off. And then the drinking was the big one. You know, he went to a doctor and the doctor's like, you're going to die. Yeah. Like your liver is not in good shape. Like if you back off now, you're probably live. If you don't, you're not. You got like a few years left on alcoholics too. They have it. I don't know if he was one or not. He might have just been like a heavy social drinker, but like real alcoholics, that's no way to live. No. I mean, they stink. They thought of like, I mean, kind of everything about a real alcoholic is just they look completely unwell. They're just kind of mangled, you know. Yeah. It's a weird disease too. In that bad addiction is one that you can't quit. You can't just cold turkey. You'll die. Yeah. It's only a couple of things that'll just kill you if you quit right away. And alcohol is one of them, which is really crazy because it gets integrated into your biological system where you need it to stay alive. Your body's like, okay, we're going to use this for fuel. Going to use this to function. Yeah, they've been weaning people off alcohol with beer for centuries. Is that what they use? Beer. They used beer. They used to go. Okay. Well, it was pretty common to drink beer and ale with dinner. Right. They just weaning off with beer. That makes sense. They knew they knew hundreds of years ago. They books on and how alcohol, you know, what are the consumption or whatever they called it? They killed you. If you just if you just quit, if you were an alcoholic and so they weaning off with beer. Wonder when they started making hard liquor because you would imagine like fermented things like wine and beer or like the first things that people consume. I think it's been around for thousands. You come in several thousand years. I wonder. I wonder like how they figured it out in the biggest the biggest, what was it? The biggest distributor in Europe of wine was the Catholic church. Well, wine has certainly been around forever. But like what about hard liquor? Jimmy put that into our sponsor perplexity. What was the first what known? I mean, we don't really know because there's so much weird shit about history. Well, like what was the first in like documented hard liquor like whiskey vodka, shit like that. That's the stuff that kills you. If you die from beer, boy, you're fucking you're going hard. Like Shane Gillis will sit here on a podcast in drink 16 Bud Lights. First alcohol drinks were fermented things like beer, wine, meat, okay, thousands of years before true liquor. Okay, first recognizable liquor appears when people begin to distill archaeological evidence throws fermented drinks. Okay, that's around 7,000 BCE. So clear of is of true alcohol distillation. Chinese rice beer distill distillates by about 800 BCE. So a couple thousand years. A thousand years. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Wine to the strong spirits. The Arab alchemists. Alcool. Oh, interesting. Using the term alcool, the root of alcohol. When they used they used alcohols base for for alchemy too. That was a base for trying to transmute metal. Yeah. I wonder if they were ever successful. They were never successful. Nothing. It seems like a crazy thing to waste so much time on trying to let into gold. I mean, there was whole kingdom spent trying to figure out how to do this. Wow. And it's just like, and they never. I mean, you think about it makes sense, right? If you're the first one, if you're the one who knows, like you can just create as much wealth for yourself as you want. Oh, yeah. And just amazing to keep trying. Must have been someone saying that they got it. I got it. Just give me some others tons of frauds. There's tons of frauds who are alchemists who, you know, they were that centuries version of a snake oil salesman. Yeah, of course we can we can turn and there was ones even in the 90s who were like, we can now turn, you know, base metals in the gold. I think there's something now where they can make some gold, but I think it takes an incredible amount of energy and cost more to make than it's worth. Right. I think it's one of them deals. Is that a fact? I feel like I've read something like that fairly recently, but it's here's a weird one. Why gold? Why does anybody give a fuck about this metal that you can't even use? It's not much of it. Right. That's true. And he's very the way they're saying is 90% of all the gold ever discovered still in circulation. Right. Yeah. Well, China just found a huge vein of gold, an enormous amount. But I mean, when you say enormous, it's like relative. Yeah. Because I think the entire world supply of gold will fit inside of a football field. Yeah, there's not much of it. Yeah. It's very, I mean, in very little of it is worth a lot. I mean, even if you think a private treasure chest, you know, it's not actually that much gold. Right. So it's a box of gold that's a pretty much valuable. And also you can do things whether you can't do with other metals. The same thing with silver, you know, silver. Scientists mimicking the big bang, accidentally turned lead into gold. Yeah. So this is the thing. But I mean, again, I think mimicking the big bang, like what are they using? A particle collider? Like, what are they doing? Okay. How'd they do it? How to steal a proton proton's found the nucleus of an atom. So extremely small amounts. In fact, the total of some 29 trillions of a gram they made. Okay, smashing lead atoms into each other, extreme. So it is a particle collider, I guess. The working on the Alice experiment and the large Hadron collider, yeah, there it is. And Switzerland incidentally produced small amounts of gold. He just need a particle. That's all. No big deal. He just building into a whole mountain. And now they're building a second one. They said, yeah, building into a new mountain. Right. Well, there was one that were put in during the Clinton administration, they were building a particle collider somewhere in the middle of America trying to figure out where it was. I'm certain there's already more than one. Oh, there's many particle colliders. But I'm certain there's ones that are that are even probably larger and hidden than the one that's currently there. Really? I think so. Yeah. Oh, for sure. What do you think they're doing with them? Well, I mean, the military applications for that are like very enormous. I think the idea that you could make like some kind of particle weapon, you know, or something like this. Yeah, there's no way that the that the US military is going to let scientists have a gadget like that somewhere that they don't have complete control over there. No way. I wonder because I don't know what kind of military applications you would have for particle colliders. I mean, for sure big explosions, right? There's probably yeah, but you're just you've got a giant loop in your mashing things. Yeah, right. Yeah. So what I mean, what do you do? Like a hair on the edge of the slide. Either you can make them go boom, boom, right? Kind of. Well, the real concern with the large hadron colliders that were going to create many black holes. We're going to eat their way through the earth that you wouldn't be able to stop them. They were just like slide through the earth. You know, that's heard that. I heard there was concern. They were going to open up a portal to a different dimension. And I've heard like yeah, I've heard all sorts of like yeah, we changed your timeline. We're on the new timeline, you know, the the whole nine yards. I've heard it all. I'm just saying that anything that it's just been my experience when I look through the historic record that if there's any scientific gadget out there that looks like it has the potential to make something go boom, the United States military has a version of it somewhere. Yeah, that makes sense. That makes sense. But for whatever reason, they abandoned this one during the Clinton administration. I don't remember why they abandoned it, but you could people can, if they have access to the area where it's at, can still go inside of it and see like what they started to build, but they never did. But it would have been larger than large Hadron Collider. I want to say it's in Georgia. I don't remember though, but it's a it was going to be an enormous particle collider. Yeah. And for some reason, they just stopped funding to this thing. But well, they're talking about funding another another one that's twice the size of the one that they have now. They say that they need more room to smash more particles together. What are they trying to do? I have no idea. Like that is way outside of of my domain. I can tell you, I probably the same things you've heard, right? They're trying to smash small particles together to see what happens. That's what the kind of the official story is. But it's funny because every time a new story comes out, it's like scientists smash this together with this and this happens. And I'm always like, okay, what does that mean? And you never get any of that, right? Right. This one was in Texas. I was in Texas. Yeah, the Clinton, okay, that's it. Yeah. It's been $2 billion on it and abandoned it. Yeah, I wonder. Seating and find some images of it. Yeah, it's outside of Dallas. Oh, it is outside of Dallas. Okay. Abandoned superconducting supercollider site in 2008. Wow, I wonder if you could buy it. That'd be fucking awesome. Get in a broken zone. Broken zone. Particle collider. I mean, there's nothing there. It's just concrete. Yeah, let me buy it. What's a big deal like that weird time machine out desert. That was really funny. Let me set up an archery range aside from this stuff last week. Department of War confirms plans to scale direct energy weapons. Did you see that thing? Why would they need a hydrocliter though, right? Or, you know, particle collider well, because they want to make stuff go boom. Yeah, direct energy weapons. Yes, the Department of War has direct energy weapons. Yes, we're scaling them. Wow. That's a pure suit there. It's been a while over this. Oh, of course. Well, that was a lot of people. I'm like, I'm full out rifle though. I do. I want my plasma rifle. Right. I do. If I can have plasma rifles, you can buy one, right? Oh, yeah. For sure. You probably get a tax stamp. You'd probably be like a lengthy thing. Oh, for sure. I'm glad you're a gun guy because I wanted to bring up this whole thing with this guy pretty. Yeah. And I haven't talked about it. We haven't done a podcast since the guy got killed. But that whole thing, there's a lot of people that don't understand what's going on. And why riots only in Minneapolis and why riots in the place where there's an ungodly amount of fraud that has been discovered coincidentally, right around the same time. Exactly. Like instantaneously afterwards, the narrative completely changes. Everybody forgets about the fraud. Now, all anybody cares about is ice and fascists and Nazis. Yeah. And it's, uh, there's a, you know what a color revolution is. Of course. And for people that don't, it's, it's a coordinated effort to cause chaos. And this is a very coordinated thing. The idea that this is an organic protest. These, these riots organic is nonsense. It's provably nonsense because now they have access to the signal chats. So they know that these, so these people can't be by the way. Yes. He's been on the front lines of this. The crucible has been a big supporter of that effort, my channel. I will often snipe his coverage while it's going on. Send my audience over to send in super chats in order to keep this guy going. I think that that work is critical. Yes. It's critical. And there's not that many people doing it anymore because of how dangerous it has become. Yes. And so, you know, a big supporter of that doesn't mean I agree with everything he says politically, but what he's doing on the ground there needs to happen. Right. We need, you need to understand that this isn't organic, regardless of how you feel. I don't feel like that guy should have been shot. But I understand what happened. And what happened was chaos. So what happened first of all, it wasn't ice. People need to understand that. It was a customs board of patrol people. So they were brought into assist ice. And they're telling this lady to stand away. And then this cop gets very aggressive and shoves her. You have to understand the situation that they're in. Right. And this is not making excuse for any of it. But you have to just to put it into context, these people are getting harassed outside of any hotel they're at. People blow horns. They try to smash into the hotel. They dock some. They dock some. That's why they're wearing masks. It's a coordinated effort. I'm not saying that guy should have shoved that guy. I don't think he should have or that woman. I don't think he should have. And then pepper sprayed. And then the guy who got shot pretty, he steps in, which is if you know anything about concealed carry, if you are a concealed carry holder and you are carrying not just a pistol, but two full magazines as well, you do not ever physically engage with someone. You also are supposed to carry your license on you. And you're supposed to, you're supposed to have ID on you. All right. You and your trained specifically for this, by the way, I was a CPL instructor for years. Okay. And the thing is, there's a framework here. If you don't mind if I add your framework, the framework here is this is a mathematical formula. So I've been following these extremely closely live. And looking at how this is done, let's go backwards in time. You remember what was going on in California. Nobody died in California. There was an ice rate on a home depot, and they went nuts. And they started smashing police cars. They were starting fires. This was not over somebody dying. And now the narrative they're trying to make the narrative shift, the Gestapo's in here murdering American citizens. Well, what was going on in California then, because there was no American citizens getting murdered there. What was going on there was they did an ice rate on a home depot, which anybody who's been to California knows that you know, there's used to be that you drive down the street and they would all hang out in front of the home depot and you'd say two. And they'd hop in the truck and you would, you know, they would go, yeah, they were day laborers, right? So it didn't surprise me that they were there doing daily raids. Okay, that doesn't surprise me a bit. And they all went ballistic. Now, here's what was very curious about the coverage of that. And I had a debate with a couple of leftists on this. What I saw was what looked to me to be a police stand down order. There was people who were breaking into, I don't remember if it was an amco or a 7-Eleven, but they were busting into it. And the cops were on the side corner watching this go down and do anything. They didn't do anything about it. Right. Okay. They if they got too rowdy, they'd clear it out and then they let them continue. They looked like a stand down order like you don't don't involve yourself. Well, what I think these guys have figured out is a mathematical formula and it works like this. If the local police are not going to protect the federal buildings, then it's left to the federal police to do this, in this case, ICE is going to protect zone buildings. The FBI is going to protect its own buildings. If the local police aren't going to protect it and it's surrounded, then who does the protection then? And this is why Trump, he unleashes the National Guard, but where to those federal buildings to protect those federal buildings? That was the whole point of it. That's in basically any time he's unleash the National Guard that I've seen, it's two federal buildings to protect and so the mathematical formula works like this. The longer it is that protesters are engaging with federal officers whose job is not to do basic street cleanup of thugs. That's the local PD's job. The chances that there's an incident, which is going to be a bad incident is going to occur. So basically the longer you're there, the more attrition there is, the more engagements you have with these federal officers over time, eventually there's going to be something which is out of pocket that happens or something, which is escalatory that happens and they're banking on that. And that's why ICE is out in front of these, or not ICE, the anti-fap people are still out in front of the ICE buildings in front of many states night after night after night. And it's designed specifically to make sure it's just a math formula, right? The longer we're here and the less the the local PD involves itself, the more chance of incident between federal officers and us. You're knocking stealing as Flint. Yeah, you're waiting for the fire. You're waiting for sparks. And in this particular instance, this guy clearly had been very involved. I don't know if he was a part of the signal chats, but when you go to what's supposed to be a peaceful protest, and you're fully armed like that with two magazines, it's kind of crazy, right? Like, why do you need so many bullets now that they're also a pro-second amendment to that is why I'm for every right. I tell him he didn't last month, but okay, I like it. I like where it's going. I like that because that's kind of a trap. Um, did you see when MSNBC did do his image? Yeah, they were they were they gusted it up. The opposite of what CNN did to me, you know, CNN during the COVID times turned me green and they made me ugly and look like I was dying and they made him handsome. Yeah. So people would be more sympathetic to him getting shot, which is kind of wild. Like our ugly people less valuable to MSNBC less marketable. That is crazy to me. Like look at the difference. Yeah. Look at the difference. They shortened up his face. They gave him a little bit of a tan. They widened his face a little bit. It seems like they just made a little handsomeer. Yeah. They gave him a bit of that Chad jogged, didn't they? They shrunk his nose a little too, didn't they? Yeah, they did. They shrunk his nose. Game a little bit of handsome jaw. So he looks like and even made him if you look at the shoulders, it even looks like they they may have plumped up the shoulders there a bit. A little bit. Yeah. The one on the right looks like looks like he's a little plumper. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They they changed the tone of the color wild. I mean, they would they they changed his fucking teeth. Yeah. I mean, this news, they gave him a bit of ears. Yeah. Look at the difference in his teeth. He's a much more handsome guy. Like that one on the right is like the handsome brother and the one on the left is like fuck. Yeah. Why couldn't I look on the right? Yeah. The one on the right. He they were twins and he took more of the protein. Right. That was what that was what happened. The thing is, it's like this doesn't surprise me by the way. This is what's going on. This is a well orchestrated, well crafted thing. Yeah. And the signal chats prove that, but we knew it anyway. Yes. Just by the government, by the way, allegedly at least involving Minnesota state government involves walls. Yes. So that's not alleged. Right. You know, it's not alleged that involves walls. It's not alleged that it involves fray. Right. And it's not alleged. Well, what is alleged? The allegations of fraud, of course, but there would be a reason why you would want to to distract from all that fraud. Sure. And that would motivate you to do something along these lines. So let's go back to the instance. So you've got these cops that are on these CBP guys that are on high alert. Right. There's a lot of tension. People are screaming. If you're an environment like that all day, like I've never been a police officer, but I was a security guard. And when I was, I was security guard for great woods. And by the way, I'm not comparing this in any way, but I'm just explaining my mentality when I was there. It was very much us versus them. It was a small group of guys that were working at, I worked at Great Wood Center for the Performing Arts in Mansfield, Massachusetts. It's a concert venue in Mansfield. And this was when I was fighting. So it was me and a bunch of guys from my Taekwondo team got hired to be security guards. One of the guys came and said, Hey, you guys want to get a job working as a security guard. It's great. You get to see concerts. And it was like a good pay. And you know, I was doing a bunch of random jobs back then while I was competing just to sort of pay bills. And I said, Yeah, okay, what I have to do? And like there's nothing. You just go there and you want first day on the job. I go there. Some guy had stolen one of the security golf carts. So there's this dude named Alie Cat. He was the head guy of security. He was fucking character hilarious. His main dream was to open up a bar. Like Bayce, Alie cats, libations and victuals. He had this whole dream of like just a real character. But this guy was a hardcore motherfucker. And they caught the guy who stole this golf cart, attacked him to the ground. And he was beating him in the face with a walkie talkie. This is my first day on the job. So I'm like, okay, so this is what we're doing. And we kind of became like almost like cops for this place. But there was very much in us versus dem mentality. And it turns out it was a lot more involved than I ever thought it was. And then one day I was at a Neil Young concert. I was working the Neil Young concert and riots broke out. There was fire. It was cold out. And there was like a grassy area. So there was like a lawn. It was like there's the inside. Not inside. It was like an outdoor concert venue. But there was a roof to part of it. And then the back of it was like this lawn area that was in the back. And these guys had started bonfires up there. And we were supposed to go in there and break up the bonfires. And then my friend Larry, who was like one of the most mild-mannered guys you would ever want to meet. But you know, a elite black belt. He gets in a fight with this guy. And some guy pushes him and he knocks this guy down. And I'm like, okay, chaos is broken out. Let's get the fuck out of here. And I used to wear a hoodie. I used to carry a hoodie so I could just zip up the hoodie over my security outfit and like buy. Because I knew there was going to come a time where I was like not getting shot, stabbed, killed, whatever stall. This venue for 20 bucks an hour. Whatever the fuck was that? So I wound up leaving that day. But there was a very, and I remember very clearly like, oh, this is probably what happens with cops times a million. Like you develop this us versus them. Because it was very much us. We would meet up at the beginning of our shift. We would all talk about what's going down. We're mostly we were catching people that were bringing in alcohol. Like women and their purses would, you know, like some Carly Simon or something be playing. They'd sneak in a bottle of wine that, you know, James Taylor, you know, there was a lot of that. And so we'd we'd have like literal fucking trash cans filled with bottles of wine and liquor the other night. We would get to keep them. We'd take them home. And so this us versus them. Nice perk. It was kind of fun. Yeah. It's a nice perk. Yeah. He's like, I was illegal to drink. I was only 19 at the time. But an even nicer perk. It was very clearly us versus them. And the tensions were very high. Yeah. Like whenever some weird shit went down, everybody popped up their chest and everybody was ready to throw down. And I was like, this job is not good. But it, it educated me. I was like, okay. And I'm in my mind, I was like, okay, this must be like this when your police officer, again, times a million. That the think of what's going on. Why they have their codes, right? They have the, they have their oaths they take and then they have their little codes to each other. Exactly. Exactly. But I wouldn't, I don't blame them. Like it seems completely, there's a, a certain wisdom to this. Like, hey, look, that could be me. 100. And so if it's you, I'm going to be right there with you. 100. And then if it's me, you're going to be right there with me. I get it. Also, there's a tremendous amount of social media content that anybody could access at any given time where a lot of these dorks are calling for violence. You know, it's just, it's all over the place. You could find it the least likely people that would ever be involved in any sort of an altercation are on TikTok calling for violence. We've got to kill these motherfuckers. We've got to shoot these motherfuckers. And these guys are out there in the middle of that. All right. So tensions are high as fuck and they're getting screamed out all the time. They're on, Red Alert. They're wearing vest. They're carrying guys. All the wives are getting called in threatened and they're saying they're going to rape their kids. And they're saying that they're going to brutalize their family members. And they can call is the middle of the night and they whisper to them, wow, how's your dad such and such doing? You know, and just cryptic things like that and let it go. Uh huh. Exactly. And this is very coordinated. It's very coordinated and organized and the way they find out all their information is very creepy. So again, I don't think this guy should have pushed that lady. I mean, the way he did it was very violent. She was a small woman and he shoved her very violently to the ground. Then this other guy, pretty, gets in between them. Okay. Which again, if you're a concealed carry holder is a giant no, no, you do not fuck it do that. You do not engage with law enforcement when you're armed. You should engage with anyone. Ever. I mean, you should be avoiding. You should be trained to avoid conflict. Yes. That's the whole thing is like if you're if you're armed, you move into that next level of you need to really be avoiding conflict. You're not supposed to be in bars drinking. Exactly. You're not supposed to be, uh, you know, at big parties and things like this where violent things can occur. Exactly. You know, you can take it to church, defend the church. Yeah. Other than that. Yeah. Like you're supposed to be avoiding conflict. Exactly. So, uh, he gets in between the officer and this woman puts his hands on the officer and then he gets pepper sprayed. They go to the ground. There's a lot of scrambling going on. Now you have to understand what happens when you get pepper sprayed. Okay. I've never been pepper sprayed by did you get tear gas once during fear factor. We did a fear factor stunt where these people had to, I forget what they had to do, but we had built this, there was like a structure and they were inside the structure and they released tear gas and it's charged. I got hit with it. It's pretty brutal. But it's painful. Yeah, it sucks. And you can't breathe. You can't breathe your eyes swell up. You know, it starts going crazy. Yeah. Um, and that's just days on your clothes. You don't think well when that happens. So this guy's clearly not thinking well and he can't see and he's, you know, and then they're on him, right? So they're on him and then one guy, whether he yells out he's got a gun or grabs the gun first. I'm not sure. But there he has a gun. So they see his gun in the middle of the scramble. The guy pulls his gun out and moves off. Now this is where it gets, this is where it gets weird. I believe the gun was a SAGP run three two. Oh, a SAGP 320 is known for having accidental discharges. It is, uh, it has a reputation for it. It has a very specific type of striker. It doesn't have a safety the way some other guns do. And you can have negligent discharges with six. Now is the, the P 320 is at a hammered bottle? Yes. Okay. So it's not a striker fire. No, wait a minute. No, no, it is a striker fire. It's what's what's what's pulled, let's pull it up. Cause I'm not, I know that 365 is built very differently. The 320 breaks cleaner. But I thought the 320 had a hammer was double action and single action. And then I, I, you might be right. I didn't think it was a striker fire. Most of the P models are not striker fires that I'm aware of. I could be wrong. Well, the 365, the P 365 is definitely different than the 320. Yeah. They have a different striking mechanisms. They're known for accidental discharges. Okay. Um, I can't tell if that's a hammer underneath the slide. Well, let's just just what is this? What is the trigger mechanism of a SAGP 320? Put that in there. And what is it that makes it prone to accidental discharge? If you look up SAGP 320 online in any search engine, accidental discharge comes up very quickly. I did a striker fire. Yeah. Okay. Okay. So it's a modular striker fire trigger mechanism. Uh, when press trigger bar moves forward, disengage a safety lever and see a release in the striker. Okay. So it's a striker fired. Right. So okay. Got it. So as of, uh, 2017, SAGP changed the way they make their guns because the trigger itself was heavier than what it is now. And not just the pull, but the actual mechanism of the trigger was heavier. If you drop it. So if, uh, this is the barrel of the gun where the bullet comes out, and this is where you're holding on your hand, if you drop it, it'll, it'll discharge. And it'll discharge without, without, without moving the slide, which is kind of crazy because what happens is something in the dropping it on the back where the handle is released is the disc connector. Probably it causes that heavier trigger, the heavier weight to the trigger to drop down and it will discharge. Okay. Uh, as of 2017, they made the trigger lighter and it doesn't do that anymore. Okay. And there's a whole YouTube video where this guy explains it and shows that you can do it with the older models. If you drop them on their side, they don't do it. If you drop them barrel first, they don't do it. But if you drop them handle first and it hits the, the back where you hold it, where the, you know, the, the, what is it called? The beaver tail gun on the sit. The internal hammer fought drops and bang. Exactly. And it's one of the only guns that does that. Yeah. And, uh, so much so that I believe you should search this. I believe the Dallas Police Department stopped, issuing them to their officers. See if that's true before I go for that because I don't, I don't want to get any legal weeds here. But I have one. I have us 320. I've never had a problem with it. Uh, I, here it is. Dallas Police Suspends Use of Pistol Manufacture. Okay. Yeah. And it's because of that. So, um, one of these. I hear it is Dallas police, suspense, use of pistol manufacturer. Okay. Yeah. And that's because of that. So, um, one of these chamber did in 1940. It's nine. Nine. They're nine. But the, um, so that's the gun. This guy has. Mm hmm. So when this CBP officer grabs his gun, he was moving off and it appears. It's very grainy the video. It appears there's an accidental discharge. Now you can make an accidental discharge of this gun without touching the trigger. If there's any kind of pressure on the trigger, if it is a modified trigger, if there's anything that engages with it, even a slight amount and you move the slide at all. That gun will go off. And there's videos of it online. You could find videos online. See if you could find videos of it online where a guy shows how you can get that gun to negligent discharge. Cause it will. It will. At least the priest, 2017 model. Um, I don't, I didn't see his hand going the slide of the gun though. Yeah. Well, he's holding it in a, it's the hard thing is it's fucking growing. Yeah. You can't see. I looked at it from both angles, but it looked to me like he was holding it. Um, like by the handle with no finger on the trigger. Yeah. But it does seem like at least some of the takes that I've seen are maybe wrong, but it seems like that gun might have negligent discharged. Now usually when someone's holding a gun and there's a negligent discharge is because they, they pulled the trigger. Right. Right. So in this case, let's, I'm, I mean, I'm going to assume it for a second. So the gun drops on the side, striker fired. Let's say it's, I don't know what the mechanism is. Well, let's say the disconnector that makes the disconnector go. drops, bam, hits the primary gun fires, gun fires, hits the ground. These guys think they hear gun. These guys think this guy might have a gun in the scramble. They don't know. This is all set down. High pressure. They open fire on him. That's what I believe happened. You know, so when people say, oh, they straight up executed this guy, thank you better. There's a little more nuance to it. There's chaos. There's the fog of chaos. The other thing that's in the middle of this like very high stress situation where you've already pepper sprayed this guy. Now you're in a physical scramble. Someone says he has a gun, gun goes off. Bam, bam, you're just shooting. I'm assuming this is just a lot of, you know, a lot of gas. That's a lot of bad stuff that has to happen in sequence. Yes. Like the fact, even if this gun is recalled is a model that had these issues, right? I'm guessing that it wasn't every, every one of them that had the issues, some of them, right? Probably not all. And if it's because it has to have a lot of force for it to go off or the slide has to be, you know, you have to be moving the slide or something like this. What I saw was him holding the pistol, how you or I would hold the pistol with the finger off the trigger. I did not actually see like what would have caused that force. This is where it gets weird. So there have been documented instances like the pig, the Sigp320, there's a lot of legal stuff involved in this. There's tons of cases. Some of them are bullshit. There was one cop where they said the cop got shot because the gun accidentally went off and everybody was like, oh man, Sig's in trouble. Turns out that cop had to recant that and he accidentally hit the trigger and shot a cop. But he wanted, so this is one. So this guy, his gun just goes off. Now he doesn't have his finger on the trigger. It just goes off. Now there's another one where a cop is in the middle of a precinct and he leans forward. He's got the holster on the outside. He leans forward and the gun goes off. He does not have his hand on the trigger. He's not touching the gun at all. See if you can find the one where the cop does it. So there's a cop where he's in the precinct. His gun is, now here's the question. Was there something touching the trigger? Was it the holster bad? Was there debris in it? Was there something? Was his shirt touching it? Did he jam the gun on the holster and maybe like his shirt got stuck in and touched the trigger? There's also the second gun theory. And then he moves forward. If the guy had a second gun. There's also the second gun theory. So I understand what you're saying and maybe it met all of the conditions for that. It does seem unlikely to me, but it's possible that he's just holding it and it just happens to go off. It would seem unlikely with any other gun. So if the guy had a Glock, but both of these cases are from the holster, this guy's riding from the holster, he's grabbing from the holster with a cop, had already pulled it out of the holster and now he's holding it and then it goes off. Right, but it's so low resolution. It's hard to see what's going on with his hands. So if there had been some funkiness with the trigger, you know, who knows where he got the gun, who knows whether or not that gun had an aftermarket trigger, who knows what's going on? But as he's doing this, you're in the middle of the chaos, you're ramped up with adrenaline, who knows if that guy accidentally while he was holding it, put pressure on the slide and caused that gun to negligent discharge? I don't know. This is the speculation and the reason why the speculation is so it's something we're talking about is because it's a SIG-P320. Yeah. And there's so many stories about that. It's not outside of the wrong possibility. Right. In other words, which is the worst case scenario, right? You got all this chaos and then you've got that fucking gun. And that goes, but let me ask you this, let's say we adjust for this. There's an investigation. Turns out that this 320 model was one of the ones that, you know, was an older model. Yeah, or something like this or it was, it's a record of the fact. And it's brand, it's newer. Let's just say it's newer and they've gotten this design flaw out of there. Let's just just assume for a second. All those things being equal now, right? And the leftist points at that and says, that's an execution. What's your opinion then? If it's the case, there is no, there is no negligent discharge. There is none of that. What, like, how would you view it then? Well, it's extremely unfortunate case of what happens during chaos. Yeah. Right. Right. I don't think it's an execution. I don't think they pulled the gun from them and then just shot of the rhetoric being used, right? It is. But, you know, which you're automatically going to have if you have a guy get shot. Can we watch a video? Let's watch a video and see if we can discern when the shot fires off because it does it before or after they say he's got a gun. Because someone says he has a gun. One of the officers removes the gun and then a shot goes off. Yeah. Now, there's another speculation that the guy who shot him had a negligent discharge. he didn't like maybe had his hand on the trigger and he got a little amped up and it went off and then he just fucking kept going into him. Yeah. That's possible too. I'm not exactly sure. There's a ton of angles, ton of different cell phone angles. None of them are really crystal clear. And the thing that's interesting about this is I'm even willing to kind of grant it to the left just on appearance alone for a second just for the sake of like logically taking this to its conclusion. Let's say that the cops were totally wrong on this. They messed the whole thing up. They screwed it up. It was a negligent discharge from the officer himself. It killed this guy. It was totally unjustified. Okay, but now what? Is it the case that we're going to stop deporting illegal immigrants? We're going to stop, you know, that ICE is going to stop border patrols. It's going to stop doing his job. ICE is going to stop doing his job because of a single incident, even if all of the officers involved were incorrect. Of course not. That's ridiculous, right? The thing about this incident is it's being used as a catalyst to now say they're the Gestapo just like they were trying to do with Renee. They're the Gestapo. They're here to, you know, be the jack booted thugs of the Trump administration. That's being used now as the new rallying cry and catalyst for the, in its post hoc justification. That's what makes me so angry about is it's like, no, no, no, you're out here doing all of this long before anybody was getting shot by ICE. Okay, you're doing this long before there was any supposed abuses by ICE. It seems like they're the, what they do is they set up the reactions, right? They set up the conditions, maximize the conditions for horrible actions to happen. And then when they do, they use those as the justification for why they were ever out there in the first place. And it's like, what's going on here? That's, that's what bothers me. Right. The quintessential description of the color revolution. I mean, they're, they're, they're trying to create chaos. And is, again, it's very well funded and very well organized. It's not as simple as this is an organic protest that people are fired up because ICE is in their community. That's not really what's going on. But I think there's a lot of good people that are wrapped up in that that think they're doing a good thing. And they really do think they're fighting fascism. Does they exist in these bubbles? And they're, they're, I believe them. No. I do believe them that they think that they're fighting against fascism. And I've, I've debated with enough of these people on what historically fascism is in comparison to what they perceive it as that I do think that they believe that 100%. Right. It's, I just think it's an unjustified belief. And I think it's, it's ridiculous. It's not accurate. It's not accurate. You know, one of the things that we went over the other day is we talked about the deportation right and that there's been somewhere in the neighborhood of two million deportations. But one point six of them were like self deportations. One point six of them were like people were notified and they said, we're just get the fuck out of here. I don't want to be in jail. And then a half a million of them were, and then, but people are saying very few of them would have been violent criminals. But we found out there was like eight percent that this is just eight percent of what we know has been caught. That is a lot of violent criminals. If you go to half a million people and eight percent of them are murderers and rapists, and they snuck in, don't not even snuck in because they were allowed access to the United States over the last four years. Somewhere to the tune of let's be like super charitable. Let's say it's only 10 million because I think it's a lot more. And they don't really know the number because it's really the numbers that they're giving or based on interactions. Right. People snuck through and they didn't have an interaction with them. It's a lot, man. It's a lot of people and they did this shit on purpose. And they did this shit because they want more congressional seats because the census doesn't count citizens. It doesn't count legal citizens. It just counts human beings. So the more citizens you have in an area, the more congressional seats you have. And then there's places like California that make it illegal to show your ID. You're not allowed. Not only are you not supposed, which you should have to show your fucking ID when you vote. Right. So we know that you're legally voting. They made it so you can't show your ID, which is the only, you could steal man this to the end of time. The only reason why you do that is because you want to cheat. Of course. Of course. Well, it's not just that, but you make you make a good compelling point here. The idea, even if it was the case, let's just say almost none of them are violent criminals. Let's just give it to them just kind of for the sake of argument here. We'll give it to them. So what? The people don't want them here. That's it. These are supposed to be the biggest believers in democracy and republicanism ever. That's what they're fighting against is the evil fascists. It's like, well, here are the people spoke, okay? And then said, and the people said, we don't want illegal immigrants here. We want them out of here. It doesn't matter what the conditionals are for violent criminality or not violent criminality. If you're really a big believer in the republic like you claim, why is it that when Trump gets elected to do exactly this job, you impeded it every turn. Yeah, they don't want it to happen. They don't because it was a part of the strategy for a uniparty. I mean, this is Elon came on and was, you know, was very passionate about wanting to explain this to people. I mean, it's one of the reasons why he did it before the election. Like you have to understand the plan that's in place. And what they're doing is they're trying to make it so that no one by the Democrats can ever win ever again. And one of the best ways to do that is to ship untold numbers of people to swing states. Yeah, which is what they're doing. And it's what they did. They didn't just do it. They flew them out there. They gave them EBT cards. They put them on social security. We had this woman. We documented, we talked about this woman who worked for, got to forget which department, but her job was to turn these people from illegal immigrants into what she described. They described to her as clients. And so you would tell these people, are you? Yes. So her question was to them, do you have a permanent disability? So do you have headaches? Does your back hurt? I get headaches. My back hurts. I guess I'm permanently disabled. And all you have to do is like, you don't have to have like, like clear evidence. You have all your fucking discs or fused. You can't walk or you have. Yeah. No. You're fucking back hurt. Your back hurts. Well, what fucking man who's a laborer who's 35 years old doesn't have fucking back pain? Yeah. Like y'all do. So they come to you. They said, you have headaches and back pain. Well, it is an office worker. It doesn't have back pain. Right. Exactly. Fuckin' everybody does. You get older. You get back pain. Especially if you don't take care of your back. And so these guys are all being roped into the system and then they get money. They get social security money. They get money from taxpayers. And essentially forever. So if you can get those people to vote, they will most certainly vote for the people that are giving them that money. Right? Of course, it's most certainly vote for the people that are moving them into the Roosevelt Hotel and New York City. So I tell Muslims will vote. Even though at the local level, they oppose all leftist policy. They'll vote at a national level for leftist because they bring in their family members. They bring in, they allow the importation of people that they want here. So yeah, they utilize the system for the aims and for Democrats. This is all good. And of course for Republicans, it's all bad. And Elon's right. He is right that Democrats, and here's what I see, the bird's eye view. Right? Trump, what they're going to do, Democrats going to win the midterms by hooker by crook. They're going to win the midterms. And when they do, if they have the power in the house to do this, they're going to teach them day one. And we'll have now to be the thrice in Peach president. And they'll obstruct him. They'll obstruct his agenda, the entire step of the way under this elongated impeachment. They'll just run out the clock. Yeah. Let's run it out. It's all pretty fucking crazy. It's really crazy. Gadside has a great way to describe this. It calls it suicidal empathy. A lot of these people that are on the left that are self-described leftists, they're very kind people. And they want everyone to have a chance to live in America and be good people. And they understand they're being used as pawns by much more cynical people that are just trying to get total control. And if you want to know what total control looks like and what kind of restrictions could be imposed on a Western society. No further than the UK. Look what's going on in England right now. 12,000 people have been arrested so far last year in the last year rather for social media posts, just social media posts criticizing immigration. There was some new thing that they just passed that makes it so that you're supposed to tell on people who are talking in pubs, who are having conversations in pubs that you think are dangerous conversations. There was that woman in the UK who was S-8 and then called the guy named he attacks. Yes. She called him a faggot. Yeah. She called him a faggot. She was sexually assaulted. She called him a faggot and then she was arrested. She was arrested. I remember arguing on Pierce Morgan. I was debating with a leftist on this. This was the topic at the time. And the leftist who looked at me like he was a faggot too, said he was defending it to the nail, right? This is a good thing because we want to get rid of stigma. The idea is to try to de-stigmatize the things. He words create stigma and stigma creates harm values and harm values are evil. They're bad. That's the whole moral system. If we reduce harm, that's moral. If we increase harm, that's immoral. So that's the zero-sum way that they look at this, right? Yeah. If you're increasing it bad, if you're decreasing it good. if we're decreasing stigmatization of an activity that we think is protected, then that's reducing harm. Therefore, that's the moral position. They are crazy. That is actually a crazy way to look at the world. Well, it's very dystopian. It's very spooky that it's happening so quickly and that the UK has become the leader in the world for arresting people for social media posts. No one would have ever saw that coming five, six years ago. But this is what happens when you get total control of a population. You don't, and you don't stop where you're at. You continue to move forward. You continue to try to get more and more control. And this is this new thing where they're trying to get people to turn people in for bar talk, which is just crazy. It's just crazy. So that's where it goes. If you're really a real liberal, a real progressive person who really believes in free speech, you should believe in all speech and you have to. I mean, this was the ADL's position way back in the day when they would allow the Ku Klux Klan to march. They would say, look, then fight for the right to do so. Yes. I mean, this is what it used to be. It used to be an understanding that as complicated as this thing is, you've got to allow people to say horrible things so that you can counter them with better points and you make a better argument and that people see your side and then society moves forward. You know, generally, you know, in the online dialectic, the way that it moves between group and I think that now online influencers, podcasters, political commentators actually do have political, they have some political capital now, which can be spent the same way low level politicians have political capital, which can now be spent. They actually are connected oftentimes with politicians and operate as mouthpieces on behalf of whatever that political arm is. Well, you say that about the right to, wouldn't you? Of course, but I don't see it as prevalent as I do with the left. For instance, there was a whole thing that used to go on on Twitch where an organization came in and bought up all the Twitch mouthpieces. That's what they did. And like this is something which has been going on for a long time. But what's interesting with the political capital angle from these left is they don't care what the means are. The ends are what that's all they care about, right? The means to get there totally irrelevant to them from their view though that makes a six sort of sense. They believe that they're fighting against Nazis, right? Litteral Nazis. So if you believed that you're in a war with literal Nazis, what wouldn't you do to complete that war? What, what means wouldn't you go to? What means of sabotage would you not do? What cars would you not blow up? What cops would you not eliminate in order to stop the rise of the new Hitler? And it's like, and they're, they're expanding their political capital on that message. And that message has a lot of influence on people. Yeah. It also, there, there's so many people that are getting attention by feeding into the rhetoric. There's so many people that are making viral clips of them threatening, you know, like menacing, like these weird, dorky, liberal guys, like these guys that you would think of pacifists are literally calling for violence. I got one of them because it's like the most unlikely guy, like you see this guy doing this, like, hey buddy, like, who, what, what are you saying? Who, who's following you in the battle? Yeah, who's, I'm going to say that because it's, it's the way he says it too is so like, like he's watched too many fucking TV shows. This guy, let's, because it's, it's the terminology that he uses that is, it's actually kind of funny if it wasn't so scary. Because it's so, he sees guys doe face and his understanding of real violence. Listen to this. When combat starts, we all roll initiative. I'm going to say that again. And anyone, everyone knows what I'm talking about when I say this. When combat starts, we all roll initiative. I mean, I hate to laugh because it's kind of fucking serious because they're, they're, inciting violence and they're, they're calling for insurrection. They're calling for people to take his treats and start violence, but that guy. Like what? Would it, like a roll initiative? What does it even mean? Well, I mean, I think, I think it just means we all go. Right. When violence start, we would, we all do. Dungeons and Dragons reference. Yeah. Is it rolling? Oh, rolling. No, no, no, no, no, no. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. No. The tweet says Dungeons and Dragons in it. I don't even know. Oh, God. Dungeons and Dragons nerds means business. I think so. So, so he's doing, do a search on that. Does roll initiative? Is that a part of Dungeons and Dragons? Roll the, because I only know I've done Dungeons and Dragons from strange. So it does, this is AR due to D6 damage. It's like, but it's just the menacing way that he stares into the camera. Okay. Here in his combat rolling for initiative determines the turn, order in combat, each player player and monster rolls a 20 sided die and adds their dexterity modifier. Oh, God. But I mean, this is what I'm saying. It's like, it's, it's, a lot of his cause play. That sounds like he is saying though, we all go there, right? Yes. Yeah. That sounds like it's, that's what he's saying. And it's also, it gives meaning to people whose lives do not have a lot of meaning, right? Like all of a sudden you're a part of a greater cause. You're, you're a part of it very important movement. And you're stopping Nazis. Yeah. And it's, you know, relatively safe from the comfort of your own home, staring at your phone on, on TikTok. Sure. And you get all excited about it and you cheer. And these are the same people that cheered when Charlie Kirk had shot for just talking. Like that was fine, but this one is not good. You know, it's, it's, it's all like, it's very fucked up. Well, I'm going to kill, they'll kill more commentators. They can get away with it. Um, happily. I mean, part of that whole signal chat that's dangerous that people aren't talking about, that's probably the most, most dangerous aspect of it. It, it, and I can't prove this, but it's been my experience that left wing communities and left wing groups, especially online communities, nonline groups, really pander to the mentally ill in a big way, really pander to them. And it's, I think that it's a form of weaponization. They want to attract the extremely mentally ill into these communities and it helps with actually what is radicalization. And they play on the fact that they're mentally ill in order to do this. Well, this is Antifa. Right. This is, this is why it's on Tifa. It goes beyond that. Sure. If you go to some of these TikTokers communities, you go to some of the online political pundits communities who are far left. Okay. These people who are in there are fruit loops, man. Yeah. And they're pander to, they're pander to, oh, okay, you can't say this to them. That's ableist. You can't tell them this is your weirdo because that's mean. And not only are they pander to, but I think that that's the source of the weapon. If it's the case that these people don't care about death, they don't care like, oh, the outcome's going to be death. That guy shot at the, the ice agents, not too long ago. Remember he was on top of the roof. He was shooting across, but I think a mouths are rifle and they, they dusted him. They killed him or he shot himself. I don't remember which. Where one was this? This was a few months back. I don't know about this one. I don't think no. There was a guy he was just a callous. I've become. Yeah. He was taken shots at, I believe there's ice agents in front of the ice facility. Oh, that's right. Yeah. I believe I'm using like a Mauser rifle or something. Yeah. Okay. Now remember, it's early on with the Charlie Kirk thing. They were actually making these connections because he had used a, a Mauser as well. Right. It's a shoe Charlie Kirk. So people were making those early connections. Wait, is this, is this a sequence of events? Does the Mauser mean something here? Is that particular rifle have special meaning? You know how people are online? Yeah. But anyway, the interesting thing is like they don't care if they die. They're, they're dying martyrs. They don't care. And it's really easy to weaponize mentally ill people that way because they don't care. These are the same people have the high suicide rates for a reason because are already mentally ill, like the trunes and others. What's the meaning of them you find or connected to trans people almost every time? Also SSRIs. Yep. This is the other problem is that how many of these people are on these psychiatric medications that violent ideation is a part of the side effects of these suicidal or excuse me, these psychiatric drugs. There's a lot of people that have a psychotic thoughts when they get on some of these different SSRIs and different psychiatric medications. So you've got people that already fucked up mentally. And then you've got them on these medications that cause them to do all kinds of crazy things. And aren't women, aren't women taking much more in the way of SSRI pills than men are? And who do we see is that on the bull horns and loudspeakers at most of these events? It's women. Well, particularly liberal women, particularly liberal women. I'm sure you've seen this statistics, but I'm very lopsided. I gave them because they're kind of nutty. What's interesting is the least mentally ill in terms of numbers is conservative event. Conservative Ben, I think it's like... Because they're normal. I think... Okay. Young liberal women, 56% report a mental health diagnosis. Young moderate women, 1829, 28%, young conservative women, 27%, only slightly less. So for men, it is 34% of all liberal men, 34%. So a third of all liberal men are mentally ill, 22% of moderate men, and 16% of conservative men. Yeah, but do you know what the lunatics argue when you bring that up? These lunatics they'll argue. No, no, no. The conservative men are just as mentally ill. It's just undiagnosed because there's a stigma in conservative communities about going to get your mental illness diagnosed. I always point out, and I think this is an interesting way to point this out, like maybe they're not going to get diagnosed because they don't have a problem. Did you ever think of that? It's possible. It's possible it's undiagnosed because I think that is accurate, though, that there is a stigma about mental health and therapy and things on those lines in conservative... If you want to agree, but I also think that what happens is when you're talking especially about the voodoo that is psychology and it is voodoo. It is. I have very little respect for psychology. I don't even consider it science. I consider that there are scientific methods used for data gathering, but I don't consider a psychology of science. And that's psychology. Psychiatry is even weirder because you start adding medication. Yeah. You're not talking about therapy. It's all voodoo as far as I'm concerned. I think that men often, especially conservative men, get as much out of their close relationships with friends and family as they would going to a psychologist. In other words, I think just having somebody to talk to who's a close friend who's intricately familiar with your situation probably gives you more value than going to a complete stranger who has learned manipulation techniques. That's what they learn, essentially, is manipulation techniques. I think there's more value there. So I think that the stigma which exists there doesn't exist because it's like you're not manly, which is how they try to frame it. I think the stigma exists there because so many conservative men who I tried that shit and it was nonsense. I tried it and sucked. I tried it and it was worth it. I went to marriage counseling, did nothing, cited with the wife. I went for this issue, did nothing. But when I went out and had some beers with my friends, that actually helped relieve some of these issues. I think the problem with that is there's a lot of guys who don't have good friends. And you don't have some of that you can count on, unfortunately. There's a lot of men out there that are lost. I agree, but I think that the conservative men seem to like they have closer longevity with friends. on unfortunately. There's a lot of men out there that are lost. I agree, but I think that the conservative men seem to like they have closer longevity with friends than progressive men do. Yes, and they don't abandon them when they change their opinions on things. So here's the self-reported data. From 2022, survey analysis found that 51% of conservatives report excellent mental health compared to 20% of liberals. That's a big difference. It's a giant difference. I don't think stigma could account for that. No, it can't. It's like it's not just stigma. It's like, it's also like what is what does it mean to be conservative? Does it mean, you know, taking a count for your own actions, discipline, hard work ethic, all those things are actually good for your mental health, like like pulling yourself up and getting back to work and doing things. I think I think now, and I think maybe it always should have been framed this way, I think now for for the label of conservative to apply, we really kind of start with religious foundationalism. That's what is becoming fast becoming the delineation. They have a framework having the framework. Right. And the religious framework is almost instantly going to put you in that moving towards that conservative camp almost every single time. And I think that that's a necessary component. Now if we're trying to make these political delineations, it becomes tough. What's a Republican or neo-con versus a conservative versus a versus that? It comes down to foundationalism of framework. Right. Like you were just saying in the framework of Christianity, Christian ethics, huge delineation point between the right and the left to reject that for harm principles, utilitarianism, and various other sorts of frameworks. Yeah. And they'll also point to what Christianity has done throughout history and the amount of harm that it's caused. But it's kind of like every power structure throughout history you could point to in that way. Well, it was what was there. Yeah. The Catholic Church gets a lot of shit for this. Well, look at all the horrible things that the Catholic Church did. It's like, well, the Catholic Church was the whole known world once. Right. You know, all of Europe was the Catholic Church, not, you know, like all of it was you can't have organizations which span whole nations and countries, ethnicities, cultures integrate themselves into it and not have corruption that I don't care what system it is pointing to it and saying it's because they were Catholic. That's where it becomes absurd. Right. They were corrupt. There was corruption. But that's not because they're human. Because they're human. Not because they're Catholic. Right. Right. One of the things that I always try to point out to people, they go, why do you go to church? Because when I was younger, I was very cynical about religion. Then I've got older. One of the things that I always say is, if there was a pill that could make you as nice as the people that I go to church with, everybody would be on it. Yeah. They are the nicest fucking people you ever encounter. When we leave the church They're kind. They're kind. Kind. Kind. Kind. Kind. Nice. They're all the above. They're like very friendly, happy people. But when you leave the church parking lot or even when you're entering, they're the, they, everybody lets everybody in. It's like no one rushes ahead. It's like you go ahead and then you go ahead. It's like the most self organized, most charitable way of exiting a parking lot. I've ever experienced my life. The opposite of a concert, you go to a great concert. Everybody's like fucking, everybody's bumper trying to weasel and people are hocking. Fuck you. In church, it's like one person goes, another person goes, no, you go wave. And then everybody's fine. And everybody's happy. It's like, if that was, if you could take a pill that could do that to you, if therapy do that to you, we should all be on therapy. We should all take that pill. Philosophy can do that for you. Because the phenomenon that you're talking about is the me philosophy. And so what you're, you're going to church. It's not all about you. Right. And that's why you have those types of interactions. Right. I'm going, I'm going, you go to a concert. That's for you. That's for me. Not for these strangers. I'm going there because I want to be entertained. That's for me. You go to church. It's not for you. Right. And the thing is, it's the, it's the kind of material of materialism view, the materialistic view of pure materialism reduces always to me. Me, me, me, because what else can there be? Right. There's just me and the material I engage with. There's nothing outside of that. So why engage as though there's something outside of that? That doesn't just lead to nihilism, but it's the beginning stages of understanding the distinction between religious foundationalism and basically everything else, the reduction doesn't come down to me. And that's why those interactions seem so much better because they are because people are thinking about you. Right. What a concept, a magical world for people think about somebody besides themselves. And they think about, they can think about everybody as a part of a community and a collective community that you care about that as a value to you. And there, you know, there's, and then you go, why does mental health rate so much better in these communities? It's like, well, isn't it interesting how much they think about other people than just themselves and duties to those people instead of just me, me, me, me. They're the kindest people you're ever going to come across. And I think there's a lot of value in that. And I think the people that are cynical about that because they don't want to believe in fairy tales. So they don't want to be stupid. They want to get duped by like, like, there's a foundation to that. If you just look, forget about some of the stuff that's in the Bible that, you know, it gets weird when you get old. Like you go back into the old old old stuff because like for sure human beings had some sort of an influence on what was written down and what wasn't written down. But you could get just to the teachings of Christ. I can't find any faults in it. Like it's all about being kind. It's all about this, this idea that we're all in this together and that you're supposed to lift each other up and look after each other. There's no faults in it. It's not like you have to kill the non-believers. It's not like you get to rape and pillage for the non-believers and the infidels must die. There's not that. That's why the, that's why Christians believe in objective truth that it must be objective truth because otherwise why is most of the world following this as though it's objective truth. We seem to be leaning towards this as of this must be the thing which is objectively real and and objectively true in a thing which we can point to that is because when people are introduced to it like you just said it's really hard and difficult to find fault in it. It's not just that, you know, it's interesting if we reverse it. If we say what could I do that actually would be the best for me, me, me, me, me. It would still be that. Yeah. Which is the funniest part of the whole thing. It's like both ways it works for you. Even if it's not all about you or it works for you even if it is all about you it's still going to be the better message out of the two. It's definitely a better framework for living your life and there's a lot of people that just reject that that are that think of themselves as intelligent. You know, think of themselves as intelligent and well-read and educated. It was just like a sad. Yeah, too smart for that. I'm smart for all that. I'm an atheist. Any atheist needs to take eight grams of mushrooms. Just get a little DMT. Duh-duh-duh-duh. And you're like, oh, I don't know anything. You think you know things. You don't know a fucking thing. You just know what you've experienced. And I think that the world is better off if people have a great moral and ethical framework. I think morals and ethics and being kind is one of the most important values that human beings can ever possess if you want to live in a productive and healthy community. Completely agree. And I think that kindness, I make a delineation between kindness and niceness. I think it's often kind not to be nice. But I do think that you can be nice and it may not be kind. And so I make a delineation between those things. I don't think that kindness though has much variance. Kindness is looking after the interest of somebody who's not me. And it makes everybody feel it's actually selfish because it makes you feel good too. Yeah. There's I mean, there's something to look at it that way. Sure. From the from the position of trying to convince the unbeliever. Right. Appealing to their self interest may not be the worst idea. Right. You know, appealing to like, well, has the lack of community in the like, let's just assume for a second. Let's just assume it's all bullshit and it's all nonsense. Every bit of it is just totally made up. We just like, we just made it up. Right. But we all acted as though it was true. If it's the case that your whole framework is that we just want a society that really works well and does the best it can possibly do for everyone, then shouldn't you by your own framework just pretended true? Right. Yeah. Shouldn't you just act as though it's true anyway. Jordan Peterson had a very good point about that. Yeah. About believing in God that if you believe, if you act as if God is real, you will have a better life. Like it works. It really does work. Almost like a universal truth. Yeah. It's very fascinating. It's fascinating that people that are self professed atheists and people that think of themselves as too intelligent for religion will acknowledge that. They don't want to believe that. And so many of them that I know that are self professed atheists are some of the most miserable people. They're they're very depressed. A lot of them are psychiatric medications. A lot of them are in therapy. A lot of them are really fucked up. They're almost cursed. Yeah. Oh, it seems like that doesn't it? Yeah. And the thing, well, the thing is interesting is like, I've talked with a lot of atheists debated with a lot of atheists, especially on the effects of Christianity and society against the effects of atheism. And I know what pure secular states have led to. That's what communism was. That was a a purely secular state. Yes. Where you really, where you really wall off the church from the state. But here we pretend that it's secular and they get all the benefits of it being quote, secular, but it's not secular at all. Right. Politicians are constantly voted in based on the fact that they have an X amount of value structure. And that's what they're going to implement legislatively on you. The whole secular thing totally made up. It's an them pretending that that's even even real or has ever existed as a real framework in the United States. Just nonsense. Not only that, but I think there is a natural default in the human mind to be attracted to a structure. And if that structure is a Christian structure, you're attracted to all the Christian values that we've just discussed being so positive and beneficial to you. But if you're not, and you go to a leftist progressive structure, leftist in particular, like a Marxist structure, what you're seeing is a complete lack of forgiveness. They don't have that built into the system. You know, one of the one of the beautiful things about Christianity is forgiveness. And the recognition that we're all sinners and we all fuck up and we're all human and we're all flawed. And that you could you could move on and be better and you can atone for these sins. And you could recognize that, you know, yes, you've made a mistake, but here's the best way to move forward and be a better person. Society at whole recognizes that you are me and I am you and we're all kind of the same thing. We all fuck up and we're all, we're all just human beings. But there's a pathway. It's a pathway to forgiveness. There's zero pathway in this in leftism. That's the most horrible thing when you watch these pylons online over like the most innocuous. And so their discretion. What's funny with left is, is their pathway is just everything's permitted. And the pathway from the Christians, no, not everything is permitted, but almost everything can be forgiven. And that I would see is the big distinction. If you're, you know, there's a story that I heard because I'm Eastern Orthodox. That's that's what I follow. And I heard it was a great story of my priest told me. And so basically how this went as it was monks, they lived in a commune one monk, I'd like to get drunk. That was his big vice, right? And he drank a lot of beer. And he did this clear up until the day that he died. And when he died, everyone was crying. And a monk said, well, you know, why is everyone crying? You know, he held that vice clear up till the day died in the head of the, of the, the, the habit who was there. He said, yeah, but the last few years, he cut it in half. He was on the path. He was, well, he's just saying, I'm going to recognize all the progress that this man who had this horrible vice, uh, did right, there was still Prague. He was still trying to move towards the virtue. Yeah. Now, maybe he never got to it. But where I was still going to recognize that he was trying to. And maybe he was not able to surmount it. He was not able to get past his demons. Maybe he wasn't able to overtake them all. But he was at least attempting to write. That's the thing. That's the, that's the thing. And well, it's this idea of like someone being a perfect person is just a nonsense. Doesn't exist. And so if you don't have a pathway to forgiveness, and if you don't, if you don't have that built into your society, you're always going to have people pointing out the people that are the bad people. And it's going to keep moving in that direction. And it's one of the things you see in the left in particular, they eat their own. And it's drives me crazy when I see that also from the right. I'm like, you don't you see that the people that you criticize are doing this and now you're doing this? You guys are turning on each other over the most innocuous things and forming tribes where you're attacking each other, even though you have mostly shared values instead of being charitable and recognizing that, you know, these are just human beings and they make mistakes. Yeah. But the left eats itself more than any fucking group that I've ever encountered over almost nothing. And they love to pile on because they're absolutely terrified that it's going to come for them. They're fucking terrified. And so they will go out of their way to shame and attack and to take some of the energy away from them. But do you think there's a unity in that? Like if we were to, if we were to look at this again, like from a bird's eye view, I agree with you, the left eats itself way more than the right does, though the right eats itself too. Right. And we've been seeing a lot of that post Charlie Kirch death. I though I think that that was mostly power vacuum based and who gets to fill the power vacuum. I still think that it's it turned into a dog eat dog for the power vacuum fight. And it was a criticism of values, foundationalism and all of that. But from the left view, if you eat, if you're eating your own, right, and you eat the message apart to the point where you get down to the foundation. And now everybody's in lock and step is that better for political power or worse? Like if you constantly are just eating the wrong, you know, nope, that message is in pure enough and they gobble them up until you get the monster, right? Who has the right message? They're all on board. Is that the better way to achieve this kind of like political paradigm that they want? That's my question. It's very naive. It's a naive perspective that eventually you're going to boil it down to a purity and you're not going to. It's not going to happen. You're never going to get far left enough. It'll always be something else to eat them over. Yeah. Well, also, you're advocating for communism and advocating for communism is so wild. And people, there's no examples of it ever being done right. It's there's zero. Imagine advocating for something that has zero success, zero, none. Like you can, it doesn't exist. It does. It's never happened. It's never been why. While tell you why, because if everybody has to share all the money, then who's going to enforce that? Who's going to do? Who's going to tell people that you have to give up your house? I could tell people to give up your stay at the state. At the state as guns. Yeah. Yeah. So you're advocating for violence. Yeah. Well, you don't think you're advocating for violence, but you are. You're advocating for hard men with guns to enforce your well. and those people are going to wind up living in mansions and eating filet mignon and everybody else is going to be notes and gruel. And that's which is exactly what's always happened when it's tried. And the thing is interesting too is there's other, there's other value set issues that are really simple to point to like, okay, nothing's worth anything. Like how do I get my guitar? Right. It's nonsense. Like just, you know, all the communist nations are always setting their market prices based on what capitalist with markets would set for prices. And it's like, how do I value a guitar? If it's if it's supposed to just be mine in the commune and then yours also and his also, how do we set a value assessment here? What makes the epiphone better than the another part? Sorry folks, we had a crash software crash. Another problem is this idea of the quality of outcome that everybody should get an equal amount. That is crazy talk because we all know that equality of effort does not exist. There's a reason why there's outliers. And the reason why they're so compelling and so inspirational is like this fucking guy got up at five o'clock in the morning and ran every morning before work and hustled and ate the right food and and fucking did the right things and was thinking and pushing and was open minded and and he became radically successful. But from each according to their ability Joe. But that no way that's not even maximizing everyone's ability because you're basically giving a safety net for fucking lazy people. And that's not good for them either. No, being inspired by others success is a good thing. It's a good thing. And the only way that happens is if you let someone be exceptional and the only way you let someone be exceptional, you have to incentivize them. But what's the incentive? The incentive is they get more value out of their hard work. They get more money. They get a nicer house. They get like what are you going to decide that people have to like mate like that women don't find this guy attractive. But that's not fair. So they have to be with this guy and they have to find them attractive or that you know a woman has to find this man attractive. Sure. Even though he's a dumpy fucking lazy loser. This is the way of the world. Yeah. And competition is a good thing for human beings. And it inspires us. It's good. It lets you know that there's a higher bar that can be achieved. And you often used to know who the lazy people were based on the living conditions they had. Isn't that interesting? Just like you would often know if there was an ugly kid that their parents probably were pretty ugly, right? But it's true. Right. Yes, it is true. The idea here is like people tend to bat and dating in their league at least men do or try to. Women love their league. But the thing is is the reason you commonly see good looking people with good looking people and ugly people with ugly people is because that's about what you can get. Yeah. But it's the same thing when it comes to ability and skill and whatever it is that you're doing. Right. Hey. Thing is it's like a lot oftentimes if you ask a person, my daddy used to say this all the time he was right. If you ask a person, are you where you're at based on things that happen to or because of you? He did 98% of people will say because of things that happen to me. And then when you ask them about what those things are, you'll find out that it's because of them. You'll find out it's because of choices they've made, things that they've done. That's actually what's responsible for the conditions that they're in. Oh, and by the way, people that's not the case, like trust fund kids are the most miserable motherfuckers I have ever met in my life. And they lose it all anyway. A lot of them do. But so they a lot of them are not fully formed human beings. And the way I always describe it, I go, it's like if you give, if you make some meant and you don't add all the stuff in the right way, you can't fix it later. Right. Right. So during the developmental process, if you're fucking joffrey from Game of Thrones, like one of the odds that joffrey's going to fucking figure it out and get it shit together and be cool when he gets older. You're just Dexter and that's it. Exactly. Right. You just like you have the informed experience of the serial killing and it's like, there's just no fixing you. There's no fixing. I get that. I just, the thing that's interesting is like when I look at the communist paradigm versus the capital, you know, that's coming back. That paradigm's coming back. And for a while, it was kind of shoved off as like that's boomer shit. You know, the Cold War is over grandpa. Right. Cold war is over grandpa. There's no communist versus capitalist versus that that's all it's like not, it's not, it's not done. No, not all. It's not done. It's a story as old as time. It keeps fucking repeating itself. And it's just weird that people look, but also I believe in social safety nets because I think that there's a lot of people that are very unfortunate. And there's a lot of people that do grow up with shitty parents or parents that have a bad situation in life, maybe the father dies or the mother dies. And there's nothing like it's good to be charitable. And churches are fantastic at that. It's one of the, the more pure charities that you're ever going to find because their goal is really just to help those people. Unlike what you think of as charities in the modern sense, one of the grossest fucking things today is these enormous charities that everybody thinks, oh, I'm going to support this charity. It's doing so much good. to be presented to the CEO. Yeah, dude. I was watching this thing. It was either, I think it was a live aid. You know, one of those, one of those concert things was, was Bono, what was involved in? Was it live aid? I don't remember that Bono, I remember his speech where he was like, capitalism's done more to take people on a poverty than anything else. I thought that was funny. It was funny. Yeah, but true. I don't remember which one he was involved in directly, but I know what you're referencing. Well, Mike Benz did this video today where he's explaining how enormous percentage of that money went to regime change. Like it went to prop up, went to prop up CA operations. Like the fucking money that people donated so generously to the LA fires. Did you ever see where all that went? Where? It went to like a hundred different nonprofits. Like some of it was like pro immigration. It was like, we talked about it the other day. We had a a whole list of all the different things that have been documented. All NGO's. Oh, yeah. That's how. So very little money is ever going to go to the actual people that lost their house. Almost all the money is going to go to these nonprofits. All these nonprofits have overhead. It goes to their employees. It goes to the overhead costs. All these people got bonuses. But in that, the same with the state. A billion dollars went to bonuses. Yeah, but that's same with the state. The crazy is that you get a bonus for running a fucking charity. That's crazy. Bonus is huge bonus like hundreds of thousands of dollars or millions in bonuses. And that's the homeless situation. This is the other thing about the homeless situation in California. Oh, we're going to help the homeless. It's really important to donate to the homeless. Let's help the homeless. California spent $24 billion on the homeless problem. It got worse. Not only did it get worse, they can't account for the money. And when the politicians have unanimously voted to try to do an audit to see where the money goes, Gavin Newsom has vetoed it. It's wild. Well, isn't it counterintuitive anyway? If you're in an area and you say, look, we're going to be really good to the homeless here. We're going to give them a lot of money, a lot of entitlements. We're going to really help them get on their feet. If you were homeless in a neighboring state, where would you go? Yeah, you'd move the place with awesome weather. Yeah, give you money where they're going to give you money. Yeah. And so, you know, and they do, they do just that. And so that's why these budgets become very bloated. Right? People are like, wait a second, there used to be three homeless guys over there. Now there's a tent city. What the hell is going on? And they all get free crack. Yeah. Or free needles in their needle exchange or whatever it is. And it gets worse and worse. The state does the same thing. State is allocating tons and tons of cash that it gets in Social Security tax. It's not going to Social Security. It's like these entitlements and entitlements spending. Well, people found out that Social Security is going to illegally grow immigrants. No, yeah. They're enormous amount of it. They're like, wait, wait, what? And they denied it. They denied it. And then, you know, they had to mess up to it and whistle blowers and... Well, why would you have a pay-go system? Why would you have a system where you're like, this is social safety net that you're paying into for your retirement that you have to pay into? Why wouldn't that go in a lock box? Why would you have a bit well because we want access to that money right now? And we'll pay it out later. That's what we'll do. We'll pay it out later. It's like, what? Why wouldn't you have a misappropriation? Of course. It's wild that they're allowed to access the Social Security funds that are for your retirement. And then they're like, well, we're going to defund Social Security. So we'll shut the whole government down, right? Because then you won't get your Social Security checks. We'll weaponize the entitlement. That should just be in a lock box. Yeah. You know, it's well, we'll pass funding for it. Funding for the thing they already paid. Well, the idea also is that you are supposed to be paying into it so that you will get money when you retire. But your return on investment is so bad. What's terrible? And compared to what would happen if you spent that exact same money and put it in like a fund, a reliable fund, you would get so much more money when you retire. Like in a normal... Well, now you almost feel like it's hamstring because if it was the case that they let you keep, you just opt out, you know, I don't want Social Security. I want to keep it. And then you took that and you put it in those hedge funds and retirement accounts and things like this, you would way maximize over what you get in Social Security. Yeah. You know, but you can't opt out, even though it's for you. There's nothing the government does good. Not a thing. Not a single thing. So why would they be good at that? And why would anybody support that? They're just not good at it, especially when it comes to money. There's always a bunch of shenanigans that take place. You know, and the idea that they would say, oh, Social Security is sacred. This we're going to really treat. We're going to maximize your amount of investment and really take care of people. We really care about people. Yeah. We care about them, Tony. It's so naive. It's just so naive and so obviously an ineffective and possibly corrupt system. Why is it going to become a weapon? Entitlements are a weapon. Yeah. They're a political weapon. Well, it certainly helps. Yeah. And also again, the suicidal empathy that Gadsad talks about. If you're on the left, you think of it as being like you're an empathetic person, a kind person. You want people to have money when they retire. You want people to have Medicaid and you want people to have welfare and you want people to have snap. Who was a guy you brought up? I'm trying to think of his name. It was like a maybe professor wrapped something like that. He brought up the pop a new guinea thing. Do you remember the pop a new guinea thing? Yes, I do. Yeah. So on the, that little island, right, they have the seminal people and the seminal people. Basically, they molest young boys. That's what they do. Right. But apparently, the young boys there, they love it because it's a right of manhood. Right. And it's all socially conditioned in. The thing is with suicidal empathy, that's really funny here to point out to a from their paradigm. There's nothing wrong with that actually. Right. Where's the harm? Right. That's part of the suicidal empathy of the part of the ideology of suicidal empathy. Is it like for me, from my world, do you? It's like, I don't care if you don't think there's harm in that. There is. We're stopping at Emperor Andrew. Done. That's that's done. No more. That's not allowed. Don't care if it's relativistic or not. It's over. Right. I mean, it's crazy to try to defend that culture. That culture is so wild. The, the semen warriors. Yes. The semen warriors are popping. If you get me for people who don't know. And let's, let's instead of just talking about this, let's read this from an actual source so we can explain because they call the, the, the children, when I think they're six, the boys have to live with a man that they refer to as the anal father. And this guy in order for them to grow strong, they have to consume seam. Yes. Both orally and annually. And so they get mouth fucked and ass fucked by this guy. And then they continue that when they grow up as part of their warrior culture. And what stopped it? You know, it's what ended up finally stopping a lot of that. It still is. But it, a lot of it was stopped, depending on the tribe you were in because of Christian missionaries. Because of Christian missionaries. But here's the thing that cracks me up, right? And this whole culturally relativistic, nonsense, harm principle stuff. You're Christopher Columbus and you show up and if culture is doing that, don't you put them to the sword? Right. Like if you see the pyramids and they're cutting people's hearts out, like we're holding it up to those two, to, to, to raw or whatever, you're like, I'm supposed to feel bad. They put you to the sword. Like it's really hard for me to feel bad about that. Right. Yeah. It's really hard for me to be upset about that. But with the seminal people, same thing. It's like, if you went in there and you just use strong arm force is why the libertarian NAP and stuff like that I disagree with is like, you went in there and you strong arm force and just stopped it. If you went in there and you just use strong arm force is why the libertarian in AP and stuff like that I disagree with It's like be went in there and you strong arm force and just stopped it Immediately so what so what how's the world of worst place for this? How is it you know like and how is that not ultimately stopping an egregious sinful act? That you can stop with ease right like why not why not do that well one of things I got really into As sex recently and because I did I wasn't aware that a lot of those Temples that they found you would think that the people that build those incredible pyramids and temples No, they found them didn't they yeah, you would think they have to be an incredibly sophisticated society Well turns out they didn't really build them know they found them. Yeah, and they refer to them as the place where the gods were born I didn't know that I I was always told that they built these incredible structures and the Spaniards came and they found them and No, well they were primitives who found who found something that was extremely advanced and then used it for their primitive Application not just primitive but barbarian When they completed the consecration of the temple of Tinochitlon they killed Somewhere between 20,000 on the low end and 80,000 on the high end they sacrificed 20,000 80,000 people within four days in four days and this was documented by kind of forget his name Something Diaz it was a Spanish chronicler because this is before Cortez came They you know they they started like trying to figure out what's going on over there and One of the things that this guy came back. He said this place is fucking crazy You know like they killed 80,000 people and a lot of people have disputed that 80,000 people but they found so many bones That they're like, okay, it's probably Somewhere north of 20,000 which is crazy enough they sacrificed him in four fucking days. I'm a relative Of course there was 4,000 maybe what's that Jim as many as 4,000 was as max as they got to We didn't even bones. Yeah, the people that if they even did it in 2000. I think the number I think I saw was four people or it was like four people every minute You would have had to do or as it was something that almost impossible to accomplish They just said the number was probably exaggerated a lot right, but they said that no, I think if you I Would have something brought up, but I looked it up to I looked it up yesterday actually I looked it up yesterday and they were saying that that this guy who was the guy that Okay, we can I can I know I haven't saved so I can find it in here So this guy this day as guy Who's chronicling yeah, who chronicled it in the six or four centuries was this really really soon. Okay, like within a couple of decades before Cortez Yeah Trying to find it But it this I said maybe I'll just the perplexity of things that Spanish sources claimed 80,000 400 victims in 1487 Right, but my next mix just 4000 to maybe 20,000 right so 20 okay They don't really know so 20 80,000 might be exaggerated if you think about the number But just think about 20,000 people killing 20,000 people by cutting their hearts out and throwing them down the steps of the pyramid in four days It's fucking crazy. So if you're the Spanish The Spaniards and you come here, you know feel bad about conquer and those fuckers You're like what are you guys doing or how about when they showed up and they found the Mayans? And they're playing football with human heads. Yeah. Now here's a funny one They don't want to believe that they played football with human heads So historians try to say that they didn't play football with human heads even though there's artistic depictions of them playing football with human heads Like now that was just symbolic well did they sacrifice humans? Yes, they did but They played football with their heads. That would be rude. It's that that whole myth of the noble savage exactly Then that whole myth of the noble savage is something which is utilized by the left in order to make the claim That you are an imperialist in an occupy or an person who yeah, you could you have colonized Yeah, they're land and the thing is is it's like if that's what we colonized Why do I care I asked this question all the time? Why do I care if that's what I colonized if that's what my ancestors colonized? Why should I give a shit about that? Well, there's an amazing book about Texas called Empire of the summer moon It's all about the Comanche this entire land used to be before Mexico owned it by the way I want to find this lady said to me, you know This all used to be Mexico. I'm like right, but do you know how for how long? 15 years like I've been here for six like you gotta let that go That's not that long 15 years and by the way Mexico was only we had an alamo over it, okay? Yeah, and by the way Mexico was only one when it owned Texas Mexico started with its new constitution. Yeah, yeah because then also you have the language and the religion of your oppressors that you're trying to say is this noble and incredible Culture yeah, you're bringing over to America in your all Catholic and yeah, you're all Catholic y'all speak Spanish They used to have first of all the people the Native American people and the original people in the Aztecs the mines The Mexicans It's essentially the same kind of people a lot of them are they look the same It's like if you look at sitting bull my wife calls him to be working to talk a real wife calls him to pick me people other tiny little places and people and they didn't have any black noses and Mm-hmm. They like yeah, they look like pick me people well the the original people of Mexico had or what the land of Mexico had over a hundred languages The mines alone had 30 different languages. They're all lost at these languages are all lost and we're supposed to think it's noble that this amazing culture that have the language and the religion of their oppressors and they want to move here with this language They're colonizing you're trying to colonize a place You've been colonized you're trying to colonize and here's the thing about colonizing everybody Everybody that doesn't live in Africa Somewhere in their ancestry. There was a colonizer Like if you go to Minnesota and you see these Somali communities and everyone speaking Somali and have Somali businesses We think that is It's a colony course. It's just not a big one. It just hasn't taken over the entire country And when it does you'll think it's great because they're not white right? Well, they're not colonizers They're not caught. Can you see why immigrants? They're immigrants. Yeah, right? Why people are calling out? Yeah, white people are the colonizer everyone else is the immigrant nobody feels bad for Swedish chicks with big tits that are moving to America You don't think that those are colonists. Yeah, don't care. Yeah, don't care. Yeah, it's only it's only the colony. It's only the colonization Oh man, well the thing is funny Moving back to the to the myth of the noble savage thing How weaponized that is when so much of it isn't true like for instance you've heard of the two spirits. Yes, right? That's that's all that's all bullshit too The whole two spirit people all bullshit came from like one guy. I don't remember started with a B right? Who you could like bargetsha or something like this that they called them right and it was one tribe of people who? Who had some like weird thing that they did that was it most probably gay guys Yeah, that was the whole guy's like dressing up like yeah, that's where the whole time spirit thinking and then suddenly It's like no the native Americans had the two spirits like no no no no no no no That is not the case at all you just made it up because then you could throw it in with your Skittles bullshit Right, so that's the Yeah, it was gettles bullshit rainbow. Yeah. Well, the thing about this area here before Mexico owned it was Comanceria it was owned by the Comancier But you know how they owned it because they killed the fucking Apache That's that's how I think yeah, well, they were fucking Baruch That's why this empire that summer moon book is so good because it just shows you how Unbelievably barbaric the Comancier were they were the baddest motherfuckers around because they had figured out horse raising And by the way, they only got those from marriage. Yeah, yeah from Europeans, right? Yeah, which is crazy because horses actually originated from North America I thought they were in Europe and brought hearing from Europe no no horses originated in North America And then made their way to Asia and then were wiped out in North America Okay, and then reintroduced okay, so but the but the natives didn't have that Natural and tell no, he and spry okay. That's what I thought their culture was so incredibly wild if you think about it like you You know you're talking about Well, you think about Europe and Asia You've got people riding horses and building cities and you've got like agriculture Alwaysing and in North America. You basically have stone age people You're really kind of crazy really kind of fascinating and then they get horses and the Comancier were the first ones that really figure out horse breeding They figured out how you know how to castrate their horses and they became Mongols. Yeah They became mongols once they had access to horses. Yeah, well that was what that was the whole distinction anyway If you if you reduce it all between its two civilizations Europeans had domesticated animals Natives didn't right and because we had domesticated animals. We had labor We built these these amazing societies and they didn't yeah like the difference that a Work ox and a workhorse can make in labor is astronomical. Yeah And so you know like that's that's the real difference same thing with disease like ah You know the white spot over all their disease is like well all those came from animals smallpox all that got immunity because we A vanable husbandry they didn't have any immunity to any of that not only had this real evidence that syphilis came from native Americans and then they brought that at least some forms of syphilis and they brought that syphilis back to Europe And then all those Europeans started going crazy and getting holes in their head losing all their hair And that's where the big wigs came from and then eating mercury pills to kill themselves Crazy well people used to believe yeah, it's really kind of fascinating But the point is even the people that lived in America before those settlers came Those people came from somewhere else. They came from Siberia You know everyone's a colonizer everyone all over the world people they started in Africa Million years ago whatever it is and then people start slowly moving away from the people that were kicking the ass Look up for a better place to live but isn't the whole thing from the leftist paradigm just to create or to delegitimize The fact that you can say what do you mean Mike my grandpa was born here? Right his grandpa was born here, right? He was a colony I'm an American and I have a right to my nation because by birth I have a birthright to to the land that I'm on and so to my fellow countrymen and they know it's an attempt to delegitimize that right? That's the point just to delegitimize your claim to your own land What's what we're talking about earlier with left with leftists where there's this purity test that no one can ever pass Because they'll always keep pushing the boundaries further and further You're never going to be there's no like real Americans everyone who's white is a colonizer Yeah, yeah, it's just it's fucking goofy and it's just designed to Point at someone that someone is the bad person and this is the reason why life sucks and Also dismiss any of the terrible activities that any of the other people participate in because like oh They're they're just oppressed they're oppressed people so they're lashing out Do you think what like if you had if you again the birds eye view? What do you think the left what do you think their end goal is here? I don't think they know I don't think they're end goal Their end goal is their enemy is the right and the right is Nazis and fascist they want to eliminate the Nazis and they want to roll initiative Right all in the initiative right? Yeah, and they do a six damage It's happening and they think that once they get into power everything will be fine It's not going to and not only that what would be fascinating is if Someone from the left started behaving exactly like the people that are on the right Just did it from a perspective of the left where you would think oh this is okay And that's what we got during the Obama administration. I sent you this thing Jamie a little bit ago The clip of Obama Talking about immigration and by the way Obama And I was mistaken on this I thought that a lot of the people that Obama deported were people that were turned away at the border Uh-huh that was a third Most of the people out of the I think was three million over the course of his presidency That were deported were fucking deported like arrested deported a lot of people were killed Let's put on the headphones so we can listen to the speech because this this sounds Very magga listen to this there are those in the immigrants rights community Who have argued Passionately that we should simply provide those who are illegally with legal status or At least ignore the laws on the books and put an end to deportation until We have better laws and often this argument is framed in moral terms Why should we punish people who are just trying to earn a living? I recognize The sense of compassion that drives this argument But I believe such an indiscriminate approach would be both unwise and unfair It would suggest to those think thinking about coming here illegally That there will be no repercussions for such a decision And this could lead to a surge in More illegal immigration And it would also ignore the millions of people around the world who are waiting in line to come here legally Ultimately our nation Like all nations has the right and obligation to control its borders And set laws for residency and citizenship And no matter how decent they are No matter their reasons The 11 million who broke these laws should be held accountable That sounds so Republican in 2010 that was a Democrat saying that and everybody was like well Okay, that's reasonable. Yeah. And I know Tom Holman Who is the head now? What's the guy then and he gave him a fucking metal? Find the clip of Hillary when she's running in 2012 Where Hillary is more magga than Trump? The way she frames things is so hard core right-wing She sounds to the right of Marjorie Taylor green If you've never seen this have you seen this one? I think so, but I'm gonna look again Wonderful, it's wonderful because it just shows you how much horseshoe by the way How good was he he was such a good spokesperson like the way he talked was so it was so measured and So noble and the way he phrased his sentences like it was really it's really interesting how much perception Plays a factor and what you think of as like someone being a good president Because everybody in the left thinks of him as being like the most amazing president ever. Oh, yeah Now this isn't the one and he wasn't it keeps coming up though what I'm looking for but this isn't the one the one is she's giving a speech So I thought I was looking for but I didn't even type in what I was looking for I just type in 2012 and that's the thing that keeps me maybe it's not 2012 it might have been 2008 Don't don't do Hillary is more magga than than Trump See if you can find it. It's I know it's on YouTube But it's this amazing campaign speech where you got it Is it 2008 dad that's it that's it here is listen Love this one. I think we got to have tough conditions Tell people to come out of the shadows if they've committed a crime to port them no questions asked they're gone If they cheers cheers from the Democrats if they've been working and our law abiding We should say here are the conditions for you staying you have to pay a stiff fine because you came here illegally You have to pay back taxes and you have to try to learn English And you have to wait in line you're gonna learn it because you're my cheered Yeah, they love it. They love it and now Now you're not Johnson Nazi yeah, Trump's a Nazi that is more right wing than Marjorie telegram yeah, the the Democrats were I mean There used to be labor unions that would put pressure on them, right? This was a big thing like there was labor unions that was what the Democrats had yes and the labor unions did not want The cheap labor to come in and displaced them from having their nice little high wage jobs And so it was all about we got to deport the illegals like for what a Bernie Sanders say Mass illegal immigration is a right wing Koch brothers Conspiracy to bring in cheap labor and he wasn't wrong right. He wasn't wrong. But the thing is is it's like What the hell are we fighting over here? Well, we're fighting over the fact that The left is just trying to appreciate itself with power and they don't really care about what the moral paradigm is as long as they can get their people in power They'll use anything as a litch pin issue. That's right. That's right. It's all about power The whole thing is about power and that's what people need to truly understand you're being played you're being played you're being played in Minneapolis You're being played All around the country. It's it's about power It's about them getting power. I mean if you think that once they get complete if they did where they were successful They imported millions more all these swing states. They allow them to vote. They completely break the system Now it's only you think that's gonna be good for everybody. You're out of your fucking mind. Let me ask you this Do you think then that Christians knowing this they know that these are bids for power? When you have Christian nationalism on the rise in Christians moving towards that Does that seem like it's a rational and reasonable thing to do for them to want? The mindset of if we're not in power they will be in power It's rational from their perspective for sure what people are terrified of is that it would restrict the freedom of religion and that you would impose Christianity on the entire country, you know, and I don't think you should impose any kind of religion on any people I think people should be free. I've never seen the I know that they there are of course the the people Who push that there has to be an established theocracy in order for Christian nationalism to work But the frameworks that I've seen that have political legitimacy don't seem to push for that at all They push instead that the ideas that Christians should not be hamstrung from the ideals of Holding power itself that that does not make you bad or evil or awful no matter what the left says Christian Or how Christians are supposed to act and that when you are in power you should rule with Christian ethics in mind That's how you're supposed to pass policy public, you know public public policy of all kinds It's through those ethical means That's what it sounds like not. Hey, it's gonna be a theocracy That doesn't seem like it's a necessary component No, well people are afraid of the concept of a theocracy And I think that people are afraid of just human nature and that if people did get into power that that's what it would become just like these people are just trying to get into power that they would use Christianity as a vehicle And they would just use that as an ability to control people though the real concern is just human nature Human beings when they get into any position of power like to keep it and expand it. It's like that's what they do You know, I tell jokes. I talk shit. That's what I do. I like to talk shit. I like to tell more jokes They're having good kings right there have been but boy good luck Good luck finding a benevolent dictator Well, not anymore. I don't I don't think you would have to use it utilize a dictatorship But if it's the case that we can point to like there were people who had a lot of power Who fundamentally were pretty good? It's positive that they're pointing to that made them good like is there something we can point society towards that can make our leaders a bit better That can make our leadership not hyper focus on The nonsense of like gay marriage and stuff like that which is completely and totally Unimportant at the political level. She didn't be up to the federal government anyway. Yeah, and I think it's a political tool too You know Anapalina Luna was on the podcast and she said something that I really didn't consider about Certain political problems that exist in this country that they don't want to solve them Because they want to use them to finance their campaigns. They want to run on those principles They want to run on that's always be there and they always be there and they always be there as an issue and it's like Yeah, I feel I think a lot of these can be solved like if we if we were to have Politicians in mass and their supporters in mass who followed Christian ethics I do think a lot of those sub issues get solved very quickly if it's true Christianity if they really do follow the teachings of Jesus Christ But I think what people really worried about is like When people think about Christians they think about the worst case scenario of Christian Which is like evangelicals on television? They just try to get private jets But how is selecting atheist better or electing socialist better or electing any of these people better and can't be better Right, it's not better like if someone's a complete sociopath It doesn't have any moral framework like a Gavin Newsom type guy. Yeah, like that's that's even more terrifying Yeah, that's like if I'm gonna be ruled that can I at least be ruled by people have my ethics or Really, they really believe and that they're trying to make the world a better place And they're not just trying to acquire wealth and and help their donors acquire more wealth It's spooky it's spooky because people that have power You know it scares a shit out everybody else and it should because historically it's never been good It's almost always when people have power They want more power and they want to also support the people that help them acquire that power and then they want to make sure They got that power locked down So what's the best way to do that? Well you restrict people's ability to express themselves restrict people's ability to travel You take away as much money as possible Tax them as highly as possible So they're always in this like state of Constantly struggling to pay their bills you keep them complete no one's comfortable ever And then you know have this problem that we have to solve this is why you have a problem These people yeah, and we're the we're the solution the causes. Yeah, the causes are the solution Do you know one of the things I mean you engage in so many fucking debates man I've watched I've consumed a lot of your content online and I always wonder like what does that wear on you after a while? Constantly. Oh yeah all the time all the time. Well the thing is is it so I argue from a worldview My worldview is Christian ethics and this is a foundation from which all other arguments are starting and ending Now I'm happy to meet people in the middle a lot of people on an argue in the middle Right, we're gonna get past all the foundational stuff and we're gonna go to the menu or the middle of the argument and start there And I'm kind of happy to do that to kind of move that move everything backwards or forwards So we can either get to the end or we can get to the beginning and get this figured out Yes, what wears on me the most about it is There's a lot of people who I debate with who I know don't believe what they're saying. I know I Know for sure and I mean there's moments where I catch myself where I recognize it right then that moment in the debate and then I'll hammer them But it happens all the time. I'm like, you don't believe that shit There's no way and then they'll come back with a you know with a re I do and and you can just tell it's disingenuous Right, I can't logically show it. There's no way for me to logically show necessarily or note your motivation Maybe an extreme context, but yeah, man There's people who are pretty disingenuous about their view and there's times where it comes out and the whole audience can see it and you can see it And you're just like just why this why are you like you don't even believe the shit yourself and You're you're propagating it on other people and you know people follow it, you know There's some cash there, you know, there's a but you're doing it anyway You're doing it anyway like I've always thought my head you take a guy like destiny, right? The kumor gremlin as I like to call him. Okay. He called him the what? Kumor gremlin. What's that mean? Oh like kumor like he just all he does is What's that word? He's like a sexual degenerate right that what a kumor is yeah, well kumor It's a it's a little more mild than that kumor is just like um Kind of one of the higher values is just kind of having sex with everyone Right as her around like that's what you do. He's like my sexual right yeah, yeah, I think yeah I did boys all kinds of sexual apparently, but the thing is is like um I've often thought that There's times when I'm talking to the guy where I'm like I you don't believe that Like you just there's no fucking way you believe that shit You're making it up and I know you're making it up right and you'll catch him at times You'd be like whatever I got to say to win the argument. Yeah, and it's like yeah I believe that Yeah, I believe that but it's like there are people who genuinely Believe their view and are excellent debaters Uh Backing their view and I love those engagements. You know, I live for those engagements. It's a problem is it's like It's five percent of them right a lot of people are just trying to win right well not just trying to win but I don't even have a problem with going into a debate with a mindset of winning it if you're representing a view you believe You want to win the engagement whether it's a conversation or it's a debate You want to you want to win people over to your side You want to even win the person you're talking to over to your side You know or maybe sometimes you got to be brutal and destroy the view completely so people don't move towards it Both of those are completely I consider them both fine and I think they're both effective But the issue that I have ultimately is when you're arguing with somebody You know, they don't believe what they're saying. Yeah, and yeah that that wears on you and It's not just that but Sometimes you hear the same recycled argument over and over and over and I'm like you don't even have to tell me anymore I can get to the end before you can I can tell you exactly where you're gonna go what you're gonna say why you're gonna say it What your justification is gonna be and I could just get to the end and take care of this right now It's gotta be way like how will do? 42 so it's just turn 42 Weird like in your late 30s Early 40s to like I've entered into this world. Oh, yeah, dude I'm so strong. It is it is beyond bizarre. I mean to be like a normal work in class guy Do it or nobody from nowhere no political experience Nothing I know no entryway nobody in entertainment nobody to help me along nothing and so was it just seeing how Ridiculous people were being during the COVID pandemic that like motivated You to be vocal about all the stuff. It well and I had time Yeah, you know times a big one, but with the with the layoff. It's like oh Well, I don't really have a lot to do and I'm listening to this and it's like now I can maybe I can engage a little Maybe I can get involved a little bit, you know not much I didn't think I didn't think anything ever come of it. You know what I mean I just wanted I saw my view wasn't being represented very well but did you have a History of education like were you were you just reading books like where did you develop these ideas? Yeah? Well, it wasn't just from books Right, I would listen to long form. You know historic podcast I would more than anything. I would be listening to you know the mediums changed But I would listen to what people had to say on a variety of issues And I would watch the news incessantly and I would be able to pick out what's true and what's not true after a while Political education comes from a variety of sources You can't get it from the news and you can't get it from listening to just podcast And you can't listen get it by just talking to people you have to take a sum total of everything All of it in order to at least be even moderately politically savvy and understand what's going on in the world And I realized most people make commentary on things that they have no fucking idea what they're talking about Right, and so how did you transition to doing this as a job? Well, it's about two years in to doing this. I was like look I said I tell him my wife and I said I'm not making enough money on my podcast to quit my job There's no way, you know or doing debates to quit my job There's no way, but I think I could I Actually think I could if I just focused my time on it now I think I could do it replace my income with ease. God. That's a big risk. Right was a huge risk because you have a family Yeah, huge risk and she said okay. Wow. Give me a kiss and At least my income with ease. Got it. It's a big risk. Right. It was a huge risk. Because you have a family. Yeah. Huge risk. Yeah. And she said, OK. Wow. Give me a kiss. And next day, I went in, quit. And I was like, I don't know what the fuck I just did. I was like, you know, it's, in some ways, it was like, it's like, oh, I'm going to go be a big football star to screw you to your boss. You know what I mean? And it's like, it wasn't the same exactly. But it was a big risk. But I just thought, you know, I really can make a goal of this if I can focus by time and energy on this. I think I'll do really well at it. Well, I think you have a very unique mind for it. And I think you're very good at it. And I also think you have really good points that are very valuable for people to hear. And you're really good at pointing out the logical fallacies and pointing out the ridiculous thought processes that a lot of these people have. And I, you know, that's important, man. It's important for society. I'm probably don't think of it that way. Probably just enjoy doing it and feel like it's valuable. Because there's not a lot of people that are good at it. I get hundreds of DMs weekly from people. And they'll say thing and this again, I'll never get used to it. But what I do, this is my process. I sit down every morning, I have a cup of coffee, and I just respond to every DM that sent to me. Wow. So for me, yeah, do you probably get too many, right? Yes. I get, I thought so too. I thought, well, if I start getting hundreds every day, there's just no way, but I still do it every morning. How much time does it take you? Takes me hours, about two hours. Two hours every morning, so I'll sit down and I'll go through them. And I can't send back long paragraphs, but usually I'll read exactly what they say. And even I'll just say something like, thanks for the support. Or I really appreciate you saying that, that means a lot. Because it does. To me, it's my privilege to have fans. It's not their privilege to be one. And so when I started to see that, and I started to see wait, this actually does have a massive effect on people, I also began taking it very much more seriously, because I understood, I can also say things that do the opposite. They could move people towards the opposite of things which are good. You know what I mean? Or things which are things which you should be moving towards. And so I do take it seriously, and I understand my job is to represent a worldview. And when I go into a debate, that's exactly what I think millions of people are gonna see this worldview on display. I'm representing it. I need to do the best I can to represent it well. To be an intelligent, reasonable person who's both well-read and has very good points that you can express about social issues, societal issues. It has, it's a massive thing. It's a very important thing that, mainstream media is not doing a good job of filling that role. It just doesn't. There's not a lot of people out there. I mean, Christopher Hitchin's is dead. There's not a lot of people out there that are really good at debating against ridiculous people and exposing this. And it's so important for people to sit down and see something like that. And to recognize like, oh, I've heard people like that talk. Oh, I've always wondered like, that doesn't make any sense. Why doesn't someone tell that guy to shut the fuck up? Why doesn't someone, and you do that? That's my job. That's your job. My job is to go in specifically and say, why don't you shut the fuck up? Because what you're saying is so detrimental to people too. Yeah. It's nightmare fuel for him. Like, I mean, people hear this stuff. Man, like, I remember this one guy, DME, and he was like, Andrew, I hate these fucking people. Like, I hate him. He said, I'll listen to him, man. And I just fucking rage in my truck. I'm like, I fucking hate these bastards. He's like, but I can't stop listening. He's like, and his mindset was, I want to know what the enemy's thinking, right? That's his mindset. And I think a lot of it is maybe that particular guy is addicted to rage or whatever, whatever you want to frame it. But I don't think so. I think the truth is is that when people are trying to get to the bottom of things, they're trying to be like, why is this happening? Why is this going on? Why do these people think the way they do? And then they start listening to him? Sometimes it's way worse than you thought. As like, you really believe that shit? You really think that that's the case. You really think that we should be doing anything like this. What is wrong with you? Yeah. And I think that for a lot of people, that could be a very kind of like jarring experience for him. And I think that that's healthy, though. I think that's healthy for you to be kind of jardot complacency a little bit. Would certainly healthy for other people to watch it? Because certain people lean in one direction or the other, and they're not really exactly sure how they feel about things. And sometimes someone who has bad ideas can be very compelling with these bad ideas, because they're not being confronted by someone who's better at it. And I think that's a very important one. Where even is good. Yeah. Even if you just draw a stalemate, it's like sometimes even that's good enough. Because it's like, maybe I was leaning towards this or I was leaning towards that. But I'm not sure again. Sometimes that's the best thing. Maybe you shouldn't be too sure on this side or that side. But before you commit, at least maybe I can stop you from making a commitment to this. Tons of people are like, man, I was on the fence about Christianity. And that was on the fence about. Or the doc seems on the fence about this. I was on the fence about that. This debate did it for me, listening to what these people had to say. This debate did it for me. This debate did it for me. Different fans have different highlights that they like. Because they're all coming from different walks of life. But they're all very similar in one aspect. Most of my audience are married men or marriageable age. But late 20s through 30s early 40s, that's about the demographic. But mostly like 32 to 45. And so these people, they have some life experience. They're not dummies. And they're listening to it and they're like, it's about time. Someone told that. Someone did somebody let them know what was going on. Somebody challenged those ideas. Somebody buried them. And that's one of them effective at doing. And that's what I'm going to keep doing. And here's what I've learned. The higher I go in confrontation with the higher level people, the dumber they get. Really? The dumber they get. Back in the old Twitch blood sport days, when it was 50 live viewers and me against two leftists and we were slugging it out, they were smarter. They were these were much smarter people than the high level academic. Like it took on these two academics recently at debate con, both of them Ivy League graduates. It was nothing. I could have easily destroyed them while enjoying a hot bowl of soup. It would not have like it was just it was in consequential. Why do you think that is? Well, I think it's because of there's a degree of asking. And there's a degree of people around you affirming over and over and over how fucking great you are. That's where that ego, Tism comes in. Where I'm saying earlier in the podcast, you have to be make sure you're grounded. Make sure that your ego never takes over. make sure that you don't become the thing that you hate. And it's so easy to do. But it's also I think that as they go, things become more cerebral and academic rather than applicable. And those kind of old debates that I was doing was people living in it, not external from it. And so they you know, it did. They had real emotion behind it. This wasn't just a thing on a chalkboard. Right. So and the other thing is I think a lot of people get where they are in media through connections and not because of merit. I think a lot of people who are in media or political pundits have no fucking business being there at all. They're dumb as a box of rocks. And they're there because they had connections or they had friends who assisted them in getting in the position they are. And when they are actually confronted on their views, they fall apart. They totally fall apart. I've seen comedians comics who were on the road for years do better in academic debates than academics. Yeah. And I was as possible as possible because that guy has real world experience. He's probably just as well read as you had a lot of downtime. Right. So he educated himself, but he can do the thing you can't. He can apply it. That guy has a way to apply this knowledge in a framework that works because he's part of the apparatus of the world. There was nobody there where he was like, he tugged on their shirts, leave and said, hey, daddy, or hey, you know, uncle bucks or whoever, you know, I want to be on Fox News and now they have an end, you know, and I think a lot of that in media happens. I think it's very, very, a lot of nepotism there and a lot of people just got no business being there at all. Don Lemon. Don Lemon. Not just Don Lemon. I mean, no, there's so many. There's like pick on him because he picked on me. Yeah. Well, I don't know what Don Lemon's doing picking on any of it. Like you would, you would, same thing. You would destroy lemon while enjoying a hot bowl of soup. It would just be nothing because Lemon's biggest problem is he had never had any business. He was, he was a token, literally a token. He was the token gay black guy. He was not valued for his great insights and wonderful political takes. The fantastic way in which he broke down the issues of our time. He was valued because he was a gay dude who was black, who was like liberal talking points. Yeah. That's it. Yeah. I agree. I listen, man. I enjoyed this. I still do it again sometime. Absolutely. And tell everybody your show, the crucible where they can find it. Yeah. My show is the crucible on YouTube. You can also make sure you go and grab a copy of my wife's book, a cult feminism is fantastic. I brought you a copy, Joe. Cool. And then I know you, I know you love feminists. That's why I brought that copy. And then you can also catch me, debate university. It's the thing that I've done for years. It will teach you how to debate. You can go check that out as well. Debate university.com. I really appreciate the time. Hey, I appreciate you being here, man. I think what you're doing is great. I really do. I enjoy it. Thanks. All right. Bye, everybody.