Joe Roman Feige! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night! All day! We doing this? Yes. I'm glad you brought it. Echo fist! You did not have to do that. I appreciate it. I fucking love your channel, dude. I've spent countless hours watching your hilarious videos. So cool that you've even found it. Well, you know, Jino told me about it. A lot of your brother, Jino, who I've been friends with for years, told me about it a long time ago that you guys were doing this. And I was like, really? You all right? Interesting. And then I watched him, like, this is fucking great. It's right up my alley. You would show clips all the time and have drive Geno nuts. And then finally, it got named Reggie Watts was here. And he's like, you ever heard the wife, you guys are talking about moon landing shit? And you're like, what's that? And I don't know. A week or two later, Gina gets a text. Are you the wife, house? He didn't tell me the name of it. He was so excited. Yeah, it's a great show dude. It's like everything I'm fascinated by. Anu Naki, Alien, Secret Bases. How did you get involved with making a show like this? Is this something you've always been interested in? All but I mean, like, group art bell. Yes, there he is. There he is. I mean, the goat. The goat. Dad was an overnight cop. So always overnight radio. And so it was always Dr. Demento. Yes. I remember him and art bell. So kind of grew up with the weird stories. And it just got in the Twilight Zone. We watched this kids. It was like required watching from dad. And the old black and white's the classics. So that was always in there. So I'll skip 20 years. We had a podcasting studio in LA on Sunset. We were doing pretty well. Hosting a lot of shows, guys, you knew. Like when COVID hit, Kill Tony came and worked out of our studio. Jeremiah, Medscar, all the guys. Didn't make any money. But it was a cool setup. But then they locked down the city, impossibly. And we didn't really know what to do. Then they said fire to the city somehow. And the wife and I are racing down Hollywood Boulevard being chased by people with bats and boxes of Adidas. And we were like, this is too much. And we just started packing. That's it. We got out. And I didn't know what to do. So now I've been working in showbiz not super successfully like on the cusp. But I've been a professional host editor, producer, writer for TV. So I was like, YouTube, easy. I'm a natural. So I started the channel talking about science and weird stuff. And it was the hardest thing ever did. It was like impossible to do. And I started out following all the consultants. Hi, energy, smash the like, be a YouTuber, top 10 list. And I did that for a little while. I was like, no one's watching. This feels stupid. And then I just, I said, fuck it. Let me just talk about the shit I want to talk about. So I think I would, the first like, good one was Operation High Jump. You know, Admiral Bird goes down to Antarctica with an armed fleet supposedly looking for a Nazi UFOs. And it's a six month mission. And in like a few days, they have to turn back and it's crazy stuff. So I did that story. And I got to, you know, I think I got 50,000 views. I don't think I saw that one. It's an old one. What happened in Operation High Jump? All right, Admiral Bird goes down. This is just after the war. Remember the Nazis were fleeing to South America. So mostly Argentina. So the Nazis had established or tried to establish a base in Antarctica. That's true. It's a new Schwab in land. Now people say they were trying to build a Nazi base and all that stuff. They were really just looking for a whaling station to get oil. So Hitler didn't want to rely on outside sources. So anyway, after the war they go down there, we still don't really know specifically why. it was supposed to be just to see how our aircraft would operate in cold weather. That was what they said. But this was a fleet that was armed to the teeth, like super, like armed. The first helicopters were the destroyers. So they go down there supposed to be a multi-month mission, maybe six months. They get down there and in like a matter of weeks, maybe even fewer, they just bail. And no one really knows why. there's a press contingent there. No one knows what's going on. And Admiral Bird starts giving these weird interviews. And the first one was in Spanish. It might have been them, either Argentinian or Brazilian newspaper. And he talks about how there could be these craft that attacked the United States from the poles and craft that can fly pole to pole. And people are like, what is that? And just sparked this crazy stuff. And you can hear him talking about these things. So hi, jump goes down there to look for stuff. We don't really know why they left. Admiral Bird was talking about these crafts. Admiral Richard E. Bird is famous guy flew the North Pole like a super badass. He was on paper, the commanding officer, but he preferred to just fly his plane and do stuff. So the legend is they get down there. Admiral Bird takes his plane, starts flying across in Artega and sees patches of green. And he doesn't can't believe it. And he's on the radio saying, I'm seeing this rolling hills, sun is shining. He keeps flying. It gets greener and greener. And then he's like, I just saw woolly mammoths. Woolly mammoths grazing in the green. And he keeps going and he's on the radio. And then he's talking. I'm seeing all this stuff. The sun is bright and the greater contact goes out. He's flying and flying. Suddenly he's engulfed in light. And he doesn't know where he is. The green is behind him. He's just flying in light, just trying to get his bearings. And then upside him to flying saucers, just kind of next to him. Almost like the FT at 16, trying to wave it down. He's two flying saucers. And he looks over and they have swastikas on him. And he's like, oh, oh, so he's on the stick. And he feels this thick shakin' and then the stick just goes dead. And then he goes down with the UFOs. And they just land into a cavern in the hollow earth. Right? So that's how that happens. And they take Admiral Bird out and they're tall aliens. The note like this. With swastikas on the crafts. Like the ancient symbol. I don't know. Would you be reversed, right? Well, I think there was a bunch of different versions. I think the Nazi one, it was kind of tilted. Yes. But there was a bunch of the Hindu ones and a lot of the Japanese ones for thousands years. Yeah. A positive symbol of life in the hospital. We don't know how they were oriented because I debunked all this. I'm telling you the legend. Right. Because that's kind of my format. Right. Right. I get you excited. Which explain that to people. You get everybody all jazzed up and at the end. You kind of. I get so much heat for it. Yeah, it's fun. And I watch the numbers. Like as soon as I say, but is it true? Like, everyone's done. Don't worry. No worries. There wasn't enough. They wanted no fun. And then I get the hate mail. You ruined it for me. So what is the truth? The truth is a lot of that comes from Admiral Bird's diary, which was discovered years later, which was not his diary. Oh, right. Oh, shit. Horse shit. And he flew the North Pole, not the South Pole. But here's the interesting thing. He was in a single man aircraft and only had so much fuel. He was, which can only fly for a little bit. He was out of radio contact for three hours. Nobody knows where he went. What was his take on it? We don't really know. That's kind of. So it's just he went radio silent for three hours. It would lead in the group. It's like he did that interview as soon as they got back. And then something must have happened because he got real quiet. But he would go on TV and he would talk. But the pole to pole thing was he was just warning that the poles are a vulnerable space. Like we need to keep an eye on the North Pole. Because if there's a base on North or South Pole, you can't attack from there. So let's keep an eye on that was kind of his point. The Antarctic situation is very strange because I don't know if you ever saw the Sean Ryan show where he talked to this guy that worked with the neutrino detector down there. And he was, yeah, have you seen that? I haven't seen Sean do it, but I know the guy. And the guy was saying that it's not just a neutrino detector. It's a direct energy weapon that can cause earthquakes. And this is like the DEWs. US has always been fascinated directly to the US. That's where the like the harp conspiracy's right from all of that. And if you don't know what harp is, that's the high altitude of rural research project. This is this array of antennas in Alaska. That's built by the US government to study the ionosphere. But for some reason it costs hundreds of millions of dollars. And when you look at it, you're like, where the money go. It's like a building's a box and it's a bunch of antennas. Where I'm getting at is, this is an array that can ionize parts of the atmosphere. So I did an episode on project Bluebeam, which is a conspiracy about how the United Nations, or the shadow government will create these holograms in the sky. And that will force one more government. We can get into it if you want to. Yeah. But I kind of debunk it saying, how the grams need to substrate. You need clouds. Glass is really what you need. But then the technology has gotten to the point where you can ionize atmosphere and create things in the atmosphere. So something like harp conceivably could create something up there. Something visual. Something visual. And I've heard people say that the UAP's UFOs may not be real. They could just be holograms for some reason. I heard that too. Yeah. Or a combination of many different things. Yes. I think this is probably a lot of different factors that people are seeing. I was watching a video the other day. I'm not sure if it's real. But I put it on my Instagram anyway on my story, because it was just fun of ball lightning, which is real. But this ball lightning was moving around a parking lot and it was extraordinary. Is this one? Oh, yes. The plasma lasers that the Navy apparently has the ability to make this stuff like this. The 3D images in the air. Yeah. I can also make them make sounds somehow too. Which is interesting. Because you're just vibrating air molecules. So in Project Bluebeam, the energy comes from a satellite array. So can satellites do that yet if it can? They won't tell us. But that could be a way where you could throw off the enemy or freak people out and pretend that there's some sort of an alien invasion. It's really just hologram. Really just a hologram. And that's, you know, that's Bluebeam is supposed to get rid of religion because what will happen according to the legend is the holograms will manifest is whatever deity is dominant in the area, whether it's Jesus or Buddha, whomever. And atheists will see different things. And people will just freak out. Nationalism will go away. Atheists will see different things. Like why? Because according to the legend, the array or with the technology will manipulate your mind. Again, harp has been accused of this. Because you can't manipulate someone's mind with electromagnetic frequencies at the right frequencies. So they could just tell you to see something. So like that's specific? That's specific. Well, actually. Now I debunk a lot of it because the story originally came from mom, a Canadian journalist named Serge Manass, fascinating figure. He comes out with this theory that's bonkers and then the Canadian government takes his kids away because they're homeschooled. He gets harassed by authorities. He gets hauled off to jail for spreading disinformation dies of a heart attack the next day. So then of course, that's just like, phew, that lights the fuse. And I said, what did he find? So, and he talked very publicly about all of this. So that's supposedly how it happens. Is they manipulate our minds, they show us what we want to see. And then it's not like we won't resist authority. We'll beg for it. We'll just beg to take our freedom, take our rights, keep us safe. Whoa. Because something huge is happening and we need to consolidate. I feel like that's what we happen. Well, I'm sure you've seen the Hal put off thing. Did you see when Hal put off? Well, Hal put off George Bush during his presidency, they floated the idea of disclosure. Did you ever see this? I didn't see it, but I know how it's worked very well. So what Hal said was he and several other scientists were brought aboard and they were given a task of writing pros and cons to disclosure. What are the things that are gonna be disrupted and what are the things that's gonna benefit society and attach a numerical value to each thing? And all the scientists at the end of the day showed that the numerical value for con was far higher. Like it was gonna cause much more disruption than it would be beneficial. And so they decided not to disclose. But what they were telling Hal was this was what you were planning for was retrieved crafts, not of this world and biological entities that the United States government is in possession of. Should we disclose this? Right, I think I've definitely heard that. I don't know if is that connected to the Brookings report if I'm getting that correct. Which one's that? I forget when it would even come out. Here's all the CYAs. I'm an expert on nothing. I don't know anything. I tell stories. E2, okay? How can you talk about Planet Cipo if you've never been? I just like this. I just all do respect. That's gonna go on forever. Forever. You've never been. Never been. I hope he's okay. That was Murray's a lot of fun. Oh, he's great. Yeah, so I'm not an expert at anything. So I don't know when Brookings was, but it was the same thing. It was a recommendation from the government that looked. It was a 1960. 1960. Same thing? Well, I don't know about the exact same thing, but same confidence. Most studies of the implications of peaceful space, activities for human affairs, commissioned by NASA and created by the Brookings Institute, collaboration, long range study. Same result. Don't do it. Yeah. I think they're probably right, but also I wanna know. Well, that's, that's put puts us in a pickle, I think, is let's say it's real. I wanna know too. But I don't want the Chinese to know. And I definitely don't wanna run to know. So I understood. Why do you not want them to know? Well, maybe we could all get along. If we realize that there's actual aliens that are visiting us. I mean, wasn't that the Ronald Reagan speech in front of the UN? You've seen that, right? Sure. Yeah, the famous speech. But wasn't the SDI part of that speech is we'll all get along, but we're gonna have laser weapons in space, just in case we don't. Wasn't that the same speed? It might not have been, but it was about that same time. And that was all smoke and mirrors. The Star Wars thing was fake, right? Couldn't get it to work. Yeah. So maybe we'll all get a long boy. That sounds nice. But you know, Iran produces brilliant people. So intelligent, great engineers, doctors, all of that. But the government is bananas. Yeah. So I mean, you don't wanna have brilliant scientists working like that. I mean, we had brilliant scientists working for dictators in the past and it was not awesome. Right. So that's why me. Yeah. That's why me. So yeah, it's really sketchy if they get the technology. Right. Well, this is what Hal put off said. He said that the government of the United States has at least 10 of these things. And I said, well, other governments have them. He said, yes. And I said, do they have similar numbers? He's like, we believe so. So they don't know. So essentially what he was kind of alluding to is that there's basically like a kind of Manhattan project to try to back engineer these things. And whoever figures it out first is going to have a massive advantage. Right. And it would be nice if it was us. It would be nice. Hal put off has been connected to a lot of disinformation campaigns. I love the guy in his work, but he has been connected to information campaigns with known disinformation. Think about what subjects. About disclosure. Like you heard the name Richard Dodie. Yes. OK. So I mean, he's- He's a little coffee. Yeah, let's have some coffee. I'm off booze right now. Forever. No. Not for us. Cheers. I just needed a break. It was becoming a little bit. Me too. Like I have it. You too? Yeah, I've been off for two and a half months. Maybe even a little more now. Yeah. I just decided one day I'm done. And then I feel great. Feel better. Oh my god. I think Cleary, the way that I feel in there. I have a nightclub. So I'm on my nightclub, my comedy club all the time. And everybody's buying shots. And you don't want to be here. You want to do this? After a while, you're like, god, I feel like shit. Yeah, you do. You know? But I'm at- It's like the illusion is that you won't have fun. I'm having the same amount of fun. It's so much fun. Of course, it's not that bad. I get- I get- I'm funnier. Because I know what I'm talking about. Yes. And I'm not embarrassed the next day. You just- you just doesn't kill your inhibitions. But that's- it's overrated. It is. It's fun. I'm at a good time. Boosin' but yeah. Enough. I'm allowed to go back at the first of the month. No matter. I just need- you need to quit vices once in a while if anything just should prove that you can. Yes. Yeah. It's a good thing. Just to prove that's not- doesn't have hooks in you. Right. Yeah. I can quit whenever I want. I know. But can you? I've taken a few days off of social media and I always feel better but I always go right back in. I don't know why I hardly ever look at it. It's just a massive distraction. Like I don't read anything about myself but I'm always- but more so, I'm always looking at it. But I find a lot of interesting things too, especially on Instagram. But more so now than ever, my screen time on my phone is dedicated to YouTube. It's like when I come home, especially at the end of the night, come back from the club, I'm tired. I want nonsense. I want Bigfoot. Same. I don't want to think too hard. I want, you know, I want, you know, Bob Lazar. I want Bigfoot. Yep. I want, you know, ancient civilizations. It's just me and the dog watching TV. Yeah. You know, everyone's asleep. That's my favorite. Because no booze for me doesn't mean no gummies. So I half a gummy in a Bigfoot episode. Oh, yeah. I'm having a great time. That's the one that I wish was real, but I'm 99% juror sh- same. But I also wonder, I wonder like, I wonder if unders certain conditions it's real. Like this is my thought. This is going to sound squirrely. I think under heightened states of anxiety and fear, when you're alone in the woods, maybe it's possible that the barrier between dimensions is slippery. And you can see things that you would ordinarily never see. Like it might not even be as simple as this is a biological creature that lives here on earth with us, but no one's ever found a body. It might be weirder than that. It might be these are some sort of hominid from somewhere else that can appear. This episode is brought to you by Squarespace. Our great site, JoeRogan.com, was built using Squarespace. But did you know that Squarespace also gives you everything you need to offer services and get paid all in one place? Whether you're doing stuff like using the built-in appointment scheduling for consultations or even email marketing tools to pull off events, Squarespace has all that plus invoicing and online payment tools that make conducting your business a breeze. Try it free at squarespace.com and use squarespace.com slash-rogan to save 10% on your first purchase. Native American legends say exactly that. That it's this creature that lives between worlds and the real. Same with giants as well. They have the legends of the red-haired giants that were chased west. And we're getting into that. We're getting into giants. Because the giant thing is weird when you go into the store and I watched your episode on giants. I loved it. Maybe it was the lonesome. Oh, that was yeah. That was GE King Cade and Smithsonian cover. Yeah. Grand Canyon. That's a good story. Well, the whole Grand Canyon thing has been anise. There's areas of the Grand Canyon. You cannot explore. You cannot go. You cannot fly over. Right. And you can't fly under the rim. Yet when you go to those bad places, suddenly while white plane flies over under the rim, black helicopter show up, I showed him my episode. I show the black helicopter show in a like they do show. Yeah. Like they are protecting something. Something. It's not as simple as this is a dangerous area because you can go to any dangerous area. You go to just to the normal tourist area. It's like be careful. Right. People fall. Two people are the yearfall. Yeah. The influencer. Of course. Taking a selfie. But the Grand Canyon, there's been these crazy stories of people finding these like Egyptian, these caverns with like Egyptian artwork and hieroglyphics and these stories of artifacts that have been removed from there. So the story is that shows up, I believe in like the Phoenix Gazette's 1903 or so. and they explore his GE concave and he's going down. He's looking for gold deposits or whatever. This is just before Terry Roosevelt made the Grand Canyon in a preserve. He was a naturalist. So he finds these steps that a clearly man made. He follows the steps up in the decay and he goes in there and he describes hieroglyphics that look Egyptian but are not quite. He finds a statue that he describes as like Buddha, like not Egyptian, not human but sort of like Buddha and all these weapons, shields, gold, all sorts of stuff. He keeps going. He finds a deserted city in the caves and all these tunnels and caverns go everywhere and he's trying to map everything. He comes out and he goes back to town and he gathers together a group that we're going to go, we're going to go find this stuff again. And people are excited about it. And a couple of weeks go by and everyone's gathered to go in the expedition. He never shows. The expedition goes nowhere and that's really the last we've heard of it. Well, and is there any photographs or anything? No. No. No. There never is of this stuff. Right. Just descriptions. Just a great story. Well, the great part of the story is the fact that you actually can't go there. And just the idea that there's an area where the military is protecting people from being foolish, that doesn't make any sense. Nobody asks why? Right. Nobody asks why. It really bothers me about about that story and all of these, whether it's disclosure, or whatever. I don't hear anyone asking why. Well, they won't let us. Well, who's they? Someone's in charge of stuff that's not the president or Congress. So who is it? So you know, is it possible there's some sort of a government installation down there somewhere? No. It's all going to be woo-woo conspiracy stuff or it's real. Or you can't find something and someone got to end. But if you can't find something, why would they want to hide some ancient civilization discovery, particularly in the early 1900s? Like why? For what reason? I don't know why Grand Hancock is marginalized now. Right. But that wouldn't you think that there's like less of a grip on that stuff in the 1900s? Yes. I would think so. So my guess would be treasure and money. That would be my guess is it shows up in the paper. The government goes down there. There's a lot of stuff down here. Let's grab it, send it to the Smithsonian who keeps 99% of the stuff under wraps. They have, you know, a billion items that nobody can see. And then that's the end of it. What the fuck? Which I would love to know the official reason. See if you can Google. Is there an official reason why you're not allowed to go to certain areas of the Grand Canyon? They use a VPN there, brother. The story I was looking at the article about the original article and it says that the two guys mentioned might not have even existed. Right. There's no evidence of them. GE can cave in another guy named S.A. Jordan. Oh, so it might be just a story that someone printed some whole shit. Yeah. When I was looking into one of these things before, I found something explaining that back in the early 1900s when newspapers were really popular thing to read. I don't know if it was like a game or if there was actual prizes people would play or like amongst themselves to try to get fake stories printed. If you could get the craziest story printed, you win like 500 bucks or. I might be wrong, but I think Jordan was connected to the Smithsonian. At least according to the story. I pulled this from the Smithsonian debunk, which I mean, obviously they would if this is the way we're going to go with it, but them debunking this and they gave two links. to the original 1909 article and one to a 2008 update. That's where I was pulling that from. I don't trust the Smithsonian. They're exempt from all kinds of stuff. Yeah. Well, like there's a law passed not too long ago that if you have Native American artifacts that are important to that culture, especially burial artifacts, they must be returned. Last year, the Smithsonian, then you can make a case that you don't have to get it back. How do they have so much power? Their, it's a government agency. I don't even know. I thought it was a private agency. So there's no official story as to why this area of the Grand Canyon is off limits for your safety. For all things on their call. Yeah. It's all I can find. That's fucking weird. That's fucking weird. That this story comes from the very area that's forbidden. That's fucking weird. I think one of the odds. I don't believe in coincidences. So there are a lot of these stories come from places you just can't go. All the time we're raffed in. Yeah, they're busted. And busted. Yeah. I'm arrested. You can find online. I wish I knew the names of a team that went up there. That's who found the black helicopters. And I use them in the video. And I credit them so you can find their videos that were up there for an hour, hour and a half trying to find stuff. And what they found up in that forbidden zone is anchored into the ground, a giant hook, like a loop, like what would you use that for? And that would be to repel down. That's the only reason that would be there. There's no explanation for what is this. They also found artifacts from that era from the early 1900s artifacts that people were there. So it's possible that they repel that like they might have been standing right above that entrance. And there are reverse angles of that rock face that look a little weird. It could be pareidolia, but it. What's pareidolia? Pareidolia is the is the mind's ability to see objects in random noise. You know, it's something we evolved to, you know, to see predators in the forest. That's why if you see a cloud that looks like a Abraham Lincoln, it's not Abraham Lincoln, you know, it's pareidolia. But debunkers will always fall on pareidolia. So like the real believers they hate that word. God, that would be imagine. Everything would have to be rewritten. If they found some evidence of a loss civilization with no connection to any known civilization, that was advanced. That was living in the Grand Canyon. Did you ever think about going to the Grand Canyon to go and just be an outlaw and go see? How would you get in though? I mean, if they have black helicopters and their skin in the sky or scanning the ground with some sort of a drone or a plane, we go in. Were you planning something? No, no, no, no, hold on. What should we do? I don't have a contract, all right? So this is, I just already dangerous me sitting here. But I got your back. If I go. Yeah. Because even if they drag out, questions have to have to be posed. Right. Why couldn't I go there? What did he do wrong? Well, he violated this area. Okay. Well, how come? Yeah. Well, when you think about how dangerous the Grand Canyon is overall, there's not a safe area. It's literally a canyon. You could fall at any of a million spots along the way to your death. Have you been there? Yes. Unbo, it's incredible. Incredibly, you couldn't paint it better picture. But as you get closer to that edge, you can feel your, your amygdala going. Back up. Like it's seriously dangerous. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, God. The problem is I want to believe with all these things. Yeah. Most people enjoy your show. You want to believe. That's why it's so fun. And I don't believe most of the stuff I talk about. But when I approach a story, I try to find as much evidence as I can to support it. And I also want to find the other side. So that what we're left with is some. I try to find as much evidence as I can to support it and I also want to find the other side so that what we're left with is Some truth and not all stories can be fully debunked and I've had my mind flipped a couple of times You know crop circles hollow moons and really crazy shit if flip me around crop circles is a weird one So weird it's a weird one because when I first saw them I'm like what is that and then I saw that these guys were doing them with boards and string I was like oh it's just people being silly and then I watched a whole documentary about how the Energy that bent these things over caused these nodes to explode as if they'd been cooked in a microwave correct What and then you find out that the actual stocks are woven together? Correct? It's not that they're pressed down they're woven together and that these are complex geometric designs that would have taken people weeks to map out and And there's no footprints leading up to it. There's no roads no machinery No evidence of any use of any kind of machinery and these things appear like that Like people have flown over an area and then flown back an hour or two later and there's immense football field size Perfect geometry that no one can explain how it was created correct So so the nodes in the stocks the node is like a knuckle on your fingers. So these those are there for Phototropism to bend toward light So what you're talking about is these things are bent over they're bent over at right angles It can only be done with high energy but also around these crop circles. They're finding microscopic metallic Spheroids in around the circles and that's like a spheracy theory. They're finding them and they're there these Magnetic fields around the circles and you could see videos online of people going into these crop circles and they they hand start to get red Things are happening to them So I went into crop circles thinking was all guys with boards, but then when you watch people with boards make a crop circle It's a mess they can't do this and You cannot bend the nodes of reads and weave them together in a perfect you can't do it So that was as I'm doing the research and like all right 99% of a rate of fake, but there's just 1% that I cannot Explain the famous video where you see the orbs circling around the field in England and then the crop circle slowly starts to emerge Has much been debunked semi it's controversial because the guy released that video. I don't know his name offhand allegedly went to a visual effects house And released it but they somehow put that thing together in matter of hours Which is suspicious? So in my episode on it. I said are here's what they the skeptics say But you know in the 1990s to do that that kind of the effects work because it looks real. I don't know To me I'm on the fence about it, you know, I'm very convenient that they got the footage It is you know it is operation blackbird was a famous operation in 1990 to try and capture the footage live by great research and name Colin Andrews and He's the guy that does the books on crop circles, right? Yes. Yeah, he's all in He's all in and he got a lot of support for blackbird and not only did nothing happen He was totally embarrassed by it and it was all like streaming live and a lot of people were involved He's embarrassed we find out later That while they're like waiting for the circles to happen just a few miles away There's a millet top secret military operation doing whatever they're doing He doesn't know why and then he gets a knock on the door from someone You know men in black whoever it is that sit first offers his him money to stop his work then threatens him with whatever threatens his family and He doesn't know who this guy is they go back and look at the tapes And he sees the guy in the background of like one of the TV crews So the theory is some type of intelligence was embedded into blackbird Made to discredit him and that was kind of that was kind of the end of Colin Andrews because he was he was a legit Research at that point now. He's a now he's French now He's pseudo science, but I get into that the episode that was something I discovered I never knew that there was intelligence involved I didn't know that there was a military op which is confirmed. It's all it's wild So do you think they discredited him on purpose? Yes interesting To make the crop circle thing looks foolish But like what is the crop circle thing like what is the out of the believers? What is the best theory? The believers is that it's a It's a way to message Craft or it's a landing site or it's some type of communication But why why would why are they doing in the field? I don't know it doesn't make sense to me if you have the technology Just you know yeah Pick up the phone, you know you there's better ways than just mowing wheat down But I you know I don't understand do you know the one about the the Mandelbrot set I've seen it Yeah, I think that one is really weird because I think it coincides with the fractal creation of the Mandelbrot set by these people that are Into this kind of geometry and fractals. They're like Someone made the Mandelbrot set which is essentially an infinite fractal of like spectacular design And this is before Lorenz and Lorenz attractor. I think it's before that. Isn't it? I don't know before was mainstream Yeah before it was mainstream right yes and then when this thing appears and people like what is this design and Then they connect it to this Mandelbrot set which is someone would have to have some very esoteric information To be it and it's Mandelbrot set we using Fibonacci numbers Yes, and the and the fee the golden ratio It's accurate and accurate down to inches. Yeah, you can't do that Well, maybe you can but like how and how long would it take and how much planning and how many people and what would you use? Like what what is the technology that would use to bend those things over that way and weave them It's very weird stuff. It's weird because it's These you know the way these fractals work It's this ratio in the in the geometry is like their specific sizes This one is half the size of that one which is half the size of that one And it goes on and on forever and when you see it all see if you can find the Mandelbrot set It's maybe the most spectacular. It's crop circle. It's weird It's really weird because it's fucking enormous. Mm-hmm. You know and it seems so stupid Wow, there's a whole bunch of them the Mandelbrot set is the one with the Luke like a heart About that one right there. Yeah, that's it. That's the Mandelbrot set. Yep, and there's some other fractals there as well I was looking at an article It says these two guys took on the challenge and did it for a TV show on the BBC They did if you watch and do it. It's clumsy AF. Yeah, it doesn't look as good like Like trying to find because I know they always say that these guys did it but like Could you you can't really see it there? But those flattened reads they're they're woven together With the weird some of the weirder ones go back to other crop circles. You had some other images before that There's some other ones that those ones those spirals right that one right there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That is Fucking wild. That's wild like this is multiple football fields long and wide so How could make that one a little bigger please and one of these? I don't know if that one in particular showed up right next to Stonehenge Like yeah, like a tennis ball throw away like that is crazy To not first of all if you're on the ground All right, just the measurements alone to make each one the equal distance between circles You know in the whatever six different Blades that you have that stem from the center They're all the same distance. They're all the same size The small circles are the ones that are most interesting because how hard is that to do right? Right and Their uniform and it's like what is that? Like what the fuck is that and Who's do if that is a hoax? It's so bizarre that it's only these two goofballs that were making really shitty ones with boards and strings And yet there's hundreds if not thousands of these like really complex ones Yeah, those those are the guys that are on you can see them doing it live and with those guys There's no way they had enough time to do all these things and it looked terrible. You think you look you're just trampling it Yeah, I mean look you can certainly make crop circles with a string and a board You certainly can make crop circles, but you're and you know It always gets connected like believing in aliens and everything else But it's not no one's even saying aliens like it could be some sort of energy From something that we possess something that humans possess that they Somehow another aim at these areas like what does that one above it go that one right there above like right there without Fuck is that thing look at that. They are in the same count 80% of them come from the same county in England Which is all also weird now people correct me in the comments But I believe that middle-piece of geometry is a hybrid queue. Isn't it isn't that a a Ford-emotional queue? I don't know a tester act does look like a What the fuck how long would that take? That seems like that would take a long time to do stone engines under constant surveillance and and circles show up overnight Very weird stuff. There's an interesting conspiracy What the fuck dude to crop circles that we can get into? Well, Shire has the most crop circles in England. Yes, and it's mostly in England too, which is also weird and it mostly will share Like is there some sort of a theory by the coocs? Laylines That they're happening on these these segments of energy that intersect. What is that black and white one Jamie? Click on that just a No, no, no, no, no, the one that that one what the fuck are that? Wow Wow That mountain that can be in sand I think is it like sand dunes Is that what that is? I'll circle 60 that's crazy I've never seen them one is wild. I mean just the amount of time that it would take to do these things so Laylines so this is the theory that's a theory. Have you heard about lay lines? Kind of it's this there's a alleged grid of energy that circles the earth and Almost like how magnetic fields work and this these energy lines have intersection points and on these intersection points are things like stone Hinge geeza Mountain France Wow, where are the tracks in? Heck, you know, okay, what the fuck is that so this no footprints no tracks Yeah, but that could be right right oh this is a guy that did it though I did this This is a Fucking incredible an artist did that. Yeah. How's the guy's name on that first picture? We had amazing Simon Beck so the artist angles conspiracy angle is a man named John Lundberg Who is a was part of a group called circle maker makers.org which is a an art project and also A sociology experiment. He would make fake crop circles to see how people would react Years later Lundberg and some associates created documentary called Mirage Men which is excellent documentary and mostly about Richard Dodie and his disinformation campaign on behalf of the Air Force to discredit the UFO community drove Paul Benowitz nuts Bill Bill Moore who's the who's the guy who essentially Brought Roswell out to the public Bill Moore was taking payments and being fed information from Dodie to muddy the waters in the UFO community He finally came clean in 89 was boot off the stage at Mufan and everything just unraveled So it's all disinfled boot him off the stage because he finally said look I've I've been working with the government A lot of the stuff I've been saying they told me to say majestic 12 all this stuff was coming from Dodie and They didn't want to hear it they didn't want to hand his career was basically over that day Wow, Bill Moore he there was no Roswell story before Moore before his book and You know that was Dodie so the documentary about Dodie Was directed and put together by Lundberg and his associates Lundberg was one of the original circle makers that would make these fake crop circles See how people would react. I just thought it's interesting connection but it's interesting because Clearly some people are making these but like what was the origins of it because I'm sure you've seen that Image from the newspaper of the devil with a scythe You know, I mean and they're talking about crop circles like back in like the 17 1800 Yeah, 1600 so wow first crop circle ever reported was in 1678 corn to story farmer The crop mower were arguing about the cost of harvesting the farmers oatfield the farmer was furious at the mower's price And stormed off swearing that the devil himself should harvest the crop that night a dazzling light lit up the oatfield in the morning The farmer discovered perfectly round circles in his crops He was so frightened by the circles which he thought could only have been so neatly mowed by the devil or some Infernal spirit that he abandoned any attempt to harvest the field That's a little sketchy You scared of circles come on pussy. Uh-uh really though If you were crop circles in my backyard, I would be a little nervous. I would be curious. It's not terrifying Right. They're not something that would scare me away from harvesting my crop No, I'm more afraid of the government than I am a you know That's not the crop circles don't seem to be telling anyone now But it's like what so lay lines so these things are to differentiate areas So they could see them from the skies of the idea the lay lines are the are the energy lines Whatever a mystical energy is not a scientific energy And where the lines intersect is where you see sites like Machu Picchu, Kisa, Stonehenge, all these ancient There's the lay lines But lay lines is you know, it's semi debunkable because if you if you connect enough lines You're gonna find patterns. You're gonna find geometry right right right you're looking for it right yeah Very just very weird stuff The I like I said I used to think it was a total nonsense I thought I saw some documentaries on it whether we're talking about the nodes They were talking about some of these things are just so complex and they appear so quickly The nodes and the braiding to me was like okay Now I got to change my approach to this. What do you think it is? Yeah, I don't know I think I think it's beyond us It's just we're just monkeys trying to try to guess math You know, I don't know We every time we make a guess on the show someone's laughing You know, of course It's like yeah, they think you know, they think it's a landing site Well, it's one of those subjects that if you even entertain it you're almost immediately a fool Which I'm super comfortable with beautiful I entertain a lot of foolish ideas But that one is particularly foolish because people will always point to those guys with boards And I'm like not so fast Yeah, those guys with boards definitely made some circles But this is there's some of them that are really spectacular They are And it just doesn't and when you factor in the nodes and you fact in the weaving and then these incredible geometric shapes Like how are you even mapping that like how are you doing that? How many people are involved? How long does it take? I you know, I would take people so long it would never be that accurate Yeah, with you know with ropes and boards. I'd you know, I just don't see it Right, but like it leaves you with this weird mystery Just like what what is this? I wish I knew this is one of those things that like it's almost like the universe is laughing at us Every now and then it just shows you something that's like so goofy Do you have to go what what is real? You know a great it was a hoax, but a great crop circle was the aricibo response. Do you know that one? Yes, that was a great one. Yeah, that was we sent the aricibo message You know, I had had all the symbols on it that it sent it back with like a half a year alien face Right in the show where on the in their solar system they live what their DNA was like I mean, you know, it was a great one. Who did that one? I don't know who I don't know if a circle maker is I don't know who it was, but it was a hoax But it was like a really well thought out one Well that one kind of looks like a hoax like it's so on the nose you have an alien face In the crops or yeah, wasn't that different than the than their aricibo response was it? I forget I think they were related. I'm not sure though. They're responses. I thought was so cool I thought the aries he was through a response was aligned with that UFO thing the alien face see if you can find the crop circle. That's other Jamie You could be right as soon as the alien face you're out I think the aricibo response is next to look there. It is above that Jamie You just had it if you scroll go to the top right there. Bam Okay, so that's different. That's different. But there's there's an aricibo is the answer problem cover for someone on Apple Right, but the crop circles are real crops or that that is somebody actually made that right and that's a message in that circle That's a message. Look at that one to the right There's the aricibo response down there with the humanoid face. Yeah, that's it. That's it Very weird so that's a hoax. That's a hoax, but boy. It's a good one. It's a fucking great one Go back a couple posts Yeah, right there that one on the right hand side. That's crazy It's the small circles it get me Well, it's fucking if it is a hoax. It's amazing That is just so weird But again, it's like one of those like it doesn't it's not satisfying. No, it's not There's not like every it just at the end of it. You're just like I don't know. That's why the worst question is What do you think it is? Oh, right? I was hoping you had something stupid. No, I I don't know man. Yeah, I don't know either But I do know that I want to believe which is always the problem with me with all these things You know, I want to believe the bases in Antarctica. I want to believe that there's pyramids up there all that stuff Yeah, and when you find out Something's debunked. How do you feel? Oh? You know are you okay? Yeah, I mean disappointed, but but there's a party that goes Yeah, it's probably right. Well, I think most of our bullshit. I think like most UFO sightings are bullshit Most UFO sightings are probably people seeing experimental military aircraft and Things along those lines satellite. That's a big one like those The Starlink ones fly across the night sky. Yeah, oh my god. It's an alien. It's not an alien. You could see what you're naked Yeah, but if you didn't know what it was it looks like a fleet it does ships flying across the sky and the way that they alternate lights It looks like there's an intelligence to it right. Yeah. Yeah I've never seen anything myself have you no, do you know has what did you say genosaw? And I think I think maybe Jeremiah said he saw the same thing Genosaw giant orb of light over the Pacific Ocean and he watched it for a long time And I said where's the photo of it? And he said I was so in awe I didn't even think to tip get out my phone. It's like man, but that's a common thing you hear Right is you're just so in awe. You don't think I gotta write selfie this right? You're probably if you actually saw something there's a high probability that you'd be so freaked out You'd be just in the moment like what? Yep, and you know genos legit. He's not No, I've talked to quite a day fully at a sighting. He saw something. Do you know talk to David? They saw the same thing Yeah, well, there's always the question of like what's going on off the coast And I'm sure you're aware of this one that we actually talked about it the other day But we never found it. There's a structure that's off of Malibu in the deep water That was available on Google Maps was a structure was and now it's blurred out. Yep But it looked like there's openings in it. There's a top that's flat. It looks like it looks like a base looks like a base Looks like a base. Yeah, you know if and now it doesn't now it just looks like blurry water Yeah, like why does it look different now like what's going on with a gun to my head? All the weird stuff is in the ocean. It's not from another planet really? No, I don't know who knows But it makes a lot more sense that the stuff we're seeing It's the best place the height is just deep water. So not from another planet originally Like maybe originally and that's where they they make their base I it's hard for me to square how to travel great distances It's hard for me to square that you know I know that we've got The Albuquerque drive and warp drive and all these theoretical things about about compressing space time and all of that I you know, I get it But it's hard for me to think that that's solvable But what is interesting is maybe another species evolved alongside of us a long time ago And has been here a long time and said you know what let's go here's this is where we go to avoid cataclysms and Geological instability. Let's go into water. That's a weird one though because like what kind of technology are you utilizing? How'd you achieve that level of technological superiority and not completely control man? Because if I was intelligent species that was capable of developing bases under the water I'd be super concerned at all the different things that human beings are doing to ruin things Like if we had chimps that all of a sudden had flame throwers and they were light in the jungle on fire We probably take their flame throwers. So like we would turn off a nuclear reactor. Yeah, right so We talk about humans if if this theory is true that they evolved here that we're no humans Humans are 300,000 years old. That's nothing. They would take whatever species A lot longer than that to evolve to this technological level. We've seen the craft just zip into water with no displacement Right, you know where they go and and there there are unnamed whistleblowers You know anonymous sources that say there's a there's a base near the Bermuda triangle the navy knows about it They know not to get close it moves around a little bit. I'm gonna do an episode on it soon because it's just too good not to corroborated by another Biologists who said he worked with the retrieval team and yes their stuff and what this base does is it From raw materials creates craft to go on specific missions So it's always the question, you know, why is there a saucer? Why does it look like a pyramid? Why is it this is because they're custom built for a mission and there's an AI and a species down there and they said We're gonna go survey mountain haze in Alaska super super fascinating place So we only need a scanning gear some propulsion and we just build it at fits in an orb send it out Does its thing comes back and then it gets broken down to them? It's parts and then another mission build it. Oh, it's gonna be a triangle It's gonna be this or that does its mission comes back to me that makes good sense a good way to do that a good way to conserve resources not have to go out and get stuff I like the theory. That's a fun it hits a fun theory. It's a fun theory. Yeah It's a fun theory also that if you were If you were creating bases here like say if they're coming from somewhere else and they want to visit us it would be far more logical to develop some sort of a base with resources and you know where you could you could observe things and They can exist there completely undetected and then be able to go to wherever they're from back and forth But when they're here on earth. They would be undetected right and The ocean is literally 70 something percent of the earth surface and we've mapped I think two or three Yeah, yeah It'd be a good place on plain side. That's what I would do and to make things from raw materials meaning like molecular level stuff You're I mean you're totally off grid. You know, we don't need to strip mine. We got everything here Right, right, and if you have something that's a trans medium Vehicle, so it doesn't displace the water it works on some sort of a Warp driver some I think you have to get into inter dimensionality then and all it gets a little it gets a little wild But if you're not displacing air or water That that means you're phasing through matter Right, which is theoretically doable because everything is mostly space. Well, they said they've mapped things going under the water 500 knots right without making a splash. Yeah, no ripples No discernible waves Greg Luganus right in there nothing five hundred knots under the water I mean what the fuck could do that amount of energy you have to have to go through that much resistance of deep water 500 miles an hour 500 knots right look at how when they do missile test from subs how those things are just like ah Trying to get out of the water. Yeah, and these things just go bloop. Yeah Nothing well, that's the weird ones and but that would make you also think like maybe it is a hologram Because if there are these trans medium things, but the thing is they're seen there with radar Right, which means heat signature or mass right or electromagnetic displacement or if it was if it is some sort of Photons like some sort of a projection would that not have some kind of heat signature a would if it was ionized air Mm-hmm You know that would be plasma so that was hot if that's what it is But when they go into the water we see them under the water for a second and you don't see any refraction right So that kind of screws up the like the holographic projection theory a little bit because there's no light refraction So how did you do do that? Yeah, no, I'm asking you how to do that My answer I mean you've had physicists on here that I've seen go oh Yeah well the really crazy ones are the ones that the fighter pilots have seen because You know particularly commander-fraver and the other people that were on that mission with him So two separate jets you have four people that are eyewitness to this thing and then that there was something actually Under the surface of the water like an aircraft carrier an enormous thing that this tiktak is hovering above and then that thing Descent into the water the tiktak turns towards them jamming their signal is hovering in space and then shoots off at such insane rate of speed that Most of the things that we have on earth would just disintegrate in fall part just from the sheer pressure Of course and from the inertia. Yeah, can be done now if I were doing an episode on on tiktak or go faster gimbal I Would be remiss if I didn't include mik wests analysis of those and I know you've talked to mik on and off throughout the professional debunkers he is he wants to debunk things that I don't think can be debunked he does He approaches it as it's definitely fake and I'm gonna show you everything is definitely fake almost the point where I'm like who you working Right you working for everyone thinks we're CIA by the way. I mean you all yeah Reddit is convinced I'm CIA. Oh That's two that's why my channel blew up in two and a half years because the CIA CIA's back. Oh, I've heard that before. I've heard that about many people Mm-hmm like the reason why they got successful that for that about me too Yeah, like go back to 2009 we have 200 viewers like the CIA suck back then Help me at all dude I remember just watching you in little squares on ustream just like the top of your head and Brian and Duncan I mean that's what if Genos like you got to watch Joe Rogan's show on on ustream I'm like what do you talk about? He's a comic is like he's got Graham Hancock on I went oh I got to watch that and that's that's when I started watch. I think Graham was our first serious guest So it was Duncan and I and we're in my house and Graham flew from England We ate pizza in my kitchen. It was the first time we got to meet him. I was so pumped because I've read his book in the 90s I read yeah fingerprints of the gods amazing book for the art bell is who told me about it Yeah, I remember my wife was like you should read like real real archaeology like no this is fucking interesting shit Why should his your wife is scientists or something no no she's just a little more serious than me Yeah, I'm not afraid of my heart of me Same but it's like I still to this day will pick up those books and read them and like I Do not think that modern archaeology has the full story and I've seen the way they behave I saw the way Flint double behaved with Graham their gatekeepers They don't want anyone to have any information that they don't have so even And I've seen the way they behave. I saw the way Flint double behaved with Graham. They're gatekeepers. They don't want anyone to have any information that they don't have. So even in the face of very compelling information, they dismiss openly quickly without any consideration. They just wanted to dismiss it. And then they want to pretend that any archaeologist that presents any kind of information that fucks up the narrative isn't immediately attacked. And they are. Their careers are ruined, whether you go back to Clovis first or any of these different archaeologists that have proposed alternative theories of the human timeline. All of the conventional archaeologists, all the mainstream people attacked them. Oh, Graham, Mr. Randall Carlson. Ram Chalk, John F. West. Mm-hmm. If I were advising Graham, I would have said, don't do that debate. Don't do it. There's no way to come off. You're not going to convince anybody. And you're just going to come off not looking great. And I've seen his response on his own site. He's even said that was probably a mistake. He wasn't prepared enough. But you'll never be prepared enough for a professional debunker. You just won't be. They'll have too much. So I told them, don't go into the live step. Well, the problem was he wasn't being honest. Flint was not being honest about the information that we have, particularly about offshore shipwrecks. Who's just not honest? Nope. And the amount that they have discovered, not honest. And Graham didn't know that at the time. And also the timeline of how old these are. When you get to 5,000, 6,000 years, there's no ship left. All you have is the pottery and whatever is on the ground at the bottom. And if you're talking about 10,000 years, 15,000 years, who's to say that that's not completely covered by sediment by then? And it probably would be. Well, I watched a little of Ziya wass on here. That's what I need. Just a little. That's the episode. You get it. I couldn't believe he was still doing it. Maybe he was around when they actually built the things. I think that was probably the best advertisement for alternative archaeology you're ever going to get. When you see the guy that's the gatekeeper and how close minded he is. He didn't mention the capstones, the limestone facing from Tori. He didn't even talk about it. Well, also, just saying it was the national project. And that's how they were able to get 80 tons stones, 500 miles away through the mountains on sleds. Like, come on. The Aslan stones are from 1,200 miles away. You know, the Tori stones are, I don't know, 20, 30 miles away. How long are those 11 on stones at Ballback? How many tons is that? You need a person standing on it to even see the size of, you've never seen the ball-back stone if you're listening. The thing is, it's like a skyscraper on its side. Yeah. And it's one solid piece. And it was moved there. Yes. See, pull up the ball-back stones and leaven on. Because there's stuff that's above it that is like of a more recent time period. But it seems to have been put there on top of these older stones that are so big they don't make any sense. Like, that's just one of them that was quarried but not moved. But the ones that are in place, go to the ones that like, see like these ones, the ones that are above, so that the lower stones and the ones above, you don't realize how big they are unless you can get a human being to stand next to them. But they are preposterously big. Like, there you go. Right. Like, you've had 15 feet high, 30, 40 feet long. I mean, they're shown in metrics. So I'm confused. Incredible. And who did it? And when? When was that done? And then there's like Malta. Like that stuff that they think Malta was constructed when the sea levels were much lower. So there was a way to make a path to there from Italy and from these other places. Sure. Because they found the Andritol bones there. And that's it. Allegedly giants built that. Darren Kuu and all the hidden cities underneath Cappadocchi and Turkey that they're finding are connected. Those are nuts. No one knows who made them. No one knows who made them. And they can have thousands of people living underground. They can bring fresh water from the aquifers. They can bring fresh air and circulate it. They have defensive mechanisms with these giant stones. And nobody knows how they made them. Yeah. And who? And why? Yeah. Great flood. Yeah. That's the theory, right? The theory, the great flood. And then the younger dry sand pack theory destroyed the atmosphere where there was like above the earth, which is like chaotic. And they sought refuge underground. I lean more toward that the ice sheets melted from a solar event than an impact. But it certainly could be either. Well, it could be a combination of things. It could be. Because it's also, they think there was more than one. The impact event happened. They know this based on core samples, the ridium, the nanodimans that come from impacts. This is the Greenland impact. Yeah. Not just Greenland, North America. They think they found these, the evidence of this stuff, like 30% of the earth's surface where they believe these things hit. I think we got bombarded. Right. So that would be flying through an asteroid field, like the Leonids or the Perseids or Taurus. So the remnants of some giant object that is rubble, that we just fly through it, which means we fly through it frequently. We'd fly through it twice a year. Twice a year. But we don't always, you know, most of the time, we get lucky and it's not a really a hot one. But like what happened there were Tunguska. Tunguska, right. That's great. And then it was like seven. And in the same month that we pass through that comet field. That's right. Yeah. Right. That's oversight barrier. And that was an airburst, I believe, there's no impact crater. Right. But it's flattened like millions of square miles of tree. And still fucked. This is dead. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. There's images of that. If you want to look up that, there's, there's actual like film of it. It's crazy. It looks like a bomb went off. Yeah. We're in a shooting gallery. You know, earth is flying through a shooting gallery. There's 900,000 near earth objects that are just hovering around out there. And NASA says we track most of them. The, because in those fields with the proceeds towards, there are big objects. There are earth killers in there. Oh, yeah. You know, and a pothis is lurking. A pothis is the big one. That's due to fly by in a few years. What's that one? That's a giant asteroid. That's, I think it's due to fly by maybe 2030 something. How big is that one? I'll get it wrong. I mean, I'm going to say a million things wrong today. I'll hear all about it. But it's a, it's a planet killer. Like it's a, it's a civilization ender. And it's going to fly near like we're going to be able to see it during the day. 375 meters across about the size of a cruise liner. It will pass within 32,000 kilometers of earth surface on April 13, 2029. Now stop there. That's about that's closer than the moon. That's, I mean, way closer than the moon. Yeah. So that's what's 70,000 miles where the moon is 250 to 50 300. So we're going to see that. Wow. You don't want to see that in this, you don't want to look up and see that. We're just knowing that one's far larger of pass through. Mm hmm. And then we know for sure a bunch of hit, you know, for sure. You know, Chititica that one. All right. Chititilu, but that was, that was pseudo science until the father, someone down there and found it. Mm hmm. And that wasn't that, I think that was when I was growing up, the dinosaurs died and it was, that was a conspiracy theory. Right. Right. And they found it. I think around the new Katan impact. Yeah. And that's the ocean. And the Iridium matches it. Uh huh. Yeah. All that is really spectacular stuff. It's just like when you look at the moon, you see the craters all over it. And you realize, okay, this is what happens when you don't have an atmosphere. And you also don't have water and you could see everything that hits. Like the whole thing. The whole thing. But why are there so many fewer impacts on the other side? Are there fewer? Really? I can't. I don't know. I have a, it became a saying on the show. I even have a T-shirt. The moon is weird. Yeah. Like, Gina is my, my weird topic guy. It's like, what should we talk about? He's like, do hollow moon. So I went into that story thing and this is a dumbest shit I've ever heard. Right. The moon is hollow. And I'm doing the research about halfway through him. Like, hmm. The moon is weird. And then by the end of my research, I was convinced that clearly, the moon is a hollow spaceship that was brought here from another part of the galaxy. And it's here. And the lizard people are absorbing our soul energy. That's the only explanation for it. Um, probably not true, but man, the moon is very weird. Well, it's also weird that the alignment and the size and the distance of the moon makes the eclipse perfect. Like, what are the odds of that? What are the odds that it is the exact distance from the sun so that when the moon and the sun align, it's exact. Right. It's like a 400 to one race. It's exact. It's nuts. But, but you could debunk that by saying the moon is getting further and further away. Right. But why is it perfect? What I mean, we have not found a planet in this solar system or anywhere else that has a giant moon right next to it. Corros size of the earth. We haven't found it. Yeah. We've the only one with it. And there are ancient legends that talk about a moonless sky and when the moon arrived and when it arrived, it caused a, caused a great flood. What are the ancient stories of a moonless sky? Where are they from? Ancient Indian texts will have it, but also native legends will have it about the moon, about a moonless sky and then the moon arrives. And when do they think the moon arrived? It's hard to tell. You know, I always go to younger drives, younger drives, but who really knows. The earth was apparently just covered in this haze. Just very wet, very hazy, maybe like Venus or something like that. Then the moon arrives and all that water from the atmosphere drops down to earth. The tidal forces are crazy. There's a huge flood and everything just settles and then the moon is here and the moon is now like the guardian of the planet, which it really is. We could, you know, we couldn't really survive without it. Because it stabilizes our atmosphere, right? Stabilizes us and stabilizes our orbit. Our orbit and our spin and our axis. Like when there's a major earthquake, the earth changes speed. The spin change, like our spin, it changed like measurably if there's a big earthquake. And if there's a lot of those, that could throw you off the axis, but the moon steps in like a bouncer and it settles things back down. Hmm. So the idea would be that some sort of a superior civilization placed the moon there to ensure our survival. I don't think they care about us. Really? No, I don't think so. How come? Again, we're in very speculus territory because nobody knows. I would think it would just be for resources. Hey, this place is a lot of stable water. That's useful. Don't you think they would be fascinated with us as an emerging civilization? And like I would say that if we found a planet that had cave people on it, like just starting to learn stone tools and stuff like that, we would for sure be interested in them. It would be so fascinated. And we would probably try to accelerate their learning curve. You think we would? Yeah, definitely. Yeah. We'll think of what a lot of these jerk-offs have done with like uncontacted tribes and stuff like that. We're always trying to intervene and do something with them. You know the Dark Forest theory? No. It's a Lucian show who wrote the three body problem and all those. Dark Forest theory says that if you attain a certain level of technology, the best thing you can do is just be quiet because the universe is a dark forest and the first person to stick is head out dies because you don't want a competitor in your region. So as soon as a culture gets close to some technology that could make that they're on a path to threaten you, you got to take them out. You got to halt their technology. And three body problems is kind of based on that. That's what they do in the books. And that seems to make a little more sense to me than sort of this altruistic, hey, let's help them, you know, the Star Trek approach. Let's make first contact and all of that. You know, I like, you know, human nature is a tricky thing. We're very selfish. You know, you and I might want to see those people and help them along. But there's a lot of people that would not want a competitor. The neighborhood. Yeah, maybe. But what if they don't even think of us as a competitor? What if they're so advanced? Like if they're millions of years advanced? Wouldn't they like this is the thing that Diana, Pissolka and Gary Nolan, a lot of these people that study crashed retrievals. There's a term that they use that these are donations. Right. These vehicles are donations and that the idea is we're supposed to look at this and formulate new ideas through reverse engineering. And you know, there's circumstantial evidence of that. It's true. If you look at Bell Labs and all the crazy discoveries after Roswell, like we're using cathode ray tubes and suddenly transistors are made in silicon semiconductors or wireless transmission and Bell Labs is all these leaps forward fiber optics. Laser technology came out of Bell as well. You know, the retrieval experts say that fiber optics and lasers for sure is reverse engineered. And it kind of makes a lot of sense because it seemed to have come out of nowhere. It suddenly Bell Labs has it. But you know, it's my question is where is the stuff? You know, we've got World War II. We go into Korea in 1915 at the time. Russia had the MiG15 was basically on par with us. I think we had the F86 at the time which and MiG might have even been better. So that would have been a great time for some advanced tech. But America did catch up and exceed the Soviets at about 5152, you know, during Korea and then has been superior ever since. But you would think that after 47 with the Soviets there, let's get some of this anti-gravitic stuff going. Yeah, maybe the problem is that you're working in this very compartmentalized environment. So you're not allowed to share with all these different scientists. So because of that, there's no collaboration which is necessary for real innovation. You have to have extra roots from a bunch of different fields analyzing all the different aspects of it. This is what Lazar pointed to the problems that they were having at S4 when they were trying to back engineer this stuff. He's like, you can't do science like this because everything is so top secret and so compartmentalized. The metallurgists were not allowed to talk to the propulsion people and no one was allowed to talk to anybody else and everybody was just like, what the fuck is going on? What are these things? They didn't even tell him allegedly, you know, if the story's true. They didn't even tell him where this thing came from. They show it to him and there's a United States flag sticker on it. And he's like, oh, this is ours. Oh, that makes sense. And then he's examining. He's like, oh no, it's not. There's no seams in this thing. What is this? What is the metall? Why is it designed for something that's three feet tall? There's no controls inside this thing. What is this reactor? How does this thing work? There's a chair. Yeah. There's a couple of chairs. It looks like there's a neural interface maybe. You hear a lot of the scientists, they're frustration. If I could just talk to these guys, I'm picking up an EM field from this, the metallurgists would be helpful here to tell me what's going on. I keep coming across spinning mercury all the time. Spinning mercury. The spinning mercury engine has been part of the lore since ancient India has the vamanas. Those craft. If you look at the ancient texts, it may have been the Mahabharata. Yeah. But they allude to this liquid mettle. And then you fast forward to the Nazis building the bell, the D'Glock. That was a mercury engine. And then we fast forward a little further. Mark McAndalus in the ARV vehicle. I forget the flux liner. That's spinning mercury engine. So spinning mercury keeps popping up. And spinning mercury would cause some type of field. I'm not a scientist or physicist. I'm not sure. But it would certainly throw off a bunch of ions that could maybe be harnessed or used for something. Well, it's like we're trying to explain things to us based on our current understanding of technology. Like glass was invented a long time ago. But imagine showing up with a brand new Samsung Galaxy S25 Ultra with Gorilla Glass in the thin frame and looking at the... What the fuck is this? There'd be statues of you for a thousand years. You know what glass is, you know what metal is, right? Well, this is glass of metal. You're like, what? What? No, what the fuck is this? We took sand and made it real hot and it made it clear. Huh? Right. You can drop it on the concrete and it doesn't break. Right. Yeah. So just our current understanding of technology based on the origins of that technology, just metal and glass. You know, you show someone metal and glass is thousands of years old. Show them what we have now with metal and glass. They'd be blown away. And you just keep going. Keep going. Go a thousand years from now. Like what does it all look like? It's like probably some sort of gravity propulsion system. Probably 3D printed. So there are no seams. Right. Yeah. And that's the frustration about disclosure is how far could we be by now? Right. You know, had it been disclosure in 47 or whatever. It's even more of a sign up if it's all bullshit. Like it's a sign up if it's actually, if it actually is like, wow, the government is actually really good at one thing. They're good at keeping secrets about UFOs. That's right. But if they're not, if it's all bullshit, like boy, how weird that we've been focusing on this nonsense. Like as a culture, it got in the front page of the New York. Times in 2017, putting why it's all nonsense. Right. And it's almost less likely. Well, if you look at what Dodie did in the 70s and 80s with Paul Benowitz, when Benowitz discovered this advanced technology on a curtland air force base, you know, he called the base and said, yeah, I think there's UFO. So they send Dodie out. He was where he was Air Force Intelligence, OSI. They send him out to Benowitz. And he's like, Paul, I think it might be UFO. It is aliens. And Paul, you know, Paul gets a little bit wacky. And he starts intercepting signals from outer space and they're sending him messages. But it turned out it's really the NSA. We're into the house across the street. And Paul is committed at some point. And then Dodie over the years changes the story. And it says, no, a lot of it is actually true. But Dodie is also, he said is recently is 2019, how put off tried to recruit him for disinformation campaign with with A10. Really. So how put off has been a part of disinformation campaigns. Allegedly. Allegedly forever. And what have they been doing with these disinformation campaigns? Whatever they've been trying to muddle. Just to keep guys like you had made fascinated and trying to figure stuff out while they can just operate their advanced technology and peace. Like let them think it's aliens and UFOs. That's fine. What a dirty thing to do to us. In the 50s, they were very public about anti-gravity. It was in the papers. You know, the G engine, they were talking about it and then suddenly quiet. Yeah. Jesse Michaels talks about that all the time. The Townsend Brown. Yes. Yeah. And, uh, Ningli, remember her story, the physicist who died. And then she died in the car accident. I was looking back from China. Whoops. Whoops. Whoops. Whoops. So that was AC gravity. If you guys want to look that up, she used to give talks and all of that. She was funded by DOD for $400,000. So we know that for sure. And then she just goes dark. She goes dark for 11 years, shows up. I think in 2013, she's back. 2014 to get this by car. Why is it so fun? I don't know. Mark the Klandus found all that stuff and ended up killing himself. All this stuff is so fun, which is why the Y files are so good. because it's like, I always get the same feeling when I watch your show. It's like, oh, what is the answer? What is real? What is it? But it's what is it about us that's so intrigued by these mysteries. I mean, there's so much that we know that is real. Just just the nature of the cosmos itself, a black holes and solar nurseries and all the wild shit that's absolutely real. There's these things that are like, be able. What is that? I don't think enough people are interested in it to be honest. I think that's part of the problem. Well, I don't do you think it's because for the most part, it's dismissed. And if you engage in it, so if you're a normal person, not like you or I. But if you're a person that has like a job and an accounting firm, you're like a very respected, legitimate person, especially like pre-2017, pre-the New York Times article. And you want to start talking about like gravity propulsion systems that the government's been hiding and that is back engineering programs, they've got crashed UFOs. And there's one of them. It's only like a couple hundred feet wide, but you go inside of it. It's the size of a football field. Like, what? What? I like the tardest. Yeah. Or the one in Korea that's so big that had a build a building around it because they couldn't move it. Right. I want to know what that is. Same. Same. I don't I wish more people were interested in it. And I would almost be willing to run for president just for access. Just my red for president, the company would be in shambles, but everybody would know everything about UFOs. Dude, you have no shot. Yeah. Oh, I have no shot. They're killing for sure. I can't believe the things you say are news. Oh, yeah. Well, it's because news is like really dead. Yes, that's true. They're angry about in the petit media. Well, they are, but it's also the news is not. So their business is just clicks and what better way to get clicks than I said something crazy. So then, you know, and then it also kind of supports the idea that we need to be gate-keeped and someone needs to be able to stop us from spreading misinformation or my favorite term mal information. Oh, I don't know. This is why I don't team up during COVID that we need to stop the spread of misinformation, disinformation, and mal information. Is real information that is true and accurate, but would be negative in its impact of society? That is. It's bonkers. Great. We can't live in that society. Well, they're making us infants, right? They're saying we can handle this, but the vast majority of you, even though we're all supposed to be equal and the government's supposed to be working for you and serving the people, no, we will have this information and we will know what we're doing and you won't be able to have access to it because you're not ready for it because you're too stupid. They lost. They lost already. They just don't know it yet, but they lost a long time ago. I'm going to put out an episode about how dragons are real and when I get to the debug, I'm going to say nothing, they're real piece out. Triangular spacecraft. What is this? Thumbled down a lower rabbit hole and found a patent that exists or did exist? It was abandoned in 2006. I forget the idea. The S-R-7-R-B. There's a T3B. This is like the ones that they always see like the Phoenix lights and that one. So it says a spacecraft having a triangular hole with vertical electrostatic line charges on each corner that produce a horizontal electric field parallel to the sides of the hole. This field interacting with a plane wave emitted by antennas on the side of the hole generates a force per volume combining both lift and propulsion. What? What? It's all the math, but like I don't know what I do this math. Oh, we need to get error here. Someone can look at it and be like, it's not real. Get Eric Weinstein to like do that math. It hasn't been made, obviously. Or that we're in. Oh, yeah. That's sweet. And I'm surprised isn't that classified. There's other, according to this article, that's where I found it. It's what it was about the T3B thing. Right. So that's a real experimental error. There's America have a reverse engineer UFO. Oh, oh. So that this goes back to 1991 with a desert storm. There's reports of what they call it a TR3A, which looks a lot like what the stealth bomber kind of had. Yeah. Also. Yeah. T-R-3B is said to be like nothing we've seen before. This was what I got to from liquid mercury. I was trying to find stuff about it. And there's theories that people say that like this is probably what they're running off of. It was really powered by a reverse engineered anti-gravity drive that was recovered from a crashed airland spacecraft. The TR3B is where reports of UAP performing seemingly impossible aerial maneuvers intersect with stories about very real aircraft. Read the next paragraph. There are lots of claims of the internet about TR3B's anti-gravity drive, most of which include using nuclear power to locate highly pressurized mercury, to produce plasma and in turn a gravitational field. Whoa. Something about the mercury. Have you ever heard Eric Weinstein talk about this? There's a college in upstate New York that has an incredibly overqualified physics department and they're attached to a hedge fund that does Bernie Madoff type numbers. Yes. And he thinks the whole thing is a cover for some sort of advanced physics that they've been keeping a lockdown on. And it would make total sense. I mean, SRI would be another good example of that, right? Where how was in the 70s? Project Stargate and all of that. Yeah. The idea that the government can't keep secrets like, what about Epstein? What? Come on. People ask me, although that's in front of everybody's face and they've kept the list to secret. We're never going to see the list stop asking me. You're not going to see the list. Why not? Because everybody, all you heroes are on it and they're on it a lot. It's never coming out. And I have a friend that thinks a lot of the world events that you're seeing. One of the reasons why people support it is because of the Epstein, because of the list, because people are compromised, because no one can talk about things. Which is really why. So the government can keep some secrets. The head and project, they did a great job with that. And that was one that, I mean, it was a race between us and the other foreign power powers. They were all trying to come up with a nuclear bomb first. We did it first. The idea that there's no way that we could have some sort of advanced propulsion system and that modern physicists would be aware of the state of the art and they would tell you, yeah, no, this is not possible. I don't think that's correct. I think you could probably, if you were working on something and you had a very specific hierarchy and you were really good at compartmentalization and you were recruiting these people at a very early stage in their career. People with promise, these geniuses, giving them a very high salary, a prestigious position, but then everything's locked down. Cell phones, email, there are under constant surveillance. And if somebody steps out of line, like the lady in Maryland, the Chinese lady. Yep. A lot of them. A lot of them go that way. Yeah. I'm very skeptical about a lot of the whistleblowers, especially the ones that come out of Air Force, intelligence, and all that. But even when I'm talking, I'm like, hmm. Well, I mean, you know, I have, I kind of have that needle of skepticism and it starts with, do you have a background in intelligence? Yes. Military intelligence, Air Force intelligence, are you, are you still on the payroll? Did you get your information cleared from the Pentagon? Yeah. Do you have a book? Yeah. And it all goes, did you, did you release some photos that were fake? I'm all over here. Then you go Bob Lazar. He has none of that stuff. Did the government target you? They tried to discredit you. Yeah. You know, have you been ostracized when, when Lazar came out, I think was to George Knapp. He didn't say his name. He didn't have any books. The first book I think was with him in Jeremy in 2019. So Lazar to me is the most credible of the whistleblowers. But, but Jeremy and George just had a whistleblower a couple of weeks ago who's pretty credible as a young guy. He's clearly, clearly nervous and he has some very interesting information about, what does it, a maculate constellation? Which guy is this? I don't, I don't remember his name. It's very new. Is that the bald guy? No. No. No. The bald guy I think is Air Force Intelligence. This is a kid whose career is ruined. And he's maybe in his twenties. And you can see he's clearly nervous. And what does his claim? His claim is that he was going through some files. You know, he's got top secret clearance and he found the immaculate constellation project. This is claim. His claim is that he was going through some files. You know, he's got top secret clearance and he found the immaculate constellation project, basically a PowerPoint presentation. And his job was just to sort these files. He was looking through it and suddenly it's like, whoa, this is about recovery and alien craft. And he did the right thing and went to his superiors and said, you know, there's a leakage. I saw information and maybe it wasn't supposed to. I'm just letting you know and his peers were like, forget about it. And he's like, and how is it? It's just no reprimand, no nothing. I just went back to work, but he was too fascinated by the document so he kept pursuing it and pursuing it. And, and now he talks about it. I don't know his name, but if you track down, you know, Jeremy and George, you'll find it easily. Mm. That's the kid. Yeah. So here's a way that I would kind of try to debunk that. Of how it's being logical. If I was the government and I did have some very sophisticated propulsion system that's beyond the understanding of what we think to be current state of the art physics, like be far beyond that, I think I might release a bunch of horseshit about UFOs. I might put a bunch of that stuff out there to say, well, it can't be ours. It's not ours. It's it's not of this world. Bloody the waters. Yeah, not not just that, but attach like really cookie stuff to stuff that's real so that you think the real stuff is cookie. Right. Like like the drone scared. Remember that? Mm-hmm. That was very manufactured and the depressors all over it. We don't know where the drones are. They're flying over the military bases, all that stuff. What do you think that was? I know what it was. I've seen the no-tam reports. You know, no-tam is? No. That's a notice to airmen. So pilots, private pilots get warning of no fly zones. And usually you'll see a lot of swaths carved out of like Air Force One's flying through. But for some reason, this no-tam reports have all these little circles all around that you can't fly through where the drones were. And I've seen that. And when did the drones, they suddenly stop when? Right. Right. Before inauguration day. And no one talks about the drones anymore. Yeah, it's gone. Gone. I mean, it was mainstream news all over the place. And they had people nervous. Yeah. They had them nervous. And I think that was the point. So you think they did it as a sign-up just to see how people would react? I do. And remember, I know nothing. Right. But that is my opinion, is that it was a sign-up. And that most of this is, if there are visitors and there are from somewhere else, wouldn't the best way to prepare us does to start flying a bunch of like really wacky shit that we have in the air and not explain it. That would be a good way to prepare us. Get us comfortable with seeing things hovering over New Jersey that defy what our understanding of drone capabilities are in terms of the time that they can stay in the air. Some of them were in the air for five hours. But if that's what was the reason to get us ready at backfired, because it freaked people out, people were very nervous about it. Like so our military installations are vulnerable, people were very frightened. That was the other thing. Like Wright Patterson Air Force Base, they had some drones and then they had to shut the base down. And Wright Patterson is like Ground Zero for all of that project. A new book that Roswell went there. The second crash. What's the second crash? The second crash was some miles north and west of there. And you'll hear Dodie talk about it. And that's where other pilots were recovered. I think the total of five of us. The EBEs. The EBEs. And according to Dodie and others, one of the EBEs was stayed with the government, I think in Los Alamos, for five years in 1952, there was Eba Juan or whatever. He likes strawberry ice cream. Who doesn't? Who doesn't, right? I'd be the first thing I do if I went to Planet Surpose. What's the ice cream like here? Well, just the idea that they would eat like we eat seems crazy. And then also they could breathe our air. Like, what are the odds of that? You know, the theories are, you know, we never see alien shit or whatever. But there's always rebuttal is that, you know, they have a metabolism that absorbs nutrients and their waste is recycled and all of that stuff. Oh, I sent this to someone. Well, they do seem genderless. Genderless, giant heads. You know, I always say that the archetype, like the the grace, like close encounter grace, if you go back to like Neanderthals and then you go back to like Australia, Pythagas covered in hair, heavily muscled. And then you go to like the average dude who plays Call of Duty. You know, like what do we do with like all the day? It's fine. It's great game. But you know, I'm saying it's like people become like these frail, muscleless things and then your head keeps getting bigger and bigger as the mind evolves. And then human capabilities increase in terms of like our ability to communicate, telepathically, all these different, they no need for mouth noises anymore. So your mouth shrivels up because it's a little slit. And why the eyes are so big and black because you're evolved underground. Oh, I thought it was like sunglasses built in. Well, it could be the same. Like that's what I thought. I'm like, well, that looks like sunglasses. Right. Like you're going to protect your eyeballs. If like your atmosphere is far brighter and, you know, you have to be able to see things. I think that was there was one retrieval story that that had that like one of the black eyes was half open that they thought it might have been something that would go a little shield like a shield. My adds a legit recovery story. I can't remember it offhand. Like camels have a weird shield over their eyes for sandstorms. Right. Yeah, like they have like an eyelid, a clear eyelid that covers over their eyes. That's like they can like go through sandstorms and not get blinded. You know, it's an interesting point that you brought up about Neanderthals is a lot of people don't know that just just about 50,000 years ago Neanderthals had basically an empire over over all of Europe and hundreds of thousands of years. Hundreds of thousands of years and then suddenly boom. They're defeated by frail, weak, careless humans, out of caves. And it's attributed to we figured out a bone arrow, you know, we could harass from a distance, projectile weapons. And that's how we defeated this vast empire of Neanderthals who were not stupid. You know, who were bigger brains than ours. Bigger brains than ours. They had art, culture, music. They trained in warfare. They had organized warfare. I mean, can you imagine staring down the barrel of a division of organized Neanderthals coming at you? Right. Like essentially super athletes. Yes. With chimpanzee like strength. Right. And speed. Yeah. And intelligence. And we came out of the caves and defeated them. Okay. And eyes so large that they think their eyes might have been, they might have been able to see nocturnally. Yeah. I love that episode. You guys did on Neanderthals. You debunked it at the end. But the idea that they were like more ape-like than they were human. They looked like a monster. Dark monsters. Dark skin. Yeah. Yeah. That was a cool episode. They're mostly debunked. But yeah. But I mean, there probably was some hunting of humans. For sure. And when you're dealing with something that's a far superior physical specimen. Yeah. When much denser bones. Sure. Much stronger than us. And when we know that we have some of their DNA in us. And it's, you know, when you hear, oh, we interbred with them. And it's not precisely how it went down most likely. It's most likely the women were carried away. That's how the interbreeding happened. You like, uh huh. You like, or horny men. That's some lonely Neanderthal lady. Some dudes like a big lady. Yeah. There's no shame in it. Yeah. Okay. Sick one. Maybe just some fucking warrior children. It's just want to be caught. Someone's just got dense bones. You know, I'll look up for a lady with a dense head. Let's have a dense baby. Yeah. What are their fucking language sound like? What are they? It's like, we used to think of them as being really stupid. And until they realized that their brain mass is actually larger than ours. And they were capable of language and all these different things. Like, OK. How did we beat them? I don't know. That is a puzzle. They, you know, the answer is projectiles. Well, it kind of makes sense. I mean, if we were the only ones to figure out bows and arrows and adult idols and all that kind of stuff, it would work. It would work. Yeah. Especially we organized, you know. But you could still overwhelm how, you know, get overwhelming few archers with just, we would just throw bodies at it. Mm hmm. More fairs have been fought like that for humans forever. Maybe their language is too crude to allow for that kind of communication. Like to strategize. And you know what I'm saying? Like maybe their language is like very crude, normal day to day stuff. I'm hungry. I want to fuck like right. Kill these people. It was not complicated enough to say like we had an issue here. Right. Here's the issue. We got to get around them from the back end. You know, you guys get a distract from the front. And this is what we'll do. You know, I mean, that's the only thing that makes sense. Yeah. But it still doesn't make complete sense to me. Why were their brains bigger than ours? That's the weird one. Like we associate larger brains with more complex thinking. So why would what we think of as the most brutish version of human beings? I don't know. But don't, Neanderthal brains, even though they were larger, had fewer convolutions. So are we really? Do we know that? That's part of my research, which, you know, most of it's bullshit. But that's what I read. A large brain, but not as powerful. But interesting. Well, so maybe the large brain was attributable to physical capability. Just the fact that you can produce music tells me a lot so much about your brain. And they produce music. They produce music. How do I know that? We found relics and artifacts of it. Of musical instruments. Instruments and cave writing and all that stuff. You know, they used needles and thread to make clothing. Really? Wow. Yeah, very strange that we beat them. That's in the Neanderthal tool. Blue? Blue? Blue. Some sort of flute. Wow, a bone flute. Made with the bone of your defeated enemy. Some dude you ate. Mm-hmm. A bit of flute out of his shin. Oh, that death whistle back then too. That's sort of musical. Oh, yeah. That's not the same. That's take death. That's a scary one. Yeah. I'm on the show in 2019 and COVID started right afterwards. That's the sum of the demons. Yeah. Do you remember that? January 2020. Oh, okay. Just like weeks before. Weeks before the lockdown. COVID was already here. Why haven't been closer? I think COVID was already here by then. It's like with the anti-gravity. Why can't we cooperate with the Chinese? Yeah. Nope. No. No. No. No. No. We know how to do that. To me, how many different versions of human beings existed? There's the Hobbit people, the island of Flores. Right. That's a foul moment for the florians. It's like a narcissist, whatever it is. Yeah. The three-foot tall little furry creatures that they think had tools and work clothing and all that jazz. Yeah. There's even the different branches, like Chrome Agdon, is not really from our branch. Really? Yeah, we branch from a different branch. So that's a little bit of a dinosaur. That is that is it, right? And then what are the big head people that they just found recently? This is like super recent. Like there was an article that was made in December of 2024 about this other new branch of the human species that had much larger heads than ours. And they think it was like his really thick, muscular, like heavy human being. What is it called again? You're jewelry. You're jewelry. Yeah. Big head people. Which, yeah. So they disappeared around the same time as the air and it's all 50,000 years ago. Have you seen the images of what the reconstruction? Go to some of the drawings of what these people look like. They look fucking insane. Were they taller? I do not know. I don't know how tall they were, but they look fucking cool as shit. Yeah. There was a good jack on one. Yeah, that's the one I want. That's one, but that's not the one we were looking at. We were looking at one that theorized that it was completely covered in hair. Interesting. Yeah. So this is a very recent discovery. So how many, this is the thing. I think something like 90% of the species that have existed, we don't have fossils for. But that, well, I mean, 99% of species ever existed are gone. Right. But fossils are very difficult to happen because it has to happen in a mudslide, somehow the body has to be preserved. It's mineralized. Right. I don't know how many dinosaurs, the cleat fossils. We have like a T-Rex. I don't even think we have a complete one yet. But one or two billion T-Rexes lived and died on the planet. We have a couple of skeletons. Right. It's brilliant. Right. Yeah. And it just makes you wonder when they're finding things like this in 2024, how many are yet to be discovered? I mean, how much of the grounds surface has really been excavated to a very high level. Right. Yeah. Very little. And it's very difficult to even dig there. I mean, what's happening in Turkey is a shame with go backly tepi, just paving over it and planting orchards on top of it. They've taken down the orchards. They did. They did. Yeah. The olive trees, the problem with that was that, and this is Jimmy Corsetti had talked about this long ago, that the issue with them doing this is the roots you're going to destroy the artifacts below. And they're like, no, no, no, no, it won't. And then turns out, actually it is. And so they had to pull them. And so they pulled the olive trees. Well, they planted them purposely over the area, which is like, I'm glad Corsetti's out there. I like him and I know him pretty well. That's great. The Turkish government, I think, has banned him. And he's trying to get him in trouble here. He's trying to get him sanctioned. Sankton. How do you sanction the guy off YouTube? I, for what? Look, when CNN was going after you and they were trying to get Spotify to cancel you, creators like me who go against mainstream were very nervous. Because YouTube just pulled my show. I'm kind of fucked. Right. So it's like, if they could take down Joe, we're done. But they spotify with a lot of respect, hung fast. Yeah, we've talked about that. If I wasn't on Spotify, and I was only on YouTube at the time, I might have been fucked. Because they were taking people down for actual, real, truthful information. Yes. That was in their eyes mal information that would cause vaccine hesitancy. Yeah. And still no apologies. No. But as a risky time, to be non-politically correct before it was safe to. Yeah, it was a very dangerous time. And weird, because it's instantly dangerous. It wasn't like that before. Then all of a sudden, anything you'd say could get your career ruined. And again, everybody turned out to be right. Everybody was right. That mass don't work. Everybody was right. That the vaccine didn't stop. The infection didn't stop. Wasn't a vaccine. It wasn't a vaccine. It has a bunch of side effects. The pangolin is nonsense. I mean, we knew that all of this, it was just intuitive. The lab leak theory was racist. It was racist. Oh, my goodness. The R word did you try it? Anything. They tried anything they could to silence any opposition. Wow. You were going to say something, do you mind? You were going to say you got a clear question, I think. I forgot we steamed over it. But we're talking about the weirdness of that time of how dangerous it was. It was like real touching go. It was real weird. There was a lot of forces that were trying to get me removed. Because I was talking to people that they were deeming quacks. One of them, which is Robert Malone, who has nine patents on the creation of mRNA vaccine technology. These are rock-solid credentials these people had. They weren't cooks like J. Bhattacharya. All these people are Stanford, MIT, Harvard. All these, all the people from the Great Barrington Declaration, there's legitimate researchers and scientists that didn't agree with the narrative. And they were getting the removed from Twitter. And they had awards through their careers. Highly revered and respected. And then suddenly no. It didn't matter because these people, unfortunately, had a conscience. And they were saying, well, this is not what I know. I am an actual expert. And I do not think that the information they're giving out is correct. So I'm going to speak my mind. And then there was also a concerted effort by Fauci and his group to go after these people and to attack these people publicly. Yes. And when it was very early on, I forget even what paper I had released in some paper criticizing a lot of this and locked down. My dojo was closed down and was trying to fight with masks on. So I was angry. And then within weeks of that, it suddenly became politicized. And I was like, now I'm fucked. Now it's a political issue. How is it at this a political issue? Right. But it was. It was politicized. And I don't know why. I don't know why I was all shut down. I think it's all just money. I think the vaccine companies wanted to make as much money as possible. And then anything that contributed to vaccine hesitancy was not for the greater good of public health. It was because the more vaccine hesitancy, the less profit they would have. I think it's real simple. Yeah. I agree. But that's really gross. It is gross. But it's also gross that they would prescribe it for children because it was totally unnecessary. So the only reason why they would prescribe it for children or mandate it for children to get into schools because they wanted to make as much money as possible. And they made insane amount of money. So it did work. It was effective. But boy, it destroyed a lot of credibility. It certainly did. It definitely worked. Where my wife was working, it was a mandatory vaccine situation. But she was working remotely. So didn't really have to get it. But I can see that the narrative was starting to catch with her. And I'm like, honey, hold fast. This is a story. It was a left wing company. And they were just following the narrative. They don't just hold fast and don't get that shot. And she didn't. Yeah, luckily. I know people that did. I know people that have real fucking problems right now. Same. Yeah. Lots. Like they got long COVID suddenly. Yeah. And it's weird that long COVID is something that mostly affects people that have gotten vaccinated. But they want to call it long COVID. They don't want to call it vaccine injury. Nope. The whole thing is very creepy. Because it just shows you if something is very clear and obvious and it's a real disease. And we know the origin of it now. And we know that all this stuff has been done to obscure it. How many other elements of society, how many other stories that are in the news have also been distorted and twisted around in order to promote a very specific narrative? And how effective have they been at doing this? It's not like this is the only time they've ever done this. So COVID was kind of a window into disinformation and about how the government can use these employees manipulation and using these tactics of humiliation, humiliating, these established scientists, ruining their careers, attacking their credentials. And what other things have they used these on? What other geopolitical aspirations have they masked in all this bullshit? The whole thing is just like it's very disconcerting to find out that the people that have been running the country are super comfortable with lying. Here's the good news is the irony of COVID is the forces that were forcing us to be locked down and stay home, gave rise to independent creators and journalists and independent thinkers and folks like you. And because of their forcing the lockdowns, they destroyed their own industry. Yeah. And there's no going back. I mean, I haven't watched MSNBC or Fox News in years. And you turn it on. It's like, oh, this is just, I hear the same stuff from the left and the right. I just hear the same stuff. I get my news from YouTube from all different sources. And that's what I want. And they destroyed their own industry. Yeah. And it's interesting to see, what is it going to look like, five, 10 years from now? Because five, 10 years ago, 10 years ago, you never would have imagined the CNN would lose all its credibility. No, that way we watched, as it's storm on there. Everything. Always. When you wanted to get the news. And it was always also CNN was thought of being as this like sort of nonpartisan environment for the news. So it just showed you what the news was. And then somewhere along the line, it became very editorialized, very opinion based, and very, you know, these people's handling you to do your own research. Do not do your own research. Like, imagine saying don't read. Right. Don't read. You're not smart enough. AJ. Right. You think you can go read. Right. And more information. You're not smart enough to observe information. Leave that to the experts. Don't listen to Rogan. He takes horse pills. Got that from his doctor. You know, what's also calling it horse, do you wear my way so stupid? Because everybody knows that's used on humans. Oh, I've remectans in my cabinet. But it's just a simple Google search would tell you that something's wrong. That's required medication for the form service. Yeah. So it's one of those things where you wonder after something like that has been having, well, this seems like a playbook they're really comfortable with using. How many other things do they use this on? Like what other aspects of society are just complete horseshit? When did it really start? Right. You know, probably during the 40s. Maybe even before, because if you read wars or racket by smelly butler, that was 33. General Butler, yeah, the business plot. General. Yeah. Yeah, he was a very, very honest guy. Yeah. Yeah, if you guys don't know the business plots worth looking into, that was that they tried to recruit him over throughout the government. Yeah. Yeah. Because he had all the troops at his disposal. Yeah, that was wild. They were going to have a coup. I think we're going to have that in the States. Yeah. And nobody has answered for that. And that's the JP Morgan's manual set. So this kind of thinking has been going on forever. And then this also kind of gatekeeping of information, like hiding the truth from people in order to preserve narratives, in order to preserve power and authority. Well, let's connect. Let's go back to Butler for a quick second. You've got Tesla who gets funded by JP Morgan to create wireless technology. But Tesla gets a little ambitious and says, I'm going to do wireless communication. But I'm going to take you $150,000. I'm going to do wireless energy. And we'll do free energy around the world. And Morgan's like, how do you put a meter on that? Tesla's like, what do you mean? This propel mankind forward. Morgan pulls his funding, tells everyone in the investment class this guy's a cook. And if you invest with him, you don't do business. Me, a few years later, Wardencliff Tower gets torn down, Tesla dies in poverty. Yeah. And where are those 20 boxes? Yeah. And why was the government so quick to respond to that crime scene? Yeah, they show that with that guy's house quick. Yeah. They're going to call that information. I wonder what they got from that. Uncle Uncle John Trump there. Yeah. Wasn't going to do that. Right. What did they get in those boxes? Donald Trump's uncle reviewed Tesla's death ray, secrets and found mysterious royal letters. I think that what he looks like at Trump, doesn't he? He kind of does. That's a Trump, but look at you. If you didn't do the comb over. Wasn't he working at a right Patterson as well? Was he? For this? Don, don, don, don. Right Patterson is a weird place. Like they think that that's where one of them is. Yes. Yeah. You know the Nixon story with Jackie Gleason. I know that Gleason was into UFOs. Tell the story. The story is Gleason got into UFOs because him and Nixon were drinking one day. And Nixon was like, oh, he's some shit. I wish I was drinking with that. He went to him. And then he takes him, he flies him out to wherever the base is, and shows him a crashed UFO and these bodies that they have in freezers. Anyways, you're right, Patterson? I do not know. I do not know. I don't know if Jackie Gleason ever said. The story came from Gleason's wife. And it was an article in some sort of a magazine. But then there's the house that Gleason built in an upstate New York that looked like a UFO. Like Gleason built a home. Yeah, that was like a disk. I'm going to look into this. It's such a good story. I wonder where they went. I wonder where they would have been in a homestead air force base. That might be in Florida. In 73, I think that's where they were when they were playing golf. And they were born. Was reportedly shown in bomb bodies of four alien beings. Dontontontont. So Nixon exposes UFOs to his civilian and then does not go well for Richard Nixon after that. Well, I think what went badly for Richard Nixon was that Richard Nixon was inquiring as to who killed JFK. And he said he thought he knew. And he was kind of talking about it publicly. And they're like, OK. And they had already brought in Gerald Ford, kicked out Spiro Agnew. They got rid of him. Gerald Ford, who was also in the Warren Commission Report. That's right. And then all of a sudden, Nixon and Watergate happens. Nixon, the most popular president of all time. And it turns out that Bob Woodward was actually an intelligence agent. And this is his first project ever. Operation Mockingbird. And then the people that were involved in the break in all FBI. You've got you Gordon Liddy. Yeah, the whole thing's a coup. Hall was a coup. Hall was a coup. And we're all parroting. You know, Nixon was a crook. That guy was a crook. He was this or that. Like they did a great job. The cytop was wonderful. I'm a patsy. Yeah. They stayed over and over. Yeah. It's all really, really interesting stuff. But it's just what it boils down to with stuff like your show. Like how much of it is how much is real? And when you have these mysteries, one of the amazing things about mysteries is you're never going to run out of topics. No. There's so many of these things. And as long as there's a US government, I'm good. So as the CIA exists, they're always going to be hiding something. But the fun ones are always the alien ones. They're the most fun ones. The alien ones and the ancient civilization ones. Like what do you think when you go over the Bob Lazar story? Like what do you, how much of you cries bullshit? How much of you's like, hmm. I'm more on the hmm side. I think he's the most credible whistleblower because he didn't profit. Didn't profit. And they I mean, they prosecuted him for running a prostitution ring. Which maybe he was. I think he was. He pled down to panoring. But they also raided him during the German Corbel documentary. While they're filming the documentary, the FBI raided his facility. And they said they were looking for something. And supposedly he has a version or a sample of stable element 115. What? That's supposedly. Yeah. And that's supposedly what they were looking for. Of course. They'd gotten that from the lab. And when he was at S4, and then he had managed to smuggle out a stable chunk of this element 115. And there was a video that George Nap had from back in the 80s where Lazar was demonstrating how this stuff bends light and what it does like has weird effects. How soon after that raid was 115 is now called Moscow VM. How soon after that raid was 115 synthesized? I think we synthesized it Russia. It was synthesized by a particle collider. And so when they got it is a very temporary, quickly dissolving form. But they proved its existence. And supposedly what Lazar is saying, wherever these beings are from, they obviously have a completely different environment. And they have a stable version of this element. Yep. And this element is crucial to this gravity propulsion system. It's a part of this reactor. It's bombarded with radiation, produces this gravity field, allows you to just slingshot through the universe. I don't know. Are they working to stabilize it? You know, I don't know what's going on behind the scenes. Why would they raid Bob Lazar? That's the spectrum of believability again. Exactly. Here's a guy who's being attacked and tormented. And the middle of filming the documentary. I mean, I just had my first IRS audit. I don't know how you're doing. Oh, what'd you do? I didn't do anything. I don't work in weed anymore. What do you think they were auditing for you for? What when you go over all your episodes? I'm sure it's just coincidence. What do you think, what do you think are the most problematic? Most problematic for me are probably the CIA ones. What do you think are the most problematic? Most problematic for me are probably the CIA ones. The one I did that ended with the ancient orange kind of expose was kind of a dangerous one. It was the dark history of DARPA and all the bad stuff that DARPA has done since it's founding. It's done some horrible horrible horrible stuff. And that was an episode I was afraid to release. There's been a couple of those. MK Ultra is kind of afraid to release because I named names a scary one was how Lyme disease might have been a lab leak. Yeah, that's a weird one. That's a Bobby Kennedy fully believes that. That was Eric trial was like the chief Nazi bio warfare specialist that was brought here about Operation Paperclip and we do know that there have been some studies done where they were trying to devise diseases that they could aerial spray, whether it's through bugs or something onto a population, overwhelm their medical system so they'd be easier to defeat. That's the document. The entire enemy super weak, everybody's weak over there and then also documented is some ticks got out. Don't. Don't. Don't. Don't. Don't. Don't. Don't. Hold their fucking dueling scars on their faces. Mm hmm. Scary looking dudes like right out of Indiana Jones. Right. SS on the shoulder. And that's what was a part of NASA that was running NASA. Like Warner Von Braun was an actual Nazi and he was the head of NASA. And SS Nazi. Yeah. So the V1 rocket program killed 3,000 people in London but killed 30,000 Jewish slaves building the rocket. You know, wait, 10 times more people died building the thing. And if you didn't work hard enough in the rocket factory, they were just hanging you for the rafters. But Von Braun said he didn't know anything about it. And all of his teams said, we didn't know anything about it. Okay. Well, that's convenient. Well, every time I bring up someone who's from there, I just remind everybody, these are Nazis, these are liars, these are bad dudes. That doesn't mean, you know, they're not, they didn't do amazing things for America because you could do both. Yeah. That's what's weird. The rocket eventually becomes Saturn 5 which takes us to the moon, allegedly. I love it. I love you. That's the allegedly. Yeah. That's my favorite one. Same. Did you ever see the episode I did with Bartzabrell? Yes. And I talked to Bart from time to time. Boy, he's all in. All in for decades. Eventually I'm going to do a conversation podcast and he'll be one of the first guys I have on. I had dinner with Bartzabrell in like the year 2000, 2003 or something. like that. I had dinner with him in Los Angeles. I had seen a funny thing happen on the way to the moon. Which what year was that? Great documentary. What year was a funny thing happen on the way to the moon release? So it was like shortly thereafter. Somehow I do not even remember how I got connected with him. But we had dinner in Los Angeles with this Italian restaurant. I sat down with them. 2001. 2001. Yeah. So it was probably around 2003 that Bart and I had dinner. 22 years later I had them on the podcast. I need to let it go. Oh yeah. He emails me and I'm like Bart, I'll have you on. I'm just still building this studio. Well, he's so all in on this. And the more you talked to him, the more you go. God damn it. He might be right. I debunk a lot of his claims. Which one? Not all of them. You know, like the parallel shadows and how there shouldn't shadow on the moon should be completely black. But that's not really true. And shadows. Well, things are reflective and the surface are reflective. That's part of the issue. But the parallel shadows are fucking weird. Like you could find a reason why these intersecting shadows could exist. But it also could be more than one source of light. Sure. There's more. There's a lot of weirdness to it. And shadows are not parallel. They don't work that way. Shadows disappear to the horizon. Right. You know, there are no parallel shadows. Right. Completely different directions is very odd. It's odd. It's very odd. That's not nearly as odd as, I mean, there's so many different things. You know, there's so many things. Like how goofy it looks when that craft lifts off from the moon and takes off at its pace. It's wobbling around like it's on a fucking string. It's like it's on a string and, you know, it's so fake. The camera tracks it nicely. It's pan's. But it's from where? From from Ersten. From Houston with what seven second delay or whatever. How about the fact that Nixon is on the phone with them in real time? In real time. Like, you know, God did lay. It would be with 1969 technology communicating. Like one of the reasons why Gus Grisham, you know, the big theory is that crushed Grisham was murdered because he wasn't willing to go along with it. Gus Grisham hung a lemon on the lunar module because he wasn't able to communicate with the tower from Earth. The communication system wasn't working. And he's like, this is a fucking lemon. And he puts a lemon on a coat hanger and hangs it on the thing. And then, well, let's go back and look at the original films and we've learned something. Oh, they don't have them anymore. Gone. They're gone. They don't know. So the telemetry data, that's really important. Gone. The episode I did on the moon, which is a fun one, I even have a NASA scientist saying we don't know how to redo the technology. We just lost it. Yeah. Didn't write anything down or nothing. And then there's the reality of the Van Allen radiation belts. That's true. That could be explained scientifically. Can it? The radiation is high particles, high voltage, all that, but they're spread wide apart. So you just got to go really fast through them. But it took hours to get through it. It did. But they still were moving fast or we kill everybody. Or we kill everybody. That's what we see. Nobody but the Apollo astronauts ever got through that. What I would say is they never even flew a chicken through that shit and had it come back alive. No. And they're just going to try it out with people. Like the dog did not survive when they threw like up there. Well, how about Operation Starfish Prime? Were they shot a nuke into there to try to blow a hole through it and it wound up making it more radioactive? Of course. They thought they were going to blow a hole. Right. And the Van Allen radiation belts so you just pop through that hole. Right. Thanks to that, we've got the South Atlantic anomaly where there's just no protection anymore. We appreciate all that. They bring out the power and Hawaii. Right. Yeah, they fucked up the grid. They were detonating nukes in space. Really crazy. People in the 1950s and 60s were buck wild. They were. They were just, they had so much power. There was no internet. There was no oversight. And they were doing things. So like we're completely new, like nuclear bombs. And they're like, let's see if it does this. Not an timer. They didn't know it was going to happen. They had more than 0% possibility that it was going to cause a chain reaction that would destroy the entire environment of the earth. Yes. They were like, let's see. Well, we got to try it. The only one way to know. Mm hmm. Right. And something like bikini atoll, which I think was Castle Bravo, was like three times more powerful than they thought. You know, it's like we're going for 10 kilotons. But we got 30. Dude, you got to carry the one. Be careful. Be careful. Just be careful. I don't even know why we messed with it. Yeah. It's well, it's too late. Too late. The genies out of the bottle. So if you had a bet, if you had $100,000 and you can get a bet, we went to the moon, we didn't go to the moon. Well, money's not enough. But gun to the head. Gun to the head. We went to the moon without people. Well, I would, that's what I would go with. But let me preface by saying, on my head, I'm like a bobblehead. I go back and forth and I can be convinced one way or the other is a very complicated issue. Like I can be convinced both ways. There's also the weird footage that looks like they're on wires, whether it's pulled up when they fall down. You could see the reflections. Uh huh. Yeah. Yeah. I get into weird. It's a good episode. I cover, cover Bart. Buzz Aldrin does that a throw shot. Okay, I'm going to, I'm going to get into it. Full shoulders. But it's also the thing is that like every other technology from 1969 is cheaper, easier and faster to reproduce today, except the moon landing. Right. That no one has ever done it again. No one has ever even been to not human beings have ever even been a deep space. I eat, I don't know why. You know, if we could 3D print anything, why don't we send the 3D printer up into orbit? And then every time Elon launches a starlink, just bring some substrate, bring some wire and just deliver it there. Every time, because you're going to do 10,000 of them, just bring some wire, bring some wire, bring some aluminum and we can just build this stuff in orbit. We don't have to worry about escaping gravity. Just build stuff up 3D print stuff in orbit. Hmm. It sounds a little more complicated than you're making it out to be, but I see what you're saying. You know, the film footage, the lost footage is just a Braille had is also very compelling where it looks like they're filming the moon from, you know, 30,000 miles out. But then when they pull the covers off the windows, it shows you they're actually in near Earth orbit. It fills up the whole window and they even say in that film, we've got the camera right up against the window, which no one can get in between it. But then someone walks in and walks by and then you see what looks like a piece of elastic, a wall, and then everything opens up. Uh huh. That's a hard one to explain. It is. And not for public display. Not for the, right. Yeah. Exactly right. And also the, the, why would you ever delete all of the original film? What, why would you destroy the original film? Why would they lose the telemetry data? And we don't even have a direct feed because they broadcast the feed on a wall and then pointed to TV camera at the wall. Yeah. And that's what we see. That's why it looks so shitty on television in 1969. Cause the network's really like, hey, can we get the live feed and that's like, you know, you need that. It's so weird. It's weird. It's a weird one. It's also just weird that we keep saying we're going to go back and we still never even get out of Earth's gravity or never even got our Earth's atmosphere. Uh huh. Earth's orbit, brother. As soon as the Chinese start mining like helium to or whatever, we'll get, we'll get there. People always say, oh, well, there's photographs of the lunar land or on the moon. You can see it. Like, how'd they get that buggy up there? Had they piece that buggy together? Yeah. A tiny ass fucking lunar module. Cause you can't see the tracks up there. If you believe the stuff. What does that mean? How easy is there's video of me selling Kentucky Fried Chicken? Oh, I gotta look that up. There's like, you know what I'm saying? I gotta write that down. Might not even mean Kentucky Fried Chicken, but it's like, there's AI video of me hawking all kinds of stuff that I've never even seen. I show up in my feed and I'm like, oh, he's selling chicken. And it's all fake. But that is easy to fake. Cause it's blurry, blurry nonsense photos. In my episode on the Face on Mars, I show exactly how NASA copy and pasted cloud formations. You literally see it's the same cloud formations and then you see the Mars photos. They copied pasted chunks on Mars. They did that. Like, I didn't make that up. I just... What do you mean by that? You've got this Martian rock face. Sidonia. Sidonia is where the face was and the alleged city and all that's square. And the square is crazy. And square. But that's a recent one that we've been seeing. Yep. That one's nuts. Sidonia was one of the original landing places and they changed it at the last minute. Why? I will land there and go to the face. Let's see, because if you don't know the story about the face on Mars, the first image is it does look like a face and then suddenly the image has got blurrier and then it was just kind of a plateau. It was, you know, paradolia. It wasn't really a face. Well, then land there. Drive, drive, you know, sejone or over there, whatever. Let's just look. What's crazy is that the face is right down the street from the square. Yes. The square, to me, is way more compelling than the face. Because if the second image is more clear and it really is just... How do you say that word again? Paradolia. Paradolia. That's really what it is. Because the first one's like real blurry and shitty and it's from the 70s. True. But this square is nuts. Right. It looks geometrical. Yeah. Right angles. And us, an actual square or at least similar to a square. It looks like a structure made out of right angles and it's on the fucking moon. I showed it to Elon Musk and I was like, oh, for instance, we should pop it up and then look around. We should. I mean, they're finally admitting that Mars used to have an atmosphere and oceans, they're finally frozen water on Mars. Yeah. Which is like, okay. Well, if we go back millions and millions of years, what did it look like? What was going on there? Remember they sent Joe McMannigal to remote view back on Mars. But what do you say? He said he saw giant tall beings there in a very advanced society. And Joe McMannigal, part of the project, Stargate remote viewer. So he goes into his thing and he's drawn the aliens and the city's and all that. But he didn't know where he was looking. They, you know, they wouldn't tell you at first. And then he's done. He comes out of his trance, whatever opens the envelope and it says Mars with coordinates one million BC or something. He said he saw stuff and Stargate again, Ingos Swan saw all kinds of stuff on the far side of the moon, which I don't see. I don't hear covered a lot with Ingos, but he remote viewed the moon because he always wanted to do more stuff. He's like, I don't want to look at a bridge. I'm going to go to the moon. He said he saw structures on the far side of the moon that sound a lot like Carl Wolf disclosed in 2001. What did he disclose? Carl Wolf, Air Force Airman, he's basically a technician. Fix, think of a Xerox repairman. He has to fix some imaging equipment for NASA slash DoD. It's images from the moon surveyor. So he goes in. It's a dark room. The guy's working there. The guy's like, Carl, look at this. Pictures is the dark side of the moon. He sees domes, towers, roads, all kinds of stuff. And he can't believe it. And Carl goes home and he's told his wife, I can't wait to see this on the news. This is crazy what we found. Like this is a civilization on the moon. And it just goes away. And Carl Wolf said he saw that. If you... Remote viewing. No, photographs. He saw photographs of it. He saw photographs of it. He saw photographs. Who took the photographs? Who's the moon surveyor satellite? That takes pictures all the time. It's like we have images. We have stuff around the moon. I don't know why there's no webcam. You know, I don't know why we can't just tap into the end. And they're up there. They're there. They're there. Just send a signal back. I read that they just got like 5G working. They send us a signal. Put a webcam on the ISS. Let us tune in. So Carl Wolf saw that stuff. In goes Swan saw the same things. But he saw actual beams there. And he said they were able to sense his consciousness. And he like snapped out of it. He said aliens are on the far side of the moon. And they are not our friends. So very interesting story. In goes Swan, very interesting cat. So what took these photographs? The moon surveyor, lunar surveyor. Would satellite... None of that stuff's ever been released? No, they released a lot of images from the far side. But they released what they released. That's why we know there's fewer impacts on the far side. Because we've seen those images. But there's no images of these domes or whatever. No, no. I've seen some that maybe are faked. That look pretty compelling. I forget what episode I just showed them in. But when I found them, I was mind blowing. And I can't find them again for some reason. I wanted them for another episode. I can't find the photos. Which is always suspicious to me. It's like suddenly the thing is blurry off of Malibu. You just can't find this stuff. But my gut tells me something's going on up there. Someone's aware that I'm dying to know what it is. Would be unbelievable if Mars was the first planet that had life before Earth was capable of supporting life. It reached a very high level of sophistication and then started seeding Earth. Right. Penzpermia theory. Yeah. I believe we have at least one rock from Mars that just landed here. I think we have one of those. So for maybe a giant impact or something through some of Mars over here. Don't, don't, don't. But the idea I think is that their atmosphere was deteriorating or that they were getting further and further from the Sun. The magnetic field was weakening. Strips away the atmosphere. And so this would be the thing. If you were a super advanced civilization, the race would be, get so advanced that you could leave your planet. Yes. And that's the only way you're going to survive because eventually your planet is going to move over millions of years further and further away from the Sun, not able to inhabit life anymore. Right. So maybe send your DNA or whatever to the third rock or I'm knocking. Or I'm knocking. That's the good one. Yeah. They show up everywhere. That's the ultimate one. And it's the big one that the Anunnaki is the big one. Yeah. That's a good one. That's that's one that makes you go home. Because it shows up everywhere. It shows up in the Bible. It shows up in the Mahaburata. It shows up in ancient Chinese literature. Shows up everywhere. Not always called the Anunnaki, but the Anunnaki and then they have their servile species that could be the Nephilim, could be the giants. And then they take these primitive humans, give them just enough intelligence to mine, to mine the gold as part of the lore. Yeah. It's a good one. Oh, it's the best one. It's the best one because when you do look at ancient Samir and you look at their detailed map of the solar system, you're like, what the fuck is that? Like how did they figure that out? Right. You're talking about 6,000 years ago. They had depictions of the planets. All in the proper air. They weren't the exact right size, but like the bigger ones were in the place where the bigger ones would be, the smaller ones in the place where smaller ones would be, it was representative. And the sun looks like a sun. Like it's got the rays around showing that this is the center of the solar system. Right. And this is two, how many thousands of years before Connecticut's right? Yeah. Didn't even know. Something I don't think doesn't get enough attention is when these ancient cultures are obsessed with equinoxes. A lot of people think equinoxes when day and night are the same, but that's not what that is. That when day and night are the same is called the equilocks and it's different for everybody on earth, depending where you are. And equinoxes is when the sun is over the center of the earth's equator. How did you know there was an equator? So Stonehenge is aligned to the equinoxes. How did you know there was an equator? And how was the pyramid, the sizes are directly divisible to a number, like 43,200, that could be factored in to calculate the circumference of the earth. So you can calculate the equinox. How did they do that? Right. And how was it pointed to true north-south, east and west? How did they do that? Why does it mirror the stars of the Orion belt? But mirrors them 30,000 years ago because of procession. Right. So I'm in the camp that the Egyptians found the pyramids, not built them. But I'm glad Zah, he's not here. Well, that would get you to the ancient civilization theory. But when you're looking at an ancient civilization that is as complex as Egypt and then you factor in the Anunnaki story and all these other things, you got to think, why were the Egyptians so advanced? Like, where did they learn this from? Christopher Dunn has the answer. The power plant? Power plant. Yeah. So you think? You know, it's one of my favorite episodes because I, you know, you can either watch my stupid thing with the fish or the better thing is to just buy Chris's books and re-enerated the science. Don't be a shape. The next one's going to have taxes are fair. For people don't know if you haven't watched the show, hecklefish talks shit from the aquarium during the adventure. It's really a funny little, it makes the show fun. Because it's like shows you're not totally taking it seriously. You have a talking fish, you talk shit to you the entire time. What I'm trying to do is take weird topics, complex topics, break them down, make them accessible to everybody, have a good time, get you thinking on your own. If I get things wrong, that's okay. As long as you go out and just get interested in stuff. That's what I'm trying to do. Have fun and get you interested. Have you been looking at all under the structures underneath the pyramid? Yes, I'm skeptical of that research. Because if you look at the imaging, I don't see the coils or any of that stuff. I don't see it. They also said they found the tomb of nefertiti. No, the tomb of Osiris. It just looked like splotches on radar. And they also haven't released any of that information to the scientific community. Nothing's peer reviewed. But when it first hit the news, I was like, that supports the power plant theory, the coils and all that. But I have a feeling that their research will be debunked. Hope I'm wrong. Really? Well, they released more of it. And because they released more of it, the conversation that Graham Hancock and Brian Murrow-Rescu had with them, where they were initially skeptical as well, they've come around more to thinking that these guys might be on something. Because they've done this multiple times now with multiple scans. They keep getting the same results. And it does kind of look like coils. When you look at the images, first of all, the pillars. The fact these pillars are uniform. And then the fact that the structure goes down two kilometers into the earth. Yeah. Like maybe people 4,500 years ago were so motivated. Zali said that it's like, this is the project of the entire country, the pride of the country. Maybe. Maybe. But two kilometers down. But we're starting to get real crazy. I mean, if you look at the like the temp, the kufu peer meds, perfect. And then you look at the pyramids that were built later that we know were Egyptian built. And it's like the T-Moo version. It's like you're not even, it's like a mess. It's just a pile of rocks. Where the great pyramid is precise. And there's no reasons for these different chambers. And the chemical residue, why? And why are there copper rods going down into the aquifer, which is exactly the technology test that was using a war and cliff tower, the same exact technology? Why? You know, there's hydrochloric acid. We have evidence of that. And we've got the zinc sulfide and it creates hydrogen atoms that go up the gallery. And then there's an opening that's exactly the right wavelength for hydrogen to flow through. And it resonates at 440 Hertz and it makes an F sharp cord. And you've got the, it's tuned inside the Kings chamber to exactly that cord. Or, you know, maybe it's just a place for a dead guy. You know, why use rose quartz, which is so highly, you know, rose granite is so dense with quartz. It's very rare, but it creates a lot of piezoelectricity when you fly pressure to it. And hydrogen could do that if you, if you pumped it through the Kings chamber. It's so fascinating to me that the gatekeepers are so, they're so reluctant to even consider any possibility that it might have been something other than what they've initially asserted. It's frustrating, but it ruins their career and their reputation. It's like everything you said was wrong. Over time, I have a buddy who just went to Egypt and he hired these two archaeologists to take them on a tour. And both of them were saying there is no way the original, the actual mainstream story is accurate. Like there's no way. Like this stuff is beyond. And then as he was like going through it with him, he said he was just fucking blown away. He said, I haven't been, but he said you can look at it all day on television and your laptop. When you go there, you're just like, what the fuck? I'd love to see it. Yeah, we should go together. Let's do it. Let's go. Let's go. Zahi wants me to go with him, but I just don't think I could. I think after an hour, I'd be like, dude, I gotta get away from you. Yeah. He'll ruin everything. I think that's over this. This is my discovery. Yeah, I just didn't even mention the limestone from tour. Did even touch on it. What's the significance of that? It's a great insulator of electricity. It's also mine from very far away. We know it was definitely there. Herodotus talked about the limestone pyramids that could be seen from the mountains of Arabia. So Herodotus, they were still there. We know that the limestone facing was there because a lot of it was looted after a couple of earthquakes. They built bridges out of it. You can go touch it. It's there. But it didn't talk about it. But if the pyramid power plant theory is true, then you use limestone as an insulator. Inside, you've got the granite, which creates this piezo electricity. Then you've got this other limestone in between that kind of keeps everything modulated. So if it was a power plant, what was it powering and how was it doing that? That's the big problem I have. So if Tesla wanted to project this energy into the ionosphere, and then everyone could tap into it with some type of receiver. Like a radio. But there's no evidence I can find of them powering anything. So we can make the argument that maybe if the capstone were gold, this energy could resonate through the center of the pyramid, come up through the golden capstone and then go straight into the ionosphere. And we know that the pyramid will resonate at certain frequencies and amplify it. That's been tested at about 200 meters is the ideal wavelength. But the only other theory is the obelisks at some point where these receivers. But there's no evidence that they powered anything. But maybe they used the energy for something different. I don't know. And if we're looking at the wrong timeline, if we're not really looking at 2,500 BC, if we're looking at 30,000 BC, or something even before that. Which is also a weird thing that Zahi dismissed. He dismissed this idea of the king's list that goes back 30,000 years. Right. Yeah. And he says that just mid-mid. Right. Just mid. Yeah. We know exactly. Also he said it didn't believe in carbon dating, which is like, yeah. That's convenient. That's convenient. Yeah. I did not believe in carbon dating. And what about rocket dating? That is a thing with certain types of rock. Lime snow not so much, but something like IgniUS Rock. You can get a pretty good idea. Yeah. The whole thing is very weird. It's so weird because it's so vast and so spectacular that no matter what you think, no matter what theories you have, you still have to look in. How the fuck? Like it's so nutty that you can't even imagine people making it. Right. Not people as like we consider people today. If a civilization today, if we, let's say, for some reason, no one had ever visited a part of the earth. And then they went to a part of the earth and they saw people with these structures today. We were like, what happened? How did you do this? We would think they were wizards. Wizards. Above a million, 300,000 stones, hundreds of miles through the mountains. You carried the big ones for the inside of the Kings Chamber. You put them up 130 feet up in the air. With a ramp. Yeah. I don't think so. But it's all just if they did, where that technology go? Where that construction knowledge go? Where did their engineering go? Like how were people that advanced that long ago? You know, I like the acoustic levitation theory. It is an interesting one where they use sound vibration to lift heavy objects. You know, we see that occurring throughout history as part of lore. But even in the 1930s, a British, maybe used archeologist, naturalist, went to see Buddhist monks. And using instruments, he watched them levitate heavy objects. And there's film of it. This is all the legend. And when he went back to the UK, they seized the film. But they were using instruments and chanting to levitate these rocks up a cliff face to build whatever they were building. How about that wacky dude in Florida that made the coral castle? Oh, yeah, that's Edward Lee Scanlan. I found, it's hard to find, but I found him using levers and pulleys and stuff. that wacky dude in Florida that made the coral castle. Oh yeah, that's Edward Lee Scanlan. I found, it's hard to find, but I found him using levers and pulleys and stuff to do it. It's still amazing what he did. Yeah, but I'm self by himself. He's like five foot one, the hundred, ninety pounds. And I think that door is tons and you can push it with your finger that door in the coral castle is amazing. And supposedly did it for his girlfriend. I didn't read that. Read his beloved. Yeah, he did it to impress a lady. You went too far, man. You don't have to do that. Just, just buy a nice car. Don't, don't do the, the, uh, it's just you don't care. Anybody could buy an actual, I'm going to rock this truck in your world. Literally get a rocker. She's going to see my coral castle. This mother fuckers the one. She bailed. She, you, you bail if it did builds you a castle. You're like, uh, look at the time. Mm-hmm. Cotta go. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Um, when you do these shows and, you know, you've amassed like this channel now with all these like fast, anything. Which ones to you are the most exciting to create? The most exciting. Like one of the ones you get really jazzed about. The ones that, that, that kind of shatter my belief system. Like the hollow moon or the, the crop circles. The, the, the idea of the moon being hollow is because they shot something into the moon and it rang like a bell. Right. Right. If, well, a few things, you know, one was they deliberately crashed their, their rocket into the moon to, and their resizedmology, you know, seismographs were placed in the moon to, to check what would happen. And it did reverberate. But mainstream science says it reverberates because it's extremely dry. And that's why Sam, Sam waves travel like that. That's what they say. But other scientists have said there, it seems to be if it's not hollow, there are hollow cavities within the moon. And why do they think that? Just, just the way that the sound travels and just how they're parts of the moon where the surface dirt is, let me get this right, where the surface dirt is older than the dirt underneath. The soil on top is older. The only way you can do that is through excavation. Hmm. Moonquakes. Yeah. You know, and the moon had volcanoes on it at some point. Passive seismic experiment size monitors were placed during the Apollo 12 mission, remained active until 1977, recording both natural and human-made moon quake, like human-made moon quake. Also, why are they doing that? Right. Why are you trying to make moonquakes? And in fact, moonquakes happen fairly regularly as space to breakey asteroids hit the moon more frequently than earth because the moon's atmosphere is much less dense. Right above it, it described that the Apollo 12 mission was the first human-made moon quake they detonated or they crashed the module back on the surface. One ton of TNT. Good idea. Oh, wow. First human-made moon quake to take place, the PSC-sized monitors, oh, size of meters, size, size, momenters, record the resulting vibrations which were much bigger and lasted much longer than the scientists had anticipated. They were far different from the earthquake vibrations were familiar with. And that ex-paragraph said it's because the moon is 60% as dense. It doesn't mean it's hollow, but it's just different. Right. Right. So, if the collision theory's true, which is the mainstream theory, then the moon was made mostly out of earth's mantle, which will be less dense is what? It just kind of clipped us. Yeah. But the moon is weird. Yeah. So the hollow moon one freaks you out, crop circles. Crop circles. You know, those are the fun ones. I do the conspiracy, the government conspiracy ones are interesting to me. But a lot of times they make me angry. So it's not really fun, but I think it's important to see eye stuff. And a K-old crew. Okay, ultra, an Asian orange. That stuff really makes me angry. Yeah. You know, the DARPA episode, I ended up kind of losing my temper and crying a little at the end. And which I didn't mean to do. And it was just in the course of the research. Just that's what happens. Things start to unfold. I just wanted to see DARPA's history. And as I'm learning about it, it's like, oh, these guys did some bad, bad stuff. And then when you get to Vietnam, and you know, you got the chemical company, Dow Chemical, and DuPont and all this creating Asian blue, Asian purple, of Asian orange. Yeah. And I mean, more American soldiers got sick than actually got killed in the conflict. You know, my, I dedicated the episode to my father-in-law who had all kinds of injuries from Asian orange. The government denied any responsibility for years. They finally agreed to a settlement in 1981, he applied for his benefits. And the government made do. They kept their word. He got his settlement 40 years later. Jesus. And even that's never going to be enough to do all those health problems. Right. So your country needs you and you answer the call. And then when you need your country, take a number. And your country needs you based on a false flag. Gulf of Tonkin. Yeah. Which is also very dark. It'll be too. They, they fake attacks to get us to go to war. And then there's Operation Northwoods, which is really wonky one. That was the one to get us into Cuba. Yeah. And that was probably the beginning of the end for Kennedy. Because I believe Kennedy put a stop on Northwoods. And Bay of Pigs wouldn't allow air support. Right. He got screwed on that. And the Bay of Pigs that that was the end. That was where Kennedy says that we need to start again. We got to dismantle this and start again. I can't rely on my intelligence community. And Eisenhower, he talked to Eisenhower a lot. And Eisenhower gave him advice and said, watch out for this. Yeah, yeah. Keep an eye on them. Because remember when Eisenhower left, he gave that famous farewell address where he said, be aware of the military industrial complex, you make more profitable. You're going to have more war. Because America was never like that before. You know, we kept, we had a defensive military, not an aggressive military forever. Profits were the devil does his best work. Right. Yeah. That's right. That's from the Bible, isn't it? Might be. But it's really what it is. If evil is real justification for evil, like if you have a compartmentalized situation, like they do with corporations, we have this diffusion of responsibility. Because you have a bunch of people that are all working together. Hey, it's not my, I'm just working. This is part of my job. And then you have responsibility to share holders, to make maximum profits every quarter. And then you justify all kinds of things. And you get rewarded. Great job. You did a great job, AJ. We like how you made those profits. You got a nice fat bonus. And then you drink yourself to sleep every night. My step sister just retired from, from Grumman. She worked in top secret programs. She won't tell the family what she did. Tom, Tom, Tom. She wants to live. Good. Keep your mouth shut, lady. Keep it shut. Lisa be quiet. I keep my mouth shut too. She never said a word. Why would you? It's not worth it. No, it's not worth it. Pensions too good. Also, you don't want to die. You know, it's just like they get rid of people. If you're in the business of killing people, which is what military contractors are, they are in the business of killing you. If you get in the business of killing people. Mm-hmm. They're like, oh, we just have killed one more person, and then we can kill a whole bunch of other people and make a lot of money. Yeah. Of course. Oh, look. He had a heart attack. Whoopsies. He fell out of a hotel. The Frank Olson murders is taught by an Israeli intelligence as the perfect murder, which will be the Frank Olson was part of MPA Ultra and was starting to have second doubts about it. So they sent him to a psychiatrist who he didn't know was actually worked for Sydney Gottlieb and was, you know, into programming and he was freaking out. and he's up in a hotel room with someone else from MK and he falls out the window. But if you look at the window where he fell, it's like, you know, two feet by two feet, you can't just jump out the window. So we found on the sidewalk by the door man. That's Frank Olson worth looking up. I drove before talking to his family afterwards. I gave him a 750 grand. That's right. And it took a lot of work. A lot of work. Yeah. So right. It was be quiet. We'll give you the money, but be quiet about it. So I mean, it's all real. And it's just, yeah, there's just the stuff that's undeniable is enough to make you just go, wow, what is happening? What is really going on? I'm hunting scenes. You know, the MPA Ultra, the tested monies from the women is really heartbreaking to watch them. The sexual abuse that they endured for years at that, you know, the whatever that was, that lodge on the water near DC and just tortured and crazy stuff. Operation midnight caller, you know that one? Which one's that's happened in San Francisco where they had agents hiring prostitutes and they've been that climax behind the two-way glass nuts. That's a bunch of weirdos. Tax dollars. Yeah. And it's because they had no no one was no oversight. You're no ultimate power. It's all totally deniable. And it was, I think it was Nixon who banned it in 72. Well, it might have even been 69 before he came in. They kept doing it anyway. Same with bio weapons. They were ordered by executive order to get rid of their bio weapons and it was found at years later. They were just stockpiling them. They still had them. Yeah. And you know they still do. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Yeah. Do you hesitate? Sometimes when you're doing these government cover up ones? Yes. Yes. Yeah. You know, I don't want to say I'm a- Because they're dangerous. They are. Big foot's not dangerous. No, big foot's not going to hurt me. Big foot's a fun one. It is funny. You have a lot of fun ones. Different dimensions, you know, we fund stuff. Yeah. It's hard for me because I consider myself a patriot. Very, very like, pro military pro law enforcement, but also anti-war and, you know, pro criminal justice reform. Like I'm a very con- Me too. Politically confused. Me too. You know, I just like fairness and transparency, that sort of thing. Yeah. You like to think that our government's good. I do like to think that and this journey has shown me that it's mostly not, you know, it's really mostly not, but it's a government made of men and men are flawed and selfish and men will hurt each other. And there's also justifications that can be made, can be made rather for doing terrible things because there's terrible people out there and you have to stay ahead. Always. Yeah. You become a monster when you're fighting monster. That's exactly right. And these, this collateral damage is just part of it. It's part of it. Yeah. You know, so we give them a settlement to say quiet, but this is for national security. Yeah. Greater good. What other ones have freaked out? And it's hard to say off the top of my head. MKL tris a tough one. You know, I have covered North Woods and some of those. Operation Gladio was a crazy one. That was, that was with CIA was killing civilians in, after World War II. Alan Della, I'm going to do an episode in Alan Della's The Dulles Brothers, a connection to the Nazis and all of that. That's going to be a dangerous one. What were they doing? They were killing people for war reason. So we had to fight communism, communism, communism. So they trained a secret army, a civilian army in Italy to bomb civilians and then blame it on the communists. The communists at that time were the most popular party in Italy, you know, post war because they had just went through fascism, right? With Mussolini. So you just, it always swings too far the other way. So we swing way the other way. Communism, very popular can't have that. So civilians were killed in bombings by the CIA train guerrilla army and they were trained by a Nazi general who was tight with Alan Della. And this was planned during the war. While American GIs were being killed fighting the Nazis, they were already planning this next phase. But civilians died in massacres and they blamed it on communists and it was denied and eventually it came out. It was called Operation Gladió. Gladió is the sword of the Roman soldier. So they killed the people. Bomb. Car bomb. Car bomb was a big one. But there was a few. They were just blaming the communists. Right. Because it was a huge Italy was a lot of turmoil. I think it was called like the years of lead or like the decades of lead, something like that because people were just getting killed all the time. I don't know how many constitutions Italy's had since World War II, but it's probably over two dozen at this point. You know, it's a chaotic place. Wow. That's my people. It's my people too. We're goofy. Followed on. Because at East Yikifah. What about the re-shard structure? You know, people ask me about that, the idea of the Sahara. I usually say, you know what? Go to Corsetti. Go to bright insight. Go to Randall Carlson. Corsetti is the most brand. Randall Carlson doesn't believe that that was Atlantis. Right. Corsetti makes a very compelling case. Mountains to the north, river to the south. The circular concentric rings. The concentric rings to the correct size. The fact that there's still salt in the ground there. I want to believe it. Yeah. And then there's like, when you pull back and you get the satellite image of the surface and it looks like it was just completely deluged. It does. Yeah. Well, we know for a fact it was deluged. Yeah. It just, it does it line up with Atlantis. I mean, I mean, Carlson has shown us how the surface of the, of Africa was just altered by, you know, by the flood. It all lines up. But there's all these leaps that we have to make. I enjoy making them. Yeah. But you know, on my show, I try to let people know, look, I connected some dots here. You know, I had to fill in some gaps with a little bit of creative license. But if you're interested, go pursue it. Go learn more. I want that to be Atlantis. Yeah. It seems like Atlantis was a real place because, you know, once they found out that Troy was a real place, Troy was also dismissed. Yes, it was. Now, Troy actually existed. It doesn't seem like any of those stories were bullshit. It seems like they were historical accounts. And the thing about Plato's writings about Atlantis, he talks about it having existed 900 years prior, which lines up perfectly with the younger dryers. Right. And he learned it from an Egyptian priest who learned it from someone else. So the story goes back beyond Plato, if, if you believe Plato, which you can't, you believe Plato. And he was right about a lot of things. And it's just, it's so fascinating. We think of like that kind of historical record keeping that you're getting these depictions of what kind of a civilization existed thousands and thousands of years ago. Right. So what, you know, with Homer Zilliard, what did they think he was writing about a fictional place? I mean, that was this. I said, I think I said 900 years. I'm at 9,000 years. 9,000 years. 9,000 years. Which is like, first of all, like how do you get 9,000 years of history 2,000 years ago? Like what are you even getting? Yeah. How are these stories? How are they documented? Like how do they pass them? How do they pass them on? Like who were the original people? Like what's the actual version of the story? Like which one is more accurate? Epic of Gilgamesh, Noah's Ark, which like something seems to exist in almost every ancient civilization. They all have a flood myth. Yeah. And Gilgamesh and Noah's Ark, it sounds very similar stories. And there are other cultures that have a Noah's Ark story. Yeah. Yeah. That's my favorite currently. I've seen a ton of videos. And I think Jimmy Corseti does the best job about the right-shart structure. But he's all in on it. Yes. And I think it doesn't look natural. No, it doesn't. It doesn't. It looks like exactly. Like what a coincidence that it matches the dimensions of Atlantis as described. And it's in the right place. Yeah. So you know, when people argue for Bemini being Atlantis, it's like, no, they didn't know what any of that was. But they knew what North Africa was. Right. And also it's so close to Egypt. It's so close to what we already know was a super advanced civilization that existed. There's been no excavations of that. I don't believe so. Are the re-shart structure? What have they done? Like deep 1974 was discovered that on artifacts, looking right now. So I was about to show you some. This isn't the creepy example, but there's other. This isn't another eye. It looks similar to it in the same area. Interesting. And then the comments say that there's even two or three of these. Wow. And I was reading Steven Novela's breakdown of Jimmy's video. He says he's leaving out some known facts. Like there was a canal that connected each of the circles that isn't apparent in the re-shart structure. But those are the things I was just getting at right now. And this looks like canals. Well, that's a dish. Well, it shows us that the re-shart structure. Right. And the re-shart structure strange because the coloration is different than the rest of the, that was also the depictions of the colors of the rocks is the same. Red and black. Yeah, like that is fucking crazy. That's crazy. It is. I think I've found artifacts that there was, there was some stuff like out here on the outer circles, but not very many inside. Well, the question is like how big was the catastrophe and how much would be left? And what would you actually see? You know, like how much was the structure altered by whatever the fuck happened? Right. So when we talk about ancient advanced civilizations, we're not talking about more advanced than us. We just mean advanced. Right. So people will say, well, where's their plastic? Yeah, but it has, it doesn't have to be the same kind of advanced. It doesn't. Combustion engines, all the different things that we've done, electronics, like we're just assuming that technology always goes in the exact same path. But it's, whatever the fuck they were doing, we know, whatever we know they were doing in Egypt was extraordinary with in terms of like their ability to core the drills. When they have these cores that they like high speed drills that seem to be, if not diamond tipped something of a similar vein that allowed them to dig into that fucking granite like that like, right? How do they generate 2000 or PMs or whatever? Right. How could they do that? Yeah. It's all freaky, man. Like the history, I mean, Graham has the best depiction. He said, we are a species with amnesia. That's the perfect way to say it. You know, it's a shame that he's marginalized, but I like that Netflix is stuck by and then you keep on putting those out. Well, the facts are the facts. You know, just the structures that he's uncovering when you're looking at good and pedang, when you're looking at all these different places, when you look at, you know, just match a peachy, all these different places. Like what the fuck was going on? Like why is this stuff so complex? Why is it so fascinating? And why aren't we allowed to ask? Why aren't we allowed to investigate it? Yeah. Remember when, when, uh, his ancient apocalypse season one came out, there was a British newspaper that Grand Hancock is the most dangerous man in the world. Because of the lights, just dumbasses. Well, they always want to connect it to white supremacy, which is so crazy. Because Grand Hancock is the furthest from a white supremacist. You know, he's married to a woman of color. He's like, the sweetest, nicest guy. He's a vegan. Of course. He's like, he never said they were white folks. No, he didn't know one says that. And who cares? I just want to know who they were. Well, they couldn't be white folks. These white folks don't live there. Like if they're Egyptians, they're Africans. Right. The Africans were the most sophisticated civilization that we have ever seen that existed at that point in time. We don't know if they're as sophisticated as we are, but we know they did some stuff back then that we're not capable of today. Yes. And that's real. It is. And we don't know how. We don't know what technology they had. But here's the thing. If it's not from 2500 BC, but it's really from 30,000 BC, what do you think would be left? Like only maybe the stone. That would be it. That's part of the problem. I mean, steel and kind of beyond gone. It would only take a hundred years for Manhattan to be covered by vegetation. A thousand years, the skyscrapers would crumble. Ten thousand years it all be washed away. A hundred thousand years, I guess he'd jack your nothing. Nothing. Who's that British archaeologist that we brought up the other day, Jamie, with the he has this really good point that human beings have been essentially the same form for the last 300,000 years. Like it's not outside the realm of possibility that we have achieved very high levels of sophistication multiple times and have been knocked back down to the stone age again. Sure. By cataclysmic events. Right. And that makes a lot of sense to me. That is just part of the cycle. Yeah. You know, the doomsday clock is it's kind of a real thing is that you just get to a level of technology where you just are too dangerous for your own good. You're not sophisticated enough for nuclear weapons. We're not smart enough to have those. No. Well, that's the hope is that that's what the aliens are here for. Do you really hate, hate, hate, hate? Right. Because they have. Yeah. But then why did they allow just the United States to detonate 60 something bombs? And well, here's the thing. Two of them that caused mass death. Right. Hiroshima and Nagasaki. But that's also when the UFO starts showing up in mass. And you know, I have this comedy club called the comedy mothership. And the rooms are named fat man and little boy. Okay. And the reason why is because in UFO folklore, after those bombs were dropped, that's when the mothership starts showing up. Right. Yeah. And in some tests, you can see stuff in the sky in the films. I think you can see something at Castle Bravo could be wrong. But there are some tests where you can see stuff in the sky. Like what was that for a few frames? Like they were keeping an eye on it. I hope they are. That would be nice. Please. That would be nice. Well, listen, AJ, I love your fucking show. You provided me with hours and hours of entertainment. It's an awesome program. You do a really good job. It's really well done. I don't know who's doing it with you and how you promote, how you produce it. But you guys fucking kill it. Thanks, man. It's a great show. The Wi-Fi-os, it's available on YouTube. 4.73 million subscribers. So I'm not alone. And you guys have only been around for how many years now? It's the 2020. That's amazing. Five years in your year, you have almost five million subscribers. See, I hate you. You're just back it up. It's a great fucking show. That's what it is. So I'm glad we finally did this. Appreciate it. Thank you very much, man. And if you ever got anything crazy, you want to break it here. We're ready for you. I've got an episode coming out. You want everybody to know about? Come on back. I think we'll probably do this 100 times. Thank you, brother. Appreciate you. All right, bye, everybody.