There are certain moments in history. There is so kaleidoscopically weird that it takes a great novelist to understand them. This is one of those moments. Walter Kern is that novelist. The Luigi story seems like the kind of story that historians will write about as they try and capture the essence of the time that we're living through right now. I don't really understand what it means. He just issued a letter, I think, from jail. Yeah. What is that story? Well, from the moment the crime was committed. I realized that we had a crime built, engineered for the social media age. If you think about the OJ crime as the crime that made cable television and serial true life crime shows an established thing in America. Yes. If you think about the Lindberg case as having the synergy with the age of radio, well, the Luigi case is the age of Instagram, TikTok, and Twitter. It was that since day one. Remember the crime occurred on video on a surveillance video. The surveillance video was wonderfully staged if you know anything about how movies or set up. You had the killer in the foreground in a hood, his face obscured. You had the victim in the distance, a tiny stick figure. He shoots the stick figure falls. Now the way that shot is set up, if you were to set it up, you have a lot of interest in the shooter, but none at all in the victim. Imagine it reversed. If the victim had been in the foreground and some tiny figure had shot him, you would have had sympathy for the victim. You'd see him die, you'd see his peroxisoms, his spasms as he expired, but it was the other way around. From the moment that video hit the internet and it got onto it curiously early, within a very short time of the crime itself, you had hordes of junior investigators on Twitter, TikTok, Instagram, examining it. There was a mystery in the video, which was, why did he have such trouble charging his gun? Why did he have such trouble operating his gun? So mystery one was, is this a professional killer or is it an amateur? The amateur people argued, well, he can't seem to, he keeps getting jammed. The professionals argued, well that's this certain sort of firearm and it tends to do that. So you immediately had this mystery of the gun and this mystery of the killer's expertise. Then almost in no time, it was revealed that he had rented a bike, an electric bike in New York City and had escaped on it. And so once again, thousands, hundreds of thousands of junior detectives using the maps and available public data about the distribution of those public electric bikes in New York, tried to trace his path. A few days later, or maybe even a day later, we find out that the hooded figure, who's face we didn't see in the first video, checked into a youth hostel, either before or after the crime, but a video emerged from a youth hostel in which you can see his partial phase while he flirts with the obviously bas added clerk at the youth hostel. So you had this slow reveal almost like a strip tease and at every stage, you had a mystery that the community could solve that, you know, it's sort of open source investigation. At that point, I said, this is too, this is too perfect. The well shot video from the killer's point of view, the mystery of the gun, what kind of gun, the, you know, following the bike path digitally. And then it just got more and more made for social media. He appears at a hearing, wearing the outfit that we hardly Oswald, the exact sweater with collar combination that the Harvey Oswald wore when he was, you know, brought to justice by even the, even the police and escorts around him were arrayed in something of the same way. So he dressed the part of the Patsy or Oswald. The hood part was, of course, a regiment of the uni-bomb, of course, and then lo and behold the manifesto appears, much like the uni-bombers in which, you know, he outlines his motives. He's avenging the torturous brutal American healthcare system on behalf of all those who've been denied coverage. He's a man of the people and so on. It got so bad at one point that I saw when he went to, when he was arrested in a McDonald's with all his stuff with the gun, with the manifesto, you know, with the costume that he'd been wearing and was sent to jail. I saw a news program in which the reporter was standing outside the jail while Luigi was presumably being processed in and he said to the, you know, headquarters anchor person, I can hear cheering inside the jail. I can hear the cheering for Luigi. We've now evolved to Bill Burr, the comedian going on TV, free Luigi. There are candles, you know, votive candles, sort of Roman Catholic style. Candles usually devoted to saints, but wearing Luigi's image. There are fan clubs, there are Reddit forums, there are all across social media adoring groups of people trying to build a defense for him, analyzing the evidence, and honestly, the evidence isn't very good. America is under the impression that they saw this murder take place, but in fact, they just saw hooded figure. Another almost amazing development was that when the gun was found, it turned out to be a ghost gun, so to speak, a 3D printed gun with a 3D printed muzzle, a silencer. Well, it just so happens, the crime was committed in December, that there is a Supreme Court case in March, I believe, to adjudicate the question of whether 3D printed accessories to firearms are legal. There was already a Supreme Court that allowed for the receiver and the basic parts of the gun to be printed, but there was still this question. So even the firearm itself played into a coming on the calendar, Supreme Court case, and it was the first such weapon to be used in a murder, I believe. It also lets remember happened right after the election. Happen in December, the left in America is completely demoralized. One of its disappointments is that youth didn't come out to vote for Harris and the number they expected. They really expected young women to swing that election, and if you heard the commentary right beforehand, they almost considered a certainty. Well, they hadn't. But Luigi, when we saw his casual photos and his family album in the first couple weeks after his arrest, was perfect for the arousal of the young American woman. The shirtless six pack, there used to be a magazine called Tiger Beat in America, which teenage girls would put up pictures from on their wandsman. And so I call him a Tiger Beat revolutionary. He appeals directly to the demographic that on the democratic side, they feel is most likely to be loyal to them and whose passivity in the last election was a problem for them. Well, they're reactivated. He is a combination of Kazinski, Oswald in his dressy. He evoked that. And Charles Manson, Beatomania almost has been fomented around Luigi. We had Taylor, where were ends, the strange, ex-watching and post-reporter given interview in which she really tried to understand and almost fanned out in doing so. Though Luigi phenomena, how appealing he is, he was, of course, positioned as a Robinhood-like figure who had on behalf of the downtrodden who are the victims of these health insurance companies come forth to administer frontier justice. In fact, he's come from a very wealthy family, East Coast family, went to the University of Pennsylvania. I noticed that in his letter he thanked people all over the world for contributing to a go fund me like defense campaign. He's brought in a million dollars. Well, his family has well over a hundred million dollars. You'd think that he should maybe spare the poor people of America having to pay for his murder defense and let his parents do it. But in any case, in this letter, he further extends his own image because he's quite conscious of himself as a blieving legend. There are a couple quotes in it. He says, the artist's task is to save the soul of mankind. And anything less is dithering while Rome burns. And that's a quote from Terrence McKenna, who is a kind of psychedelic hippie philosopher, a disciple of Timothy, Larian, so on. So, Luigi considers himself an artist. He ends that letter with these telltale words, never lose the plot, written in his own hand, the rest of its type. To me, all of this is evidence that whether he has done it himself, whether he's done it with help or I can't speculate on that, he created intentionally deliberately with some care a maid for social media assassination, which he is continuing to cultivate with the help of now tens and hundreds of thousands of volunteers. He solves a problem. He solves a problem for the left in America. They need an appealing, youthful, attractive, somebody younger than Bernie to carry forth the torch of social justice. And he appeared at just the right time in just the right way with just the right story lines. People are still on social media comparing the two photos, the first of the hooded figure, and then the one of him little later when he reveals part of his face checking the eyebrows. The eyebrows don't match. His defense is going to be quite obvious. I'm not the guy in the hood. I'm not the guy who you see via the gun. And in fact, he was not apprehended there. He was not identified there. He I think personally is part of a narrative that has been constructed in a way that a gamer or a computer science student like him might have done personally, but that it has carried on after he's in jail as though with the help of others. You know, he didn't get to go shopping, did he, before he dressed himself for the, for the per block. I mean, I guess maybe he stipulated. I want that. I want, you know, that he seems to me to have accomplices in creating the Luigi show. And it says everything about America that he has fans, he has posters, he has merch, he has a GoFundMe or it's equivalent. And he has a story, the, the Avenger. It breaks down a little when you realize he comes from this rich family. And that in fact, he never would have been, he never would have been denied coverage in a way that he couldn't have paid. I think that's the most perfect part. Yes. The private school kid from Penn gets immediate support from the rich girl from Greenwich, Taylor, the runs. Right. I mean, this the whole movement, the whole Bernie movement. I don't think it started this way, but it ended up this way is the movement of rich kids. Right. Yeah, it's like when I was at Princeton, you know, I got to Princeton from Minnesota, middle classmen of soda and everybody's, all the rich kids know about reggae. I thought reggae was a poor people's music from the slums of Jamaica. Yeah. You know, so yeah, he's a trussafarian for sure. And but what he's doing is he's rousing these anti-establishment emotions among a demographic that has already predisposed to them, but hasn't had a champion and certainly not a sex symbol. And he is nothing if not a sex symbol. Last year we did an interview with a woman called Casey Means. She's a surgeon educated at Stanford. She's the nominee for a surgeon general right now. She really is one of the most amazing people I have ever met the interview may be emotional. In it she explained how the food that we eat produced by huge food companies it can junks with pharma is wrecking our health and wrecking this country, making it weak and sick. She's the co-founder of a healthcare technology company called levels and we're proud to partner with them. And by proud, I mean, actually proud for real, most of us are not metabolically healthy even worse. We're not aware that we're not. We have no idea where our health stands. As we speak now, we don't know how to improve it. With levels labs, you'll get insight into your health to help you understand where you are to measure and optimize your well-being. It is the best thing you can do to get a picture of where your health stands and how to make it better. The levels app works with something called the glucose monitor, CGM. And now the levels membership comes with a 28 marker cardiometabolic blood test giving you a comprehensive view of your health with clear guidance on how to improve it. You can also get the extended panel which gives you an even more detailed view with 100 plus biomarkers, real-time personal data. She take control of your health for the better. You know what happens when you eat certain things. We just got word that levels is offering. This shows listeners annual memberships with an additional two free months through the website. The website is levels.linkslashtucker. That's levels.linkslashtucker2monthsfree. But the heart of the story is murder. Well, who is the father of children who may have been a good man or a bad man. I don't even remember his name. Nobody does. He's just some health care CEO. I mean, he's not in the story at all in his, but his murder is the story. And I just, I'm amazed you can hate the health insurance companies. I certainly do. I hate almost all big companies. But to endorse a murder of somebody is a big step. I never thought that that would be widely accepted in America. Well, when I started narrating this, I decided I was going to be the, you know, the garrison killer or whatever, the lazy story. I would tell the story as if it were a folk tale and try to point out to people how artificial elements of it seem, how contrived and how preplanned. People said I was crazy. They also predicted the story would go away. Sick of him. He was an unappealing character attached to a murder that the very opposite has happened. His cult has grown. He has a cult. And the question is when his actual trial comes around, will they be able to find jurors who haven't been exposed to this folk hero, Robin Hood legend. I have a hard time believing that in New York City, they will find 12 who will convict him in a case where he is linked circumstantially, but also has several outs when they investigated the electronic bike use. They found out that he had picked up the bike at one part of New York City three and a half miles from the site of the murder and somehow managed to get there in four or five minutes. And the junior detectives have rerun the route and say there is no way you can make that trip unless the 13. So there's the first flaw in the prosecution's case. They never saw his face and it's not the same eyebrows when you see the two versions of the face. There's check mark two. I predict, if you've ever seen the movie network, a satire of American television and mass media and news where they actually staged their own crimes in order to keep the ratings high at this failing network. I see elements of that here. Cable news, not just social media. Social media is on the in the ascendant, but cable news is dying. But Luigi, when he goes on trial, is going to be an advertising boon like you can't imagine. What do you think the truth is of the murder? I think the truth of the murder is murky. There's no look at the evidence as it has been presented so far. It does seem a little weak in contradictory. There's some question as to whether the bag he was carrying at the McDonald's was taken from him in a way that was unlawful, technically, in violation of how you search a suspect. They separated him from it early before really announcing themselves as police. There are a lot of weaknesses in the case. To be honest, I play stories out not for their likelihood, but for their possible cultural impact. And if I were in what they call the writer's room in Hollywood, scripting the lazy drama, I would imagine that the ending they want is he is found not guilty. He comes out of jail, a people's hero, Shagwavara, whatever, the revolutionary that all the girls can love with the kissable face and the six-pack abs, and he becomes a media star. It will be ambiguous as to whether he committed the murder or not. He's obviously pleading not guilty. You're saying that girls like murderers? Well they do. I mean, they do. They do. That's something that we weren't told before we embraced female leadership of the country that the country became a lot more violent and a lot less restraint. I would say on people's behavior and there is a kind of bloodthirsty quality to American culture that did not exist. Well, there's a go. Manson, of course, had his fans and his minions and his groupies. He had the crimes for him in most cases. And it was mostly female. Richard Ramirez, the nightstalker, one of the most horrific serial killers in American history who, you know, broken to bedrooms and tortured people in the 80s, had an infamously long list of female visitors and women courting him and proposing marriage and so on. The bad boy is always an attractive figure in America, James Dean, Marlon Brando. But the evil boy seems to have a constituency too. No, it's true. And I think I didn't grow up with a lot of women and no women in the house. And I always assumed that men, you know, men commit all most of the violence in our society. But I always assumed it was men who were four violence women were against violence. And I've learned just by watching this. I've gotten older that women is a broad generalization, but certainly female leaders are way more enthusiastic about violence than male leaders. Well, I'm not going to go as far as that in terms of my generalizations only because I want to live a free man for a few more months. No, I'm not. I mean, I don't mean it. I'm just an observation. But in favor of your thesis, Bonnie and Clyde. Yeah. You know, was there ever a more 660 style sexy romance than that between Faye Dunaway and Warren Beadian by and Clyde? Yeah, no, it's true. And, you know, going back to film law and our sort of artistic history, the femme fatale who often often causes the killing. You know, in double indemnity who recruits were Fred Murray to kill her husband, played by all those different actresses who specialized in being the dangerous, heartless blonde, is one of those motifs, one of those tropes that has a basis in our psychology. You know, I've certainly noticed. You would think it would be disqualifying, you know, despite the six-pack abs and the, you know, the dashing hood. Well, the goddess murder a guy on the sidewalk, you would think people would be like, you know, I, I'm mad at the healthcare system. I don't like health insurers, but you can't shoot a father in a husband like on the street, like what? And by the way, if you can do that, if what this case does is introduces or reveals an acceptance of murder, then that's a predicate for what's to come, I think. Well, you know, here he is writing his new age letter from jail, talking about, you know, the novels he's reading and he ends it not just with, never lose the plot, but with the single word, light, you know, light. He's a bearer of light. Um, and- It's a- It's a- It's a real good-bron kind of with a gun. Yeah, a little component, killer poets. And we know from our experience of Adolf Hitler that the frustrated artist can turn into the most prolific killer. And I know from a book I wrote about a guy named Clark Rockefeller who had murdered a couple of people. He was a, he was an imposter who called himself a Rockefeller, but he murdered a couple of people and, you know, uh, how can I put it? It can be by some considered a work of art, a sort of higher, niche in expression of self. And when, when, when, when, when Luigi styles himself in artists here, it's very troubling, especially to me an artist who doesn't kill people. Yes. Uh, and also, I mean, I don't know. I mean, this is like a theme in crime and punishment too. Um, I think there's nothing particularly artistic about shooting strangers on the sidewalk. Yeah. Well, I, I will leave you with this. I haven't seen the family of the victim come out demanding, uh, that Luigi be imprisoned or punished. And I was just thinking that I have, I have a reason to believe that there are members of the family that aren't completely convinced he's guilty. I'll leave it at that. It's not something I could report on. The family of the victim, the family of the victim. I think among certain people involved, it is still a question as to whether, he's, you know, whether he's guilty of the murder itself, whether he was involved in the crime, but not the actual gunman or whether he was a guy, maybe told to do something. And he found out later that he was the wrong place in the, in the wrong place in the wrong time at the wrong time. All these things are possible now, especially. And, and when you see how much he seems to love jail is reading Fahrenheit 451. He's reading Iron Rand, a book about a, uh, an imprisoned guy who becomes a scientist and a hero, um, you sense that this is a guy who is acutely aware of the mythical and, uh, cultural precedents for his own action. Well, I mean, that seems like a pretty compelling argument for his guilt that he's embraced the role. Yes. As a vengeance murderer. But in Walter Kern world where everything's a novel and, and, and I, let me just put that out there. I think that we now have had reality dissolve before our eyes enough times. We've had, we've had the experts, um, debunked enough times. We've learned enough about the, um, uh, untrustworthiness of our media that we have every right to speculate. They used to call it conspiracy theory, but we have every right to speculate on what indeed we're watching when we watch huge stories. I think that's right. These huge stories that have the potential to move political, uh, blocks and, and, and, and change sentiment over certain issues. And, uh, to me, the jury is very much still out on whether what has become a kind of online reality game has, has the, has the grounding and actual reality that we imagine it does. Well, I just want to be in the record, uh, in saying that convincing the American population to accept the murder of a stranger, um, is a big, big, big step. And it's a precedent we're going to regret. And it's already been done to some extent because just a couple of weeks ago when these two people were murdered out, uh, in Washington D.C., uh, remember, uh, gun down. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Right. I was right outside the Israeli embassy, uh, the killer fired numerous bullets into the crawling, uh, form of the female victim to, to, to, to, to, dispatch her completely, a violent, horrible crime, not like the one shot that Luigi did. There were people who came out immediately to say, he's the new, he's the new Luigi. So I'm opposed to that. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm not that we should have to say we're opposed to it as a measure of how terrible things are. It used to be without question that one was opposed to shooting people on sidewalks as they crawl to safety or gunning down the father of a, a, and husband on the streets of New York as he attends a conference. But apparently now there are two sides to those matters. And one of the reasons is Luigi. Well, the psychological damage, if you look at this in some way as a psychological operation, whatever. Whatever. Whatever else it is. Yes. Then it has succeeded already. So you walk into my garage, my actual garage, where the first things you see is a Liberty safe. We trust it. All my family's guns are in there, the guns are in here, the guns are actually hunt with. I put the things I really care about in a Liberty safe. We've got a new pricing program on its centurion line that makes it easier than ever to afford. So I inherited the guns I actually hunt with. I put the things I really care about in a Liberty safe. They've got a new pricing program on its centurion line. It makes it easier than ever to afford real protection, which is made in the United States. These safes are actually made here in Payson, Utah. Skilled American workers make them, and they are clearly a quality product. They're not that expensive. Prices start below 600 bucks. The centurion line is the perfect product. For first time buyers, it's ideal for protecting your firearms, important family documents, anything you want to keep safe. My guns are right there right now. Every American deserves access to high quality secure storage without spending money overseas. That's why Liberty is the best. LibertySafe.com, the whole centurion line is there. Keep your family protected. You'll be glad you did. We are. I feel like every society, people in general, are always on the brink of homicidal violence. That's why we have laws and police in courts. Anyone who understands human nature knows that. The second you allow the acceptance of murder, boy, you're just going to get a lot more than you imagine in return. Once you drop the final defense of the primary defense against murder is public sanction against murder. We don't like murder. Our own normal person likes murder. When that changes, I don't care how many cops you have or how many CCT cameras you have. You're going to get a lot of murder if you change that attitude. No? You're going to get a lot of murder. And you're going to get a lot of uncertainty on the part of people in power. I know for a fact, certain security organizations were called just after this murder to beef up the protection of CEOs and billionaires and so on. I mean, that business went through the roof. I don't know who we see. Even if there are no more murders, it causes those people to separate further from society. Up until recently, the richest people in the world they might have had security. You'd see them walking into restaurants. You'd be able to have a conversation with them sometimes, come up to their table. This will cause the further social bulk andization of the classes. It's exactly right. Boy, that's such a smart point. And I know some of those people and they're living in a completely parallel world. Yeah. Now, it does feel a lot like amazingly like pre-revolutionary Russia, where you had a period of like 40 years of anarchist assassinations of prominent people. And it softened up to society for October 1917. The Bolshevik takeover, by the time that happened with minority support and whatever, but they pulled it off, they were able to pull it off because people were nihilistic by that point because a lot of people have been killed. Yeah. It does degrade the capacity for empathy. It in a strange way, in some people, causes them to flip. And they start to become attracted to the notion of power through a gun. They start to see maybe they're saving the soul of mankind. Maybe the killer is on the side of light, love, psychedelic mushrooms and groovy things. Remember that mancing girls, a couple of the mancing girls, went on to at least one to try to assassinate Gerald Ford. Quickie from? Yeah. And I grew up, I met this strange point in life where I'm just old enough to remember the last really radical period in American history from the late 60s into the mid 70s. And it was a similar vibe. You turn on the TV. And RFK was assassinated. You turn on the TV. And right up until Reagan, really, in Reagan had been shot. It cooled off for a while. But boy, during the Trump campaign, did it get hot again with those assassination attempts. And now we've had with the Israeli embassy and with the Uyizhi thing, two more prominent assassinations. An assassination being something that's planned in which someone lies in wait and in which the symbolic character of the violence becomes the headline. So one of the worst things we do in America was we take crimes and we turn them into allegories. Exactly. You know, we find out that we find out if you hear today on the drive home that five people were shot at a Walmart in Kentucky. The first thing that everybody says is what was the race of the shooter? What were the political beliefs of the shooter? As though we're going to what make policy or understand our selves and our souls in terms of who kills who and what their motives are. And the truth is that in the old days, when there were obvious political killings, like the shooting of JFK, we developed this notion that I think is all American of the random lone psycho killer. Now anywhere else in the world, if a president or whatever is killed, you see it as political violence. In Pakistan, they don't believe in the lone gunman. Yes, but here we developed this sort of archetype of the lonely, nervous psycho killer who's just kind of maybe sexually confused and frustrated. And they just do it for no reason. It's random violence. Now in ancient Rome, you know, or any society in which political violence is being used constantly. You know, wives are assassinating their husbands, brothers are assassinating their sisters, everybody's competing, you know, to succeed to this office or the throne or whatever. And then in the rest of the world, they know political violence for what it is. And they know it by its fruits. And yet we up until recently in America, obscured all that with this myth of the guy who just snapped. But if you pull back a little bit, it's clear that, you know, that these are maybe not the product of intentional conspiracies, but certainly used as part of like a strategy. And this is kind of, and this is kind of a third thing in the sense that the conspiracy might belong only to him. He obviously researched Ted Kuzinski in the unibommer. He dressed like him. He wrote a manifesto that was sort of tribute to him. He used his tactics of coming into an out of cities on buses and so on. He studied the case. Whether it's a game designed by Luigi as a solo act or one which he had helped with, it is definitely engineered to be a compelling social media, retweetable viral drama. And where it's going is what concerns me because I do frankly expect he might not be convicted. And in that case, we will have maybe a podcast host or who definitely a podcast. That's at the least, I'll have a podcast, you know. Maybe he'll have a fashion line. Who knows? He's a $80 teacher. Who we kind of wink, wink, no is a cold, blooded murderer or at least somehow participated in a cold, blooded murder plot. And we will at that point have completed a next step toward dehumanization. Doesn't seem like there's anybody left in the society who can stand up and say, this is wrong, whatever you think of health insurers, and be taken seriously. There are, are there more authorities left in the United States? Well, I mean, it's hard to say. The church and various religious authorities of my youth who used to have popular, popular influence, Billy Graham, that kind of person, they don't exist. The moral authorities who were in the press, you know, Walter Cronkite or so on, who even though he, you know, he might have been a liberal, you know, Massachusetts Democrat, part of that establishment did act as though he was somehow speaking for all of us in a, in a common sense, traditional, moral way. Some, you know, we still get the posture of moralism, especially on the left, where a little less inundated by right wing religious fundamentalism than we were in the 80s, say, or even under Bush. But true people of integrity who can stand up and denounce things in a way that really seers the conscience of the country across different groups don't seem to exist. Is the country too big to manage as a country? Well, you know, I come from the cultural side, and I don't know if it's too big to manage as a political, a financial and economic entity. But it's too big to manage as a cultural entity. That's for sure. We have promoted, overly promoted, I think often in the name of diversity, but that was cynical, not just the Balkanization, but a kind of atomization of our culture, in which every group over 10 can't agree with any other group over 10. Now murder itself, cold blooded murder, not murders of past crimes of passion, we traditionally understood as having a slightly lower status as moral crimes. I mean, somebody came in and saw their wife in bed with somebody or somebody hurt your child and you did a vigilante killing. We understood that kind of cold blooded deliberate what the gun came to town, watched the person, learned their movements, killed them. That being a matter of debate is new. So as a culture, which, you know, Andrew Breitbart, the conservative thinker said politics is downstream of culture, and I kind of agree with him on that, because, you know, we're not always walking around following rules, we don't have the constitution in our pocket, we don't have the statutes of the state of Maine in our pocket, we have to rely on tradition, on what our parents told us, on what our heroes might do, on, you know, what we heard in church, or, you know, what we learned playing sports. It is culture that guides our behavior. And if a country's breaking down, almost by definition, it means that it's culture has broken down. And if its culture is strong, it's very hard for a country to break down. Yeah, I mean, there are countries that, with long histories of, you know, being invaded famine that are actually fine, still coherent, kind of Russia is one of them. Coherent country, like it or don't like it, you know, Russians have a real sense of themselves as Russians, as participating in a national project that's gone on a thousand years. Right. It's kind of hard to break a country like that. But if a country doesn't know, has no sense of itself, people don't know what it is they're part of. Right. I don't understand how it hangs together. Well, America has done a great job of simulating people from all over the world, huge groups, you know, my mother's ancestors came from the mists of the Carpathian mountains in Hungary. They might have been gypsies. They wrote people without birth certificates. They came to America speaking Hungarian. The most difficult language to learn and to understand the world for others, yes. And, you know, they made their way out of the slums in New York to Cleveland, became, you know, landlords bought an extra apartment, lived off that, slaughtered pigs in their backyard in Cleveland, Ohio, you know, kept the old ways. They became Americans. It's not, it's not diversity per se, or, you know, the multiplicity of the peoples in the United States that causes a culture to break down. It's attacks on what all such groups have in common, like the aversion to murder. Yes. All those groups have in common certain beliefs about what a man is and what a woman is and what the duty of a father is and what the duty of a mother is and of a child and so on. You go out of the United States and you go, oh my gosh, it's a traditional world. We're the ones who have so true. Somehow melted the social compact in ways that I think seem almost impossible and horrifying to a lot of the immigrants might come, frankly. They must find themselves in a country where they're, you know, the families under attack, where education is overwhelmed by questions of social justice and so on rather than learning to read. In some ways, I have a kind of poignant empathy for a lot of the immigrants to America who come from cultures much more intact than ours. That'd be almost every culture outside the US Western Europe, Australian New Zealand Canada. Yeah. That's at the Angles Fair, which is uniquely falling apart for reasons that I don't really understand. Why is that? Well, I went to Oxford. And after I went to college here, I had a fellowship to Oxford and I lived there for a couple of years, studied there for a couple of years and then lived in London afterwards. It was during the period of Thatcher's kind of recapitalization of the society. When I got there, England was a kind of grim post-war nationalized space in which, you know, people were used to rationing in lines and the coal miners would go on strike and the whole country would shut down. And, you know, in a couple of years, Thatcher had sort of caused it to be a dynamic, more modern money-making and the British thought materialistic culture. But it was functioning pretty well. That's mid-80s. Especially around speech and the freedom to express yourself, England of today seems like a nightmare. A place that threatens to arrest you on Musk if he comes for his Twitter, you know, failing to police Twitter, where, you know, resentments and antagonisms that are natural to a system that is bringing in so many newcomers and so on are declared crimes, where thought policing really is a reality and so is thought detention, you know. So, so what I thought of as the country that brought the full flower of human expression to perhaps its greatest, you know, greatest level in history. I mean, if you think about Elizabeth and England and next few hundred years of literature, it's unmatched in its quality of expression. It's wit, it's insight into the human condition, it's drama, it's eloquence. Every sort of character you can find in Charles Dickens, every sort of criminal, every sort of hero. But they are getting very narrow and very sensorious and very politically oppressive in a way I wouldn't have thought was possible in the country of William Shakespeare and Charles Dickens and yeah, kind of the Magna Carta and the Magna Carta. You don't want to be passive, and tired, and dependent, do you? Of course you don't. You want to be strong and self-sufficient. That's the goal and our friends, it being can help you. They understand that real strength does not come from drugs, it comes from inside you internal motivation, internal strength, health. That's the key, bigger. So we partner with beam because they have the same values that we have, that Americans have hard work, accountability, free will, independence, be strong, don't be dependent. Not until you're really old anyway, beam can help you achieve that. This great US company is offering our listeners a new bundle, the American Strength Bundle, and it comes with top selling, creating and protein powder that delivers what your body needs to perform, to recover and to stay strong. No junk at all. All national ingredients that actually taste good, you will love it. You can get 30% off this bundle at shopbeam.com slash talker, this is not in stores, just on that page for people who listen to this podcast only. They're encouraging you to be weak, don't let them. Go to shopbeam.com slash talker for 30% off. So you got, I don't even know if you wanna talk about this if you don't, it's okay, but you came back from England and wound up at some point working for a magazine called Spy Magazine. Spy Magazine. And Spy Magazine long gone, but hugely influential in the 1980s and into the 90s. What was Spy Magazine exactly? Well, Spy Magazine was a sensation. It was a humor and gossip magazine aimed at the upper echelons of New York City and Los Angeles and Washington. In other words, we've got tabloids that tell us what the TV stars are doing and what rock musicians are doing. But Spy Magazine followed the careers of people, editors at the New York Times, assistant secretaries of state, various business people, socialites. And it did what in a way what Twitter does now. It made fun of them. It sometimes exposed scandals about them. It turned them into cartoon characters. Chief among them was Donald, the young Donald Trump. Spy Magazine had almost patented or hallmark obsession with Donald Trump in the 1980s as a, well, they call them short-fingered vulgarian. That was his the epithet they used. And he was thought to be uncouth, greedy, narcissistic. He played it everything in gold. He wanted some kind of power that he probably didn't deserve. He did not have a pedigree like a lot of New York society does. A lot of New York society goes back to old families. Here was Trump coming out of Queens, and hanging out with celebrities. And there was a kind of political moment where Trump rehabilitated a skating rink in Central Park that had fallen into disrepair, woman rink, and the city had sort of acted like. It's just, we'll never fix it. It's too far gone. It's too complicated. Trump came in with his own money and his own crews and restored this rink in record time for less than it was thought it would cost. And he became a proto-political leader and spy magazine was absolutely devoted to making sure that went no further. Which is just interesting that, so it's New York City, so there are lots of short-fingered vulgarians in the real estate business. It's New York City who gilled things and hit the nightclubs and it's a type. It's very common in New York, but certainly was in the 80s, but they focused on Trump. I mean, to the exclusion of everyone else, I mean, it was just as a reader. I was a reader of it. Trump was kind of the star of the magazine issue after issue why Trump? Well, if you go back, you see that Trump has had political ambitions for a long time. He ragged, I think, famously said on meeting a young Trump. This man's gonna be president someday. And he started giving interviews fairly early about how he'd fixed the United States and what was wrong with it. So my guess is that Donald Trump's political ambitions, which he maybe talked more about in private, but were known, were troubling to the establishment in some way. You're describing spy magazine as a tool of the establishment. Well, spy magazine came out of Harvard. It came out of the Harvard Lampoon, the, I guess, private club secret society, devoted to humor that has given us a lot of, you know, our American comedy from The Simpsons, to Saturday Night Live and so on. Our publisher was the son of a, of a Raytheon executive. Um, we, uh, it's not a sector you associate with humor. Well, what influence it had, I can't tell. It's just the fact that that is the nature of the publisher's money. And it also included a lot of time magazine characters, you know, Walter Isaacson, who became head of time magazine, head of the Aspen Institute and so on. Well, we're sort of around the magazine. He never wrote for them, but he was a constant butt of jokes and kind of in that sphere of influence. Grading Carter, who went on to come and the head of the Vanity Fair, which really was, uh, you know, an establishment, burnishing, you know, force to bring, you know, a lot of, a lot of our worship of the British Royals and so on. Yeah, I'm just from that era of Vanity Fair magazine. Um, and, uh, there were other characters involved in that set in that group, who came from very high families, uh, Ivy League backgrounds and since have gone on to all sorts of positions. It was an in crowd. It was as though college had never ended for this set of people and they went on and created a magazine, treating New York as a campus in which, you know, the real cool people got rewarded and the uncool people, you know, were mercilessly made fun of. Um, is it an accident that the main butt of that humor Donald Trump became president of the United States? Well, I don't know. But one thing I've learned about America and my long tour of our, you know, high echelon, uh, system is that presidents are spotted. Future presidents are spotted and even start their campaigns as it were. The campaign before the campaign much earlier than you might recognize. Yes. My daughter went to Harvard and first year she came back. She said, dad, they're so pretentious. I said, why? She said, I actually was sitting in a room with two guys who were arguing and one was saying, I'm running in 2046. You have to wait till 2050. And she said, they were serious. I'm not surprised. What I am surprised by is that of all the ego maniacs out there, I think they're going to be president. There are, as you said, quite a few institutions like Harvard. Um, the editors that spy took Trump seriously. Like they were really 40 years ago, they were trying to strangle his campaign in the crib. Yes. I just think that's, that's just incredible. The, the way that they could smell that this was real. He's not like everybody else. He's not like other real estate developers who think they should be president. This guy actually could be and we're going to stop him. Well, those who are ambitious in America and politically ambitious and socially ambitious in a way are all aimed at the same culminating office, whether they get there or not. You know, anybody who, you know, I remember when Jack Welch, the president of GE was a big celebrity for Liya Coco, immediately, will they be president? So of course there would have been rumors around Trump that he might want to be president. Maybe he fed them himself. Maybe spy was especially lucky in picking this, uh, but of its jokes or maybe in some sense they saw in him, uh, the beginnings of a kind of rough populist to them on cooth, uh, political movement that he would lead. The people, it's by, you know, Trump's fighting Harvard today, right? Yeah. You know, the, the, the cultural arguments that Trump is having right now with the elite institutions of America. Uh, show that he doesn't like them and they don't like him. And I think that, uh, hostility goes back a long time in his career. I think he was, I think he was discerned as a threat to the hierarchies as they existed at that point. And he still is. And that's the root of the hate for Trump. It could be to the extent, you know, people always ask me, is there an establishment? Is there a big club? Uh, you know, it is, is America really have a kind of insider ruling class. And my experience coming from a farm in Minnesota, getting to Princeton, why died a good observer, a good listener, a social guy who gets into all kinds of room is answer is yes, most definitely yes. Um, and the lineages of these, of these ruling class members, they go back in all kinds of ways through certain law firms, through, you know, military service, intelligence service, through, they go back to big commercial fortunes, you know, you know, we still have basically a Vanderbilt on TV and CNN, you know, um, and that group knows itself as and and sees itself as a kind of knighthood or a night chivalric order that's guiding the US that has a right in some sense to rule it. And when they talk, when I hear the term our democracy, it's often spoken by these people in a possessive way, you know, John Kerry, Howard democracy, right? With a vote is internal. It's not a national vote. It's a vote. Exactly. You know, it's current Anderson and Walter Isaac, you know, and Hillary Clinton and whatever. And so I think it was pretty easy to identify Trump early as an outsider and a, you know, what they call in Britain, a boundary, somebody who was trying to jump to a class without the pedigree, without the proper credentials and without the right attitude. Well, here's the story. You probably haven't heard a lot about the Chinese mafia is exploiting rural America to create a drug empire. This is not available on cable news that networks are not telling you about this, but it's totally real. Communist affiliated drug gangs just drawing parts of the United States, the parts that Washington ignores, to sell drugs, laundering money and building a black market network inside this country's most beautiful, but least served areas. We've got a brand new documentary on this. It's called High Crimes, the Chinese mafia takeover of rural America. It's available now on Tucker Carlson.com. It's excellent. The purchase of churches and schools to aid the operation, the cherry rigging of power boxes to steal electricity for in pesticides, collusion with the Mexican cartels. It's it's unbelievable. By the way, one of the drug houses is like walking distance from my house. I didn't know that. It's a layered and fascinating story. Had to Tucker Carlson. The Mexican cartels, it's unbelievable. By the way, one of the drug houses is like walking distance from my house. I didn't know that. It's a layered and fascinating story. Had to Tucker Carlson dot com to watch now. We think you'll love it. When you got to Princeton from Minnesota in the 80s, were you impressed by these people? Did you think they deserve to rule? So I came out of Minnesota to Princeton with one mythology, you know, in my foremind. And that was the story of F. Scott Fitzgerald, but to say, yeah, F. Scott Fitzgerald. He came from a pretty good family in St. Paul, Roman Catholic kid, but his mother had fallen on hard times and though they lived in the right neighborhood, they didn't have a lot. And he goes to Princeton in the, you know, right before World War I, or during it. And he sees the glory of the American establishment, the beautiful debutants, the, you know, the sons of an industrialist at Princeton. Of course, at that time was, you know, an all-male school, but there were other sort of feeder schools that they could date the girls from. And he absolutely was enchanted by it. He wrote a novel, this side of paradise, you know, which Princeton still sort of exalts over as its most romantic portrayal. And I got to Princeton primed by that myth. But of course I get there in 1980 on the heels of the 60s and 70s when, you know, aristocratic and system-based establishment America was at a low ab after the Vietnam War. So I wasn't expecting the same great gas-vish party. But what I saw were people who were connected by all sorts of family, marital, business, and school ties in a much tighter, in a much tighter organization than I would ever have dreamed. And I also found out that I wasn't one of them. I could be if I wished, you know, in America when you grow up middle class and you go to the right schools and so on, you have the option of joining that country club on an honorary basis if the membership votes. And if you behave correctly. But I being a kind of dark, brooding, want to be poet, artist wasn't willing to do that. And so I spent my time sort of like the little match girl standing outside the window, watching them conduct their rituals, play their sports that I had never seen. I didn't know how the cross was played. I thought field hockey was something he played in the gym with hockey sticks and a ball. And so the whole thing was alien to me, but not charming. It seemed a little brutal. It seemed a little insular. It seemed very judgmental. And it seemed to be, that sounds like boarding school. Yeah. Yeah. And it seemed to be populated by people who they didn't just have material entitlement. They didn't just think they deserved a big house someday. They had social entitlement and political entitlement. They really believe that they should rule the country, you know. And we had a thing called the Woodrow Wilson school at that time at Princeton. The sort of woke hurricane has come through and taken everything named after Woodrow Wilson blowing it off the Princeton campus. But in those days, the Woodrow Wilson school was a place where generals and secretaries of state, you know, federal reserve chairs and so taught. And the the the the creme de la creme at Princeton were people who would turn out like James Baker, the secretary of state or Paul Voker, the Fed chairman or whatever. The Princeton mythos was that you were the gentlemen advisors, the powers behind the throne, almost too good to be the president yourself. I didn't find that as romantic as Fitzgerald did. But of course, think about what happened to Fitzgerald. That class, which he was so besotted by, never really accepted him. He ends up a journeyman screenwriter, alcohol, alcoholic out in, you know, LA. He writes his greatest novel really about the pretense and the tragedy of that class. You know, whose hero is someone who desperately the great Gatsby is actually, you know, a kid from North Dakota who wants exactly and a gun runner and a, you know, gangster basically who wants to get in and they go to his parties. It's sort of like what we've seen, you know, Gatsby wasn't Epstein, Gatsby wasn't Diddy, but he served a similar role through the biggest parties and everyone went. But the minute he went down, everybody forgot him and there's no one at his funeral at the end of the great Gatsby, you know. And so that brutal insider class that will certainly eat your free food and grace your, you know, grace your parties with their presence runs out on your pretty quick. And I was frankly scared by them to be honest. You know, my view of British society was that it was somehow a more humane and, yeah, I don't know, secure version of it. The thing about the upper classes in America, they're very insecure because- I've noticed because secretly they know they are upper at all. And that in fact they live in a middle class society whose cultural products, you know, Hollywood movies, rock and roll and so on, which are the true genius of America. Aren't created by them. No. No. And also their place isn't secure because it's not granted to them really by birth. Like at some point you have to perform where else you lose your summer house. Right. You know, at which they often do. And so there is a kind of anxiety to them and you really, really feel it. And which is one of the reasons I think they're so easy to control politically. If you tell them or tell their wives more precisely that, you know, like all the cool people are doing something they'll just do it. Right. Have you noticed this? Oh yeah. The American, you know, there's a great book by a writer named Paul Fussle who used to hang out at Princeton and who I knew a little called class. I recommend that everyone read it. And it's thesis is basically that the American class system is fully as developed as any other countries. And it's got as many signifiers and code words and secret club houses and so on. But that it obscures its presence in order to not be offensive to our allegedly democratic system. And now we've just discussed one more example of that. Luigi Manjioni, you know, from the highest cast of Baltimore, at least, you know, income wise society, making himself out to be Shagwavara or Fidel Castro or Huey Newton or something. Sacco-advanced. Yeah. Sacco-advanced Eddie. Given everything you've just described, where is the country in five years? Well, you know, as I said at the beginning, I see things in terms of stories. Stories are different than narratives. Everybody says now, oh, that doesn't fit the narrative. And they think that narrative means story. A narrative is simply Joe Biden is actually a fit as a fiddle and he just stutters. A story has a logic to it. A narrative is just the description of what's going on. A story is how did something start? What is happening and what kind of conflict is determining its unfolding and how will it end? The American story is hard to tell because right now we don't have one. We used to have one when I went to school. For whatever reason, it was thought to be too simplistic or maybe too white or to that or to colonialist, but it was people come from all over the world fleeing oppression, looking for opportunity from an old set of kingdoms and societies that had basically squeezed out the individual or they are just don't have much and they don't see how they can get much where they are. They come to America. They tame this resource-rich land and using this constitution that allows the individual to have rights that in other countries only the privileged and high-ashlawn types have, they unleash this economic, cultural, scientific dynamo that allows them to become the most powerful and in some ways the most fun and the most appealing and the most magnetic culture in human history. One that is imitated in every continent in the smallest towns whose music spans the world, whose boxers Muhammad Ali become the most famous people in the world. Now the American story has been reoriented either fractured or reoriented. There was a formal attempt to do it with the 1619 project. America began as a place to have slaves and exploit other races and its real founding is in that sin and its real story is how that sin propounded itself made everything worse, developed a brutal, horrible, oppressive, almost sickening society and we have to somehow get about the business of writing all those wrongs or we can't even get started as a society. We might even have to avenge those wrongs. I mean we're not talking about civil rights like in the 60s. We're talking about Annie Racism. We're talking about punishment, punishment and overt promotion of people not giving them opportunity but actually giving them the job and maybe even with less of a resume. President of Harvard, it's important that she'd be black. It's less important that she'd be a a plagiarist. In that American story, I guess the weasies of the world and the people who are writing in Los Angeles now and so on think we're paying for our sins. This is the scene in the godfather where everybody gets their come up and so that we can have a new society. The other is over. No matter how much somebody like Elon Musk or Vibic Romswami or other people come to this country and make fortunes and found companies or become great athletes and so on, even though that still goes on and it still goes on in all kinds of permanent ways, it's not seen as of the essence of our American project. So where will be in five years, I think depends on whether or not we're able to find a version of the American story that is less retro-retributive, less about vengeance, less about retribution, less about the past, less about making up for past sins and more about new horizons, a fresh appreciation of our freedom, which is terribly threatened. And a common sense that we actually have done a fairly good job despite terrible dissent and really I think sabotage by our elites. It seems to be the upper classes and the elites of America who have the biggest questions about it, who have the greatest doubts about it, who are most hostile to it. They often do it on behalf of classes well below them, as they see it, migrants or people with other races or people with sexual predilections which in the past were thought to be aberrant. They always make sure to team up with a client class, a human shield. Yes, exactly. But I think they're on their way out. I think they're on their way out. So to be honest, I think there is a path toward resurrection, toward restoration, toward maybe even a renaissance in the sense that we now have technical tools that we didn't before. We've got technologies and the ability to communicate and meet and get around some of the old institutions. America was a set of broke ridges before. Every relationship with power had to be brokered. You have to call stock program to buy a stock. Now you can do it on each trade. If you wanted to communicate with a billionaire, I don't know through what series of meetings and letters you could join his club. Now you can DM Mark Andrieson. And he will respond and many will. Yeah, late at night at length. What a great guy, Mark. So the American ingenuity, which is, I think, the title force that unless restrained will always dictate our future, is still alive. It's in some ways more alive than ever. We've gotten around, you know, here you are having this podcast with all these viewers without a network behind you. The universe of media and communication is horizontal rather than vertical. There's no broker here. There's no executive waiting outside to tell you. Tucker, you can't talk about that. We're going to get sued or whatever. Walter Kern doesn't have five levels of editors above him when he writes a sub stack or a book. And so I think we, the people, can outmaneuver the last stand of the brokerage classes. And I think we're in the process of doing it. But the problem is some of the loudest and most prestigious voices are those who are losing out who are on their way out. You know, Scott Pele giving a of CBS news, giving some, you know, terrible, strident, Jeremiah about American society, because 60 minutes is no longer have the prestige that it did mostly due to 60 minutes, not due to evil Donald Trump. The screams that you're hearing are the screams of the defeated and the screams of the stressed. And I actually, you know, it's fashionable some days to say, I'm a real optimist at the darkest times. But I am because I think we've done a better job in the last few years of facing our real problems, at least identifying them, of liberating ourselves from the media brokerage and of getting real. Now, there are instruments for the manipulation of opinion and sentiment that are extremely powerful. And on the horizon, like, you know, AI possibilities for literally spoofing history, changing our view of things, making false videos, reengineering the past in 1984's ways. But I do think our ingenuity, our restlessness, our great genius for seeing bullshit. My hero's Mark Twain, and Mark Twain was at the full, you know, flow of his career, said, I'm not just an American, I'm the American. And by that, he meant that his attitude, seeing through pretense, pointing out hypocrisy, laughing at the capacity was the essential American attitude. And in so far as we can bring back that Twainian skepticism, self-obility to self-criticize, ability to see through our own egos, and ability to see that the institutions are in a weird way, not what makes America great. They are things that grow up and become like giant, you know, obstacles to further creativity and must be constantly questioned, constantly leveled. So that spirit seems to have liberated itself and found all sorts of technologies with which to propagate itself. And I'm betting on that. You're not worried about AI. You're not a doomer on the question. I'm not a doomer on AI in certain areas I am. There are certain things that people do that I don't think AI can never do by definition. Right now it's possible to put in five prompts, there were series of 10 prompts, and right a novel. I want a novel in which Tucker Carlson and I are lost at sea in Polynesia and are rescued by a mysterious maiden who takes us to her village where her village of love. Well, we can get that novel. It's kind of like an early Conrad novel for five prompts, 200 pages, and it can be published. We don't even have to say it's AI. We can pretend we wrote it. In the future, more and more of our literary product is going to be produced that way. But what I say to people is, are you going to want to read the literature and the novels of an entity that has never had sex? Are you going to want to read stories written by people who have never held baby? Are you going to want to read stories by people who have never worked hard all their life to get a job and then had the political asshole in the office, beat them out at the last minute? AI has no experience. All it can do constantly remix and perfect the surfaces of things, it's essentially collage that already existed. But we're going to need to tell our stories ourselves. So I don't fear AI, but there are things that I think it will do very badly in which I have no interest. And one of them is right novels, right stories report on life. Why should we fear it though? I mean, we're told not to fear anything by our religious sages. And I think it's a reflection of us if we fear it, we're fearing ourselves. And what in ourselves are we fearing if we fear AI? A lot of what people think will happen is that there will be a kind of totalitarian agreement among the powers that be to constantly hypnotize us, tell us stories, do things like run pandemics and other panics that can almost be administered by a machine and then generate documents and videos and so on, in support of them. And that's the thing they fear. But what are you really fearing there? What you're fearing there is power running a muck because it's not going to do it itself. Until it starts doing it itself. I love your take on AI, sort of cautious concern not panicked. It does seem like everything you just said makes the existence, the possession of physical books, unchanging physical books, not digital, things that can't be revised without you're knowing more important. Absolutely. I mean, I'm a literary servicelist at this point. I'm a book prepper. Well, I am. I buy sets of encyclopedias that I believe represent the perfection of that particular encyclopedias like encyclopedias Britannica from the 80s, say, before they start becoming politically sensitive. And I actually carry in my car. Some people carry in their car jumper cables, granola, spare tire. I carry a box of books that if I were to be stranded somewhere, if the road system of America broke down, I'm not kidding. I have a box of them. I selected them carefully. There's an ornithology of English poetry. Oh, wow. There are a couple of novels by Conrad. There are some other, favorite books, the collected Sherlock Holmes to entertain myself. Which is amazing. Yes. You can't read the sign of four too much. No, a studying scarlet. Sherlock Holmes stories were the first literary story. Me too. Me too. Edgar Rice-Bros and then Sherlock Holmes. Yeah. And I got to say, if there's, you know, if I'm an anglophile, it's because of Sherlock Holmes. Because I could imagine no fate more romantic than having a little apartment in London with a roommate, a doctor, injecting a little cocaine when I got bored. And being called upon by Scotland Yard, it's all their most naughty mysteries. Also, there were ladies flitting around. We don't think of Sherlock Holmes as having much of a love life, but he actually did. It's indicated just the discretion, the civilization, the parlor that he lived in, the simplicity of his life, and the aliveness of his mind were an endless curiosity and attention to detail were really my Babe Ruth or my, you know, Elon Musk. That was my role model. So funny. Me too. I got packed off to Boring School in 1983 and my father gave me the collected Sherlock Holmes, and that's what I read for that first semester when I was 14 or whatever. And that totally, and from there, it's like a short hop to Evelyn, war or well. Right. Do you know, and I just sort of stayed in that genre, my PG Woodhouse, my whole life. I have a move beyond that. Well, in the back of my ram truck, there's a box with the collected Sherlock Holmes. And if a solar flare ever takes out the grid, I will be found next to a fire in the Nevada desert reading that was allowed. So the, I think the largest repository of books in the world, larger than the fabled library of Alexandria is the Library of Congress. It's one of them. Yes. It's unclear what the largest library, just like it's unclear what the largest anything is. Right. No, that's exactly right. But it's got to claim on the title. It's a massive repository of physical book paper books. Trump just fired the head of it. I don't know if there kind of is ahead of it. I heard someone say the other day that Walter Kern was going to be the head of it. Are you going to be the library of Congress? Would you want that job? What is that job? Well, total candor. I was approached by some people in December asking if I might be interested in the job. I thought about it. I actually grew up when I was a little kid on the outskirts of Washington. And I had a next door neighbor. He was a rear admiral. He had been a sergeant in World War I. His name was Robert Knox. He was a rear admiral and a thing called the Coast and Geodetic Survey, which was a branch the government founded by Jefferson way back when to chart and map the coastlines of America and the world. It was kind of the nautical equivalent of the Lewis and Clark expedition. And this man who was in his 70s introduced me to the Smithsonian Institute. And he was a member of a club called the Cosmo Club in Washington, D.C. and he'd take little me down there. And that was a place where kind of explorers, generals, admirals, and that type gathered. And he introduced me to a vision of mankind. He used to call it humankind and our achievements. That was, as I say, Jeffersonian. It goes back to the belief that if we can understand each other better, if we travel more, if we learn more, if we read more, we will become more peaceful, productive, and happy people. So when someone said, would you be interested? I left back to that experience and that little garden apartment and Park Fairfax, Virginia with this man who would show me his books, teach me geography, show me his take me to the Smithsonian, introduce me to writers and other intellectuals at his club. And I thought, yes, that's the continuation of that spirit that that man brought into focus for me as a young man. And I thought, it's the only job I would do. In fact, you could come to me and ask, do you want to have this political office or some kind of other role in governance? And I would say, absolutely not, stuffy, boring. I'm a writer. I'm an artist. I'm a little bit of a freaky guy. I'm an outside-the-box thinker. Library of Congress? Yes. And the reason wasn't just because it goes back to Jefferson. The Library of Congress was partly founded by Jefferson selling his library to the United States. The Library of Congress goes back to 1800. In fact, it was proposed even before the Constitution that the U.S. have national library. And it didn't fly the first time. So the idea of a national library is older than the United States. And it exists in a beautiful building right up there between the Supreme Court and the Capitol. And it represents to me the entire body of what we've done, what we've thought, what we've written. Now it collects the movies we've made, the music we've made. It has done a very good job of making them available to the public, you know, digitally and in other ways. And it is the shrine to American culture, civilization. More than that, it cannot, it can be added to every, every book that's published in America since two copies to the Library of Congress. That's why it grows. But it can't be changed. And it needs to be protected. What a librarian is to me is a guardian who stands in front of this vast file of our accomplishments and says, you're not going to change it. You're not going to harm it. You're not going to destroy it. I am between you and it. And we are going to celebrate this because this is a temple. You're not getting into the Vatican to throw bombs and you're not getting into the Library of Congress to pull books to change additions to retroactively rewrite history, to play that role, not just of guardian, but of champion, would be a privilege to be a beyond measure. And next year is the 250 end of the United States. As I say, we're a little unclear about what our story is as a country. But the Library of Congress sits at the center of that story and is the place we can go. what our story is as a country. But the Library of Congress sits at the center of that story and is the place we can go to to find it and rediscover it. And I think it's underappreciated and underutilized institution in American life that needs to be brought to the fore. You know, sometimes I imagine when this person suggested I do it and I took it to various officials. I showed my interest and some of them were encouraging. And they said, you know, you have to be confirmed by the Senate. You're a weird guy. You've written all kinds of things. There are scenes in your books, you know, opinions of expressed that aren't very political. I said, well, nobody who's a writer grows up to want to be a politician. I, you know, I was a writer. But I think because I have books in the Library of Congress, I'm probably better qualified than people who don't. I also, I also think that, you know, if you want to talk about diversity, look at a bookshelf. The works of William Burrows, drug-addled madman, homosexual visionary, crazed, junkie, wife killer, sit next to the works of, you know, Robert Frost. He's full of Vermont or people of Vermont or in other words, if we as a society can hold our differences, I like the word difference better than diversity, can hold our differences in one building. Then we can hold them in one country. You know, a great library is a tribute to variety and peaceful coexistence that society could well model itself on. And I'd love to be the face of that. And it has a great history, you know, Franklin Roosevelt pointed a poet, Archibald MacLeish, Ford, Gerald Ford, appointed a historian Daniel Borsden, who was a great thinker too. We've not had many librarians of Congress because until the office was term-limited under Obama to 10 years, sometimes people held it for 40. That suggested it might be a job as like. If people are willing to spend half their lives in that job, there must be something about it. Our books threatened. Oh, absolutely. Well, before I say, answer that question, I have a joke that I missed inserting and it's not the reason I really want to be librarian of Congress is that I've already written a desk plate for my desk which says, the book stops here. And then you need a place to put that. Right. And that's the answer to your question. Books are threatened in lots of ways. First of all, they're not physically of quality in the way they used to be. The way books are printed and the paper that printed on these days is not designed to last for 100 years. It's not designed to last more than a few years. I happen to know this from discussions with publishers that they are now being forced to use paper that is of such low quality that we cannot depend on these volumes. Staying bound or readable or intact for very long. Books are threatened in all kinds of other ways. There will be artificial books written by AI. One of the big questions is, does every book length work created by AI? Along on a shelf in the Library of Congress. Well, there's going to be zillions of them. And a future librarian of Congress is going to have to answer that question. Do we just fill this up with, you know, the endless drag produced by a mechanized form of writing or does it have to have real authorship, human authorship? Books are threatened also because we don't read. We don't read at length anymore. We read headlines. We read the paragraph. We read the short take. We read the sub-stack. We read the tweet. But to read a book is a skill that might be lost, you know, almost like sailing or, you know, how to raise a garden. It takes, not just patience. It takes a certain kind of mind to follow a complicated story that goes back and forth and doesn't have simple resolutions or simple morals in which the characters are complicated. A novel, for example. You can lose the ability to read it and people are losing that. I've noticed. And there's something really important about following a story, a set of ideas unified by a theme, a thesis, a narrative, over, you know, a couple hundred pages. It absolutely. Remember my one's asking my father about my real mother who was long gone. And I said, she seemed smart. She was smart, high-acute person. And he goes, yeah. She read magazines. I was like, I guess the most nodding thing, you know, you're speaking of AI. One feature that AI offers these days is it will interpret a tweet for you. And I don't know if you've seen this. You're not a big social media again. No, not. People are using Grok and other AI's to interpret a tweet. What did that mean? In other words, they're now downloading their literary imagination and their interpretive ability of two sentence documents to machines. Reading is not just putting together the words like a child and, you know, pronouncing them correctly or, you know, knowing what a sentence is. Reading is set of reactions and echoes created in the mind that form an interpretation and an analysis and an impression and maybe even a moral. And it's just reading itself is just the start of the reading process. Reading the words is just the start of where a book enters the mind, the soul, the culture and so on. And that process, if it dims down, if it thins away, if it becomes so uncommon as to not be a regular habit or occasion in our society, will leave us starved in a way that Bobby Kennedy tells us our foods are starving us. You know, we're still going to be eating vast quantities, but the books will be velveta cheese pumped up with, you know, 100 different additives. I look at what is contained in the Library of Congress, the pre-AI library of the United States as what they call in the vaccine world pure blood, a pure blood or a controlled group of documents from the time when people thought without the intervention of the machine. We're going to need that. We're going to need to compare the culture that comes after AI with the one that came before and we're going to need to keep a relationship between them. And it's not just a matter of keeping those books from being altered or, you know, deleted. It's a question of keeping that shrine alive so that when we come back from the wilderness of AI to the North Star of this library of what we did when it was all done by hand and by a person, we can judge what we've lost, what we've gained and behold as people. Did you, you're an adult man with the internet was invented? So you remember the hype that surrounded it? Did you ever imagine 30 years ago when it was just starting that the internet would lead to illiteracy? Well in some ways, okay, in some ways we're more literate than ever. In that we communicate by writing in more than ever. You haven't even talked on the phone. You know, text messages and posts and expoests and, you know, Facebook pages and so on are all written documents. So people are, in a sense, writing more than they ever did. Sometimes they are writing more than they speak. You can go through a whole day and realize you didn't even speak to another person, but you wrote plenty. So literacy considered in its most, you know, basic and literal sense has not died out. We do a lot of writing and reading still. this quality has suffered and there are measurements of the vocabularies of Americans and basically the vocabularies of AI programs and so on that show our vocabularies are shrinking. You know, in or well, the totalitarian state is actively engaged in shrinking the language and making it more simplistic, less, you know, less complex so that people can't think anymore. You know, they have fewer distinctions. The word bad is double plus on good because why should you need another word than good for bad? We'll just modify the word good and call it ungood. And the idea there is that they will slowly gain control of the human mind at the point where people won't be able to form ideas because they don't have the words. To some extent that's happening because of the internet for various reasons. I mean, we did ourselves the greatest injury culturally that I've ever seen in my lifetime when we shut the schools during COVID. I mean, there are kids who have a window to acquire language and reading skills and that window was closed for them. I can't think of greater tragedy in American life than that. Literacy adds a real living, you know, complex phenomenon is, I think, endangered, terribly endangered. There are words everywhere, but is there sense everywhere? Well, last question I asked you something we talked about last night at dinner. You just referred to Orwell. You were rereading 1984 for the first time in 15 and 20 years, you said. It's been 40 for me. And I think for a lot of people in my age, I doubt it. But anyways, it's still assigned in schools, 1984. Well, let me tell you something, Tucker. I picked up the 75th anniversary edition of 1984 approved by the Orwell estate. It's got a little seal on the cover. It's the official edition. This happens to be Orwell month, celebration of Orwell all across England and the English-speaking world. And there was an introduction that the estate approved for the book, which was one of the most Orwellian things I've ever seen. It was written by a novelist who said, well, Winston Smith, the hero is a misogynist and that's, she literally used the word problematic. And usually I wouldn't read a book with a character like this. But you know, you should probably, it's still an important book. And then she made other criticisms. That's in the prologue. It is the introduction to the book. Okay. I noted this on a podcast and I said Orwell now has an Orwellian introduction, which accuses him of thought crime and warns us that though the book is problematic, we might want to read it anyway. She also notes the lack of racial diversity in it. Really. Oh, yeah. Who was the do you remember her name? I do not remember her name. She's a Harvard trained novelist. But what was so odd about it was that following the introduction, there's another introduction forward written by Thomas Pinchin. Thomas Pinchin, who many would argue is our most mysterious and illustrious, serious novelist, alive. He wrote what purportedly alive. Reportedly alive. Nobody knows what is faceless. No, exactly. You know, he's written these magisterial books that are, you know, some believe almost too complex to understand. He did a forward, but he got second billing. He got bumped out of first place in introduction world by this ridiculous trigger warning. It's a series of trigger warnings about the book. And it's not ironic. Not ironic at all. So terrifyingly earnest that you can't believe it. He criticizes the book for not reflecting her lived experience. My God, it's a dystopian novel, you know, written in 1948 about a future totalitarian state, which resembles a combination of Soviet Russia and England. And it doesn't reflect your lived experience. The only books I want to read are ones that don't reflect my lived experience. I don't read Moby Dick to reflect my lived experience. Right. Your lived experience, we can assist of your diary. Yeah, right. My lived experience is a drag. It's a limitation. I go to books to go to other parts of the world, be in other heads, be in other times, other parts of history. And that that should be a criticism of 1984. It's just the triumph of narcissism. I mean, that's just basically what that, you know, so how was this about me? Enough about you. So anyway, you know, that was the first alarming thing about 1984 and Adam and gotten to the book yet. And I got to the book itself. I have to tell you, prophetic isn't the word. Prophetic is overused. It's not that he predicts the society we live in today. He finds the eternal formulas by which power defeats the human mind and individual. It wasn't that he was just extrapolating about historical trends. He was giving us a worst case scenario for group think over person think. He was giving us a warning about what happens when we lose our memories. More than anything else 1984 is a book about time about a society which doesn't have access to the past and which the past is constantly rewritten to celebrate the current leaders. It's Wikipedia. Yeah, kind of. Yes. And in which there is no future because no one can plan a life, no one can even expect that they won't go to jail tomorrow for some tiny crime or offense. People in 1984 are stuck brutally and tragically in the present. And the thing that keeps the present their sole preoccupation is the violence of society. The thing about violence is it happens now. It takes you out of the past. It blots out the future. Violence is a deep experience of the present only from which you can't escape. And in 1984, the reason they have a two minute hate where the society gathers every day to throw oranges and, you know, her all curses at this imaginary enemy subversive goldstein. And the reason they have a actual hate week in the summer every year where they do that for a week is that fear, anger and violence are ultimately the weapons of the control class. He does a very good job of showing how eternal and perpetual war with unseen enemies abroad keeps, you know, keeps the people in their place and keeps them insecure and anxious. He does another good job of showing how constant fear in the domestic realm, you know, will I be told on will I be turned in? Remember in 1984, there's a telescreen that watches you, you don't watch it. You know, will I be seen to have some, you know, item I shouldn't have, I'm supposed to have black market cigarettes, but somehow I found some good ones. Will they see those and come to my house and take them, take me? And so the book is a nightmare. And it's a thorough nightmare, which seems to offer no hope at all. At the end, it's not any spoiler to say the hero who manages for a short time to think for himself, to have a love affair, to write a diary. His great his great crime in the book is starting a diary, pens and paper are pens and paper pretty much illegal in the world because they create a record that can't be falsified, you know. And so at the end, he's completely crushed. He's tortured. He's brainwashed and he comes out at the end, a thoroughly broken person saying, saying slogans, I love big brother without spirit, without hope. It is a hopeless portrait of what happens when an inner circle of people devoted to power above all, take control of the human mind and the individual. And if you want, if you wanted to press yourself, read 1984, that it resembles in so many ways things that are happening now is uncanny, but I guess someone used it as a template at some point. I mean, you would almost think they did in so many ways our censorship regime, our surveillance regime, in the book, the young people are the enemies of the old. They're spying on them constantly. Children are the most distrustful and zealous backers of party orthodoxy. Yes, especially young women and young women in particular. And Orwell has been criticized for that, you know, thus the misogyny. Because there's no resemblance to our current reality whatsoever. I mean, he just made it up on nothing. No. Sorry. We have, when I read it as a child, the reason they assign 1984 was to tell us that there's a place called the Soviet Union that is much like this. And by reading 1984, you can celebrate your freedom to read 1984. Exactly. Which they can do over there. You can celebrate the superiority of our culture and our, you know, value for the individual and our freedom to think, express ourselves without fear. But when you read 1984 now, it's not to feel superior to the old Soviet Union or, you know, Hitler's Germany, it's to realize we're there. We're so there that in some ways Orwell lacked imagination. He didn't know AI, though in the world of 1984, novels are written by machines. They just take the elements of novels and like a kaleidoscope. They crank a wheel and new combinations come out, you know, which is very much like the AI literature I've been predicting. In 1984, machines write novels. Yes. I don't know how I forgot. Winston's girlfriend, Julia, is in the novel writing department. And it's a funny book. And one point she gets injured operating the novel writing machine. And he said, but it was a common injury in the novel writing department. She got her fingers caught in a novel writing machine. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean, prophetic doesn't fully describe it. If there's a novel writing machine. I mean, right. Exactly. He was limited by the technology of his day. And some of the circumstances and how he imagined things. The one thing he gets wrong is that 1984, the society called Ocean Eye, Airstrip One is the new name for England. It's allied with America in an alliance against Eurasia, which is basically Russia and Eastern Europe and East Asia, which is basically China. And they're perpetually at war with each other. And the war and the sides change constantly. One of the greatest black humor scenes in all of literature is Winston Smith in Trafalgar Square, some London Square, during a big demonstration against the enemy Eurasia. And there are posters up of the Eurasian, you know, evil leaders and their atrocities and so on. In the middle of the protest, the word comes down from big brother from the party, from the government that we're no longer at war with Eurasia. We're actually at war with East Asia. And the posters against Eurasia are all still up. So how are the people going to reconcile the fact because they're told we've always been at war with East Asia. And they go, saboteurs put those posters up. Share them down, Russian agents. Share them down. You know, and how many times in the last few years have we been through those ridiculous pivots where, you know, only the vaccine can save us next day. No one ever said it stopped transmission of COVID. Joe Biden is just a nice old man with a stutter he's had since childhood. We always knew he was an Alzheimer's patient being hidden by his family and various cunning subordinates. We're going through that every day, that scene where we are suddenly expected to switch enemies. We've switched Elon Musk being the enemy three times in the last week, I think. You know, about a week ago after his fight with Trump, I saw Democrats saying, we should really, we should court Elon, we should bring him into our movement. You know, now, now he's apologized and it'll again be, you know, fire bomb Teslas. Yeah. It's not just docility or it's not just so depressing. Which is such a specific activity that Orwell records is the ability of thinking people are allegedly thinking people to pretend that's what's happening isn't happening. What just happened never happened. And to go on, mouthing these utopian slogans about a future that no one actually believes will come. What's so interesting, I've never been in a royal family whole life read the collector or well, Orwell was a cheerleader for the Second World War. He was a government propagandist he worked for BBC, hate to say it, but it's true. And he wrote 1984, only three years after the end of the war. And points out, you know, it's a militarized society. Yeah. The essence of totalitarian control is war. Right. Right. So I mean, that seems like a big, like he seems to have changed his view. What do you mean? Well, I mean, again, Orwell was, oh, you mean, he spent the war rallying England to war. Right. Right. He seemed to believe was a just war. And then afterward started to see it as a racket for the control of it exactly. Yeah. Yeah, he does. And he also sees terrorism, a form of terrorism as a control mechanism too in airstrip one in ocean eye. Every once in a while, a rocket will just fall and wipe out a crowd. And no one knows where they're fired from. They assume they come from the enemy. And one day Winston is with his girlfriend and this little hideout that they have in the middle of the book in their, you know, very short and soon to be curtailed love affair. And she says, you know, we're shooting those. I know we shoot those brackets. What? He said, yeah, we shoot those brackets. It's what we call false flag nowadays. And and Winston says, I never could have imagined that that was possible. Here he lives in this nightmare society, but he still can't believe that they would shoot rockets at their own people in order to keep them fearful. The woman, however, you know, sees it clearly. She's a little bit more cunning. She has a lower estimation of people. There's not much in Orwell and in 1984 that doesn't have an equivalent now. And and there's not much in there that doesn't explain events these days, you know. I, you know, as I read it, I read it this morning. There are riots going on in Los Angeles full of hate, full of anger, full of people brandishing, bricks, multi-top cocktails and so on. And I thought, is it, does it really matter what they're supposedly protesting? No, it's the rage that matters. And is the rage really something that threatens America, threatens the state? Or are these outbreaks of rage and rioting in a way of service to power? Because they keep us distressing each other. They keep us divided. They keep us rebuilding. You know, one of Orwell's thesis is that society's gotten so prosperous that you have to have a war just to keep the economy going. Everybody has everything. So you got to destroy a lot of stuff in order to rebuild it, you know, abroad and at home. And and and seeing through the lens of 1984, protests doesn't look like it's about anything, riotous protests, I mean. But keeping the machine going through channeling people's frustration, anger and anxiety into these orgies that really lead nowhere, but always always always cause us to be more surveillance, more control, etc. You know, it gives me a dour idea of the supposed idealism behind riotous protest. I see those people as tools, frankly. I think they are. Walts are current. I really hope soon to be the librarian of Congress. Certainly a beacon of perspective and airy edition in a increasingly stupid world. I appreciate it. Thanks. Great conversation. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. On another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. So we did do that on YouTube. We think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.