Hello freaks we're live took a while, but we're here this episode of the German experience is brought to you by carbonite. Oh Look at that. I'm consistent Carbonite is a way to back up your files online Automatically without you even have to thinking about half to thinking about it having to think about it More people working from laptops today giving them mobility and flexibility and in fact 60% of workers use laptops as their primary work Computer but computer disasters can happen anytime and anywhere affecting not only your business files, but possibly even Every computer that operates in your business. That's why you need carbonite online backup And laptops can be especially Especially that's how George Bush says it especially vulnerable because 33% of stolen laptops are taken from the office 28% from cars and about 12,000 laptops are lost Every week at US airports. That's pretty ridiculous But if you have carbonite you have peace of mind that your backed up files are always safe No matter what happens to your laptop Carbonite backs up your computer files to the cloud automatically and continually no matter how many computers your business has or where they're located We rely on carbonate carbonate. We were We're not very convincing, but we mean it We rely on carbonite to back up the files here for the Joe Rogan experience podcast super easy. It's it's it's great It's it's a peace of mind Go to carbonite.com and type in the offer code JRE for a free trial No credit card required plus two bonus months with your subscription That's carbonite.com and the offer code is JRE Well also brought to you by audible.com Audible.com is the leading audio provider on the internet with over 150,000 titles It is a beautiful service. I love it. I'm a huge fan. They have audio books. They have podcasts They have comedy downloads. They have the OPN Anthony show as many grand-man cock books on audible.com Yep, yes, yeah, yeah entangled my fish novel the first novel and the second one is War God is it got yeah, war god and war god is that on audible yet? It's not on audible yet, but we're way can only get on it audible Jesus Louisus get cracking and entangled is one of the fictional works of mr. Hancock and we're gonna talk about that We're gonna talk about all kinds of shit in a minute if you go to audible.com forward slash Joe You will get a free audio book and 30 free days of audible service a service that I personally use I am a huge fan of audible and They have been supporting podcasts and stand up comedy for a long time So I'm a fan of them Just for for what they do and also for their product itself It's outstanding. It's just an amazing selection and I'm just a huge fan of using audible books and Their service for any time I'm commuting anytime I'm on a plane It's just it's a great thing to occupy your mind and actually entertain you when you would ordinarily be bored It's a fantastic service, so it's audible.com forward slash Joe get your free audio book and get hooked on audible I know you will love it. We're also brought to you by on it.com. That's o n n i t if you haven't been to on it for a while We have a lot of new products including the zombie kettlebells The primal bells which are all apes chimpanzee guerilla or rangutan and now a howler monkey, which I guess isn't really an ape A monkey It's a nape. How's that work? Is a nape a monkey? I don't know no no Monkey it's a tale right the tales the difference right? I would have been quite clear the apes are a bit there to us Oh, you're a bit there to them one of the other. Yeah one of the other but These are all what they are is functional workout equipment that is also awesome looking Designed by Steven Shubin Jr. Who is an artist that on it hired to create these badass designs They're all 3d balanced as well unlike there's there's some other kettlebells out there that are artistic But they're not balanced one of the more important parts of creating these was that we wanted to make sure that they were functional for Actually working out with so we we went above and beyond to make sure that they're 3d balanced and you can work out with them Just like a regular kettlebell. They just look more awesome We sell all sorts of other things out on it including supplements hemp protein We sell blenders Blendtec blenders for making protein shakes and kale shakes. We sell fitness equipment DVDs we sell books on nutrition Himalayan sea salt you name it if it's good for your body We sell it on it what we call on it is a total human optimization website That's what the company strives to provide you with all the things that you need to optimize your mind your body Your immune system your cognitive function So on and so forth and if you go to on it calm and use the codename Rogan that's o n n i t calm codename Rogan will save you 10% off any in all supplements All right without any further ado the great gram Hancock is here and I'm very excited to talk to you sir So to the museum Good job Rogan experience train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night All day we're live ladies and gentlemen gram Hancock a whirlwind tour across nations for many months and you're finally here in November 2013 today's date is the 13th and you've been even rocking at hearts in September I have been on the road since the second day of September between and between Betweenks I've had maybe like five days at home, but the rest of the time I've been traveling I've been let's see I've been in Turkey I've been all over Turkey amazing country my first ever visit to Turkey. Did you got to go back later? I went to go back to Turkey I spent more than a week at go back to Tepi I met Klaus Schmidt who's the actually rather decent German archaeologist who's Exhivating go back to Tepi I very rarely get on with archaeologists, but I got on with Klaus Schmidt I don't think he knew who I was but so somehow he was charming and he gave us a lot of access to the site He let's not forget right in amongst the pillars and and photograph them a very good time So we're there and then took the opportunity of being in Turkey to travel over a lot of the rest of the country There's some cool stuff there There's like what they call underground cities which go down eight ten stories under the under the earth The idea was that people built them to hide from their enemies But in my opinion the last thing you'd want to do if you were hiding from your enemies is Wold yourself up in some underground place where all they have to do is just put a stone across the door and you're done for I think they had some other function than that and yeah, we drove all over Turkey So a lot of amazing stuff came back to England briefly then went straight to Peru and Bolivia up in the up in the high Andies reached a place in a hired car 15,000 feet above sea level just over 15,000 feet. That's seriously high Short of breath up there. Yeah, and that was that was on the way to a site called Chavined Huantar where they venerated psychedelics in ancient times and Also visited T1ako in the Andies where in Bolivia where I've been a number of times before fantastic place I came back from there Went to South Africa Spent five days in South Africa Got on a plane immediately after returning from South Africa and came to the United States and I've been in the US for the last two two and a half weeks Wow, we got to get you some vitamins. Sorry. I need vitamins. We really need to get you. Do you do follow a healthy diet? Well, I always in a way. I don't I don't meet I don't eat maybe that's not healthy I don't eat red meat. I don't eat chicken. I eat but I pick on shrimps and scarlet some things like that Otherwise, I'm a vegetarian So fish and vegetables. I don't eat fish. No, it has a backbone. I don't eat things with you Interesting I don't eat things with backbones. Wow. But when what would brought this about? Well, and I was good trip. No, no, but way back in 1986 when I was 36 years old I realized that I didn't enjoy meat very much So I thought why don't I become a vegetarian? I became a vegetarian went on for years and years and years then I got bored I got seriously bored with vegetarian diet And I'd always like shrimps and scarlet and shellfish of all kinds lobster stuff like that So I went back and started elapsed and I started eating shellfish and that's kind of where I drew the line I would I would eat as far away from myself as possible But I would definitely have some flesh and so I I pick on these these creatures There's no particular moral reason for it. It's just just what I like to do It seems a bit moral though if you're trying to eat things that are far away from you I suppose so I suppose so but wouldn't it be ironic if if I were to discover when I pass through the veil to the next world That the one thing that you're not allowed to eat ever Strips imagine that I highly doubt there's dietary requirements. I highly doubt it too I highly doubt it Everything is temporary. I mean we don't part of I think what's what's great about being a vegetarian or being a vegan is that you don't want to take a life Yeah, I appreciate that. That's kind of what it comes down to for me. I appreciate that very much. However Lives are taken no matter what all the time and you take life when you eat vegetables Yeah, you just take a different type of life. Hey, I'm wearing a letter belt right now I'm wearing leather shoes. I took life life. It's life Yeah, and it's not just animal life but plant life and fungal life and all these I mean I see the point I just think it's a little short-sighted in utopian the the view is just a little delusional But I appreciate the thought and sentiment behind it to be honest if I if I if I really enjoy Meat even chicken or red meat if I really enjoyed it I would eat it, but I don't I never got I never got much out of it I was always a bit squeamish about the blood and I never I never really wanted to eat it So I kind of felt it's a waste. I don't I get no pleasure from this stuff So why so why should I eat it anyway? That's why I say it's not entirely a moral thing Which it's partly just a matter of of preference as well, but I agree with you I mean everything in the web of life on this planet lives off lives off everything else I think I think maybe in our society in western technological society You know, we've got so divorced from the act of actually killing an animal that we forget what we're doing We forget what's involved. It's all very packaged and sanitized and it's easy to forget what's involved in it But some some creature is is dying and in our culture of pretty unpleasant miserable death I agree and I think that that separation is very immoral that separation between us and our food to to try to reconcile that I've recently taken a punt I went hunting last year for the first time and got a deer and killed it Got it in quarter didn't all that jazz and eating it was incredibly satisfying and also knowing that where I went These animals they're not gonna make it no animal makes it what the idea is you just breed as quickly as you can Your children live for a couple of years and then they get taken out by mountain lions or coyotes or the winter Either freeze to death or or what have you, but it's a constant cycle and what I did is just dip into that cycle Yeah, and I think I have no problem with that and and you know It's much better actually go hunt an animal rather than the horrible cold Industrial slaughterhouses that we have that we have now and the fear and humiliation the animals are put through in that in that context At least at least in hunting is it's kind of it's kind of one to one and you are you are out there You're actually killing what you eat and the animal lives an entirely wild natural life until the moment you pull that trigger Yeah, there's no there's no artificial environment that it lives in there's no hormones that are introduced into its body No antibiotics. There's nothing unnatural about it at all Yeah, just the bullet hits it and that's gone and it's so very so and it's virtually painless because when a bullet hits an animal like that I mean they it's so fast and so quick They don't even know what happened. They try to run and then they're done I'm done. Yeah, and I think I would what I'm trying to do and I'm trying to do it this year By the end of this year. I want to make my diet when I'm home when I can control it Completely wild game. That's my goal wild game, which you will hunt. Yes, which I will hunt right? Yeah, and for me and for my whole family and I have this mapped out I'm this year. I want to get deer. I want to get a bison. I want to get an elk You know get all these various animals and just do it entirely to procure meat and to bring it back home Deep freeze it and to make sure that I always have wild natural meat available if I want to eat it Well before I went hunting I decided that I'm either going to be a vegetarian After this trip, I'm neither going to decide that this is like really not me. I don't really like it or I'm gonna become a hunter So I became a hunter right? I enjoy it. I've always liked meat But I think it's also because I participate so much in like really strenuous exercise You know jujitsu and martial arts and yeah, which requires it requires you to have some protein in your body It makes me crave it. I don't know if I need it I know there's many people that work out very hard that go on a completely plant-based diet But for me, I don't know whatever I think I need it varies from person to person But the hunting that you do or that you did have to get this animal do you I mean are you out there in nature? Is it what's the scene? How's it work? I went to? Well going next week actually But the first time I went I went to Montana the Badlands of Montana Montana actually where Lewis and Clark went down the Missouri River it was fascinating because It's incredibly wild. I mean we saw we were there as a wild lab. There's a lot of wild. Yeah, especially Montana because you can't grow out there So homesteaders tried to make these homes out there and live and we took these photos of them I should have brought some photos back button We took photos of these old homestead sites from the seven from the 1800s Right, and you know, they're just brought it out nobody could grow anything out there And then the Indians the the natives wound up killing a lot of people there is a lot of like between the Nez person all this people that live there and The the time we were there we were there for about five days and maybe we saw five or six other people the entire time And they were just people going down the river and canoes doing the same thing hunting So you're having a wilderness experience. Yeah, there's a photo of it up there. That's what it looked like It was completely wild no cell phone service no internet no nothing sleeping in a tent for five days Very very intense very refreshing too Like that was one of the things that I found fascinating about it going to bed when it got dark getting up in the morning when it got light No cell phone service no no internet no no dealing with social media No nonsense that we're constantly inundated with on a daily basis. Yeah, I enjoyed it very much But but you're not hunting an animal that can hunt you back. That's true But the animals that can hunt you back are not really not really edible I mean you can eat some of them. Yeah, I guess you can eat grizzly bear like some people in Montana or in Alaska eat grizzly yeah, I think they Make grizzly grizzly jerky out of it and some parts you can eat an outline you can eat the loin Right of a mountain lion apparently not really delicious. It's not the best game animals are essentially animals They're all running from predators. Yeah, you just take part in that. Yeah, you just get you just get into this scramble You know in South Africa in the Kalahari desert the of Namibia the bushman there they will run animals down Persists running them down. They will run them down. They will run for like 12 hours Yeah, just running running running until finally the animal just says I'm done. Yeah I've watched that I've watched that in videos online. It's an amazing native Americans used to do that as well Human beings are a rare animal and that we can't outrun animals We can't like outspeed them, but we can keep going. Yeah, we can keep going for a long time and some animals just overheat Yeah, they can't sweat. Yeah, you know, and so they're they're designed for like these quick sprints to get away from trouble But if we're just persistent and we keep after them There's a podcast that I've been listening to though is it was recommended by one of the nurses at the Regina, Keene Regina kind Oh, you say the laboratory where I'm going to get this blood work done called radio lab and it dealt with this one particular tribe in Kenya that has So many successful runners right from this one particular area and they were trying to figure out they did all these studies to try to figure out What made them so successful? And there were several factors one of them was their body shape One of them was the fact that they ran to and from school in a regular basis They were constantly running but the other one was this unbelievably brutal tribal ritual this coming of age ritual Right that the men and the women went through that involved genital mutilation With the men that involved circumcision with a sharp stick and they would cover their face with mud while they did this and if they Crack the mud if they like squinted or Winston pain then they would be able to coward and they would not have access to women They would like there they would be cut out of the economic situation in the tribe Unbelievable if you it's the most recent radio lab folks, so if you I was Recommend to me this this happens to these as a young man and just enter puberty at 13 13 and I think 17 they said they they they they they circumcised them with a stick Not only that they they keep this foreskin on and they tied in a bow and they push the head of the penis through this bow and This whole ritual takes several weeks in which time they're secluded and when they leave the hut They're like secluded this hut when they leave the hut to do anything. They're not allowed to walk They must run in a full pace. It also involves crawling through stinging nettles naked They have to crawl through these stinging nettle bushes. The idea is just to completely Control your ability to withstand pain they're gonna be tough bastards. Oh, yeah Yeah, so it's fascinating. It's like this perfect storm of They have an innate natural athletic ability based on their frame Yeah, and then it's also the running on a regular basis and then also the intense ability to withstand pain Absolutely fascinating for those things stuff. Well again I mean this is all stuff in our culture that we've kind of completely got away from set behind us We don't we don't even into relate with that at all in any more and it makes you wonder I mean if the shit hits the fan and our culture goes down Who can survive actually? I think we're just gonna go back to if the shit does hit the fan and I know that's a huge topic of your work And what what brought me to you in the first place was your your work on the very clear evidence that at certain points in history The shit clearly did hit the fan and people did have to rebuild I watch a lot of shows on subsistence living in mostly in Alaska. There's a lot of these shows Life below zero is my new favorite one and it's all based on these people living this one of them is this man Who lives with this innuit woman and they they just fish and hunt and their family lives off of this And it's absolutely fascinating The every day is spent acquiring food and they're not they're hardly growing anything because it's so cold So everything is just about catching fish hunting animals preserving these animals in whatever way whether they're drying or you know And it's it's an amazingly brutal life, but They seem to be very happy and this is one of the really confusing aspects of this real traditional sort of Subsistence living that people seem to feel satisfied by it It's kind of something we were meant to do maybe in a way I don't know if it's meant to but it seems like we evolved to do well You have to consider that for you know anatomic demodern humans As far as we know have been around for slightly less than 200,000 years and for almost all of that period That's what we did. Yeah, that's what we did. We're it's really as you know At least if we go with mainstream history and certainly it's true for the majority of the human race whether we go with mainstream history or not It's really only in the last 10 12,000 years that we've been that we've been doing anything else apart from hunting and gathering. Yeah, it's it's a long time and we've tried to upset that over the last 200 years with machines Electricity and all these different things, but we long for that created a fundamentally Artificial artificial way of life and so quickly. Yeah, very rapidly. It seems like our genetics Just have not been able to catch up with the the actual environment But it was supported the the the irony of it is that this the oldest all this development all this amazing technology All these machines all this gear all this equipment But somehow the promise was it would would make us happier. Mm. It didn't didn't make us happier Yeah, it made us it made us much less happy Yeah, I don't know if that ever was the promise. Well, it was the promise I mean, you know, I remember I remember with computers back in the back in the 80s before computers really early 80s late 70s The idea was that you know if the computer came in that we would just have all this endless leisure We would have a life of complete relaxation. There would be the problem would be actually filling our leisure But that that does not turn out to be the case Everybody's lives are taken up with the the computer the the iPhone the the email You know all the time you can never get away from it. It's it's Constantly demanding your time emails 100 100s hundreds of emails a day sometimes I have this huge burden of guilt about emails that I don't answer We sit there in my in my email is I cannot answer them all it's impossible I gave up a few years ago trying to answer them I I try to respond to a few tweets a day if possible But while doing things especially providing as much content as I do with podcasts and creating comedy all that there's no time for that It's kind of a full-time letter right there. Yeah, it would that literally would be what you would do Yeah, you'd be anyway You would be dust till dawn. Yeah, and then sleeping and starting all over again You still would never catch up. You'd never catch up. Especially if you gave it a real honest reply Like it was a complex discussion that someone wanted to have with you. Yeah, you're not gonna get there Yeah, I face the same problem probably in a smaller smaller level than you, but you know like Facebook and Twitter face Facebook I find is very it's a very useful thing It's a very very positive thing. I do like interacting with my Facebook community But I can't interact. I can't interact that much. I try to I try to put up posts I try to put up new material people make interesting comments Sometimes those comments are really valuable to me. I get a link to something I didn't know about and I go go look at that But to respond to every comment when you have when you have 300 500 1500 1500 1500000 1500 comments on a post. It's impossible. It's just it's just impossible. Yeah, that is a weird Thing about our time. I think that's a stage that we're going through that will be I think whatever comes next will probably be even crazier And even more impossible to deal with halfway to telepathy right now. Yes. That's what I think I think There'll be some sort of a technologically created Symbiotic relationship that allows us to communicate Some symbiotic thing where I think I think we're already kind of symbiotic with certain aspects of technology Glasses and glasses are essentially a technology that's a part of your life And where in your head all day right? I do cell phone might mean it might as well be attached to me Because I'm scared if I leave it anywhere. Yeah, you know if I leave it in my car and I go to the mall my God It's in the car phone is alone Yeah, we we these are weird times weird times when it comes to this stage that we're in we're obviously progressing towards an even greater connectivity with our technology. Yeah, yeah, yeah, which in some ways is in some ways is a very good thing I What I find again with with Facebook with the with the internet is Suddenly the whole world is talking We're talking to each other doesn't actually matter what national boundaries you have or where you where you grew up or what your religion is You're in your in communication with people from from all over the world and Communities of ideas tend to kind of gravitate together and people share share thoughts and ideas This is as far as we know is a new development for the human race to do this on a global scale and Yes, some shit comes out of it But also also I think a lot of good stuff is coming out of it and it is challenging It is challenging the status quo in the world today. It is very it's very threatening to the powers that be that people can communicate directly with one another I remember a time as an author when I depended heavily on the big media To be heard about to be known at all if I'd written a new book How could anybody know I'd written it unless one of the big newspapers or a big TV station or somebody covered it? I don't give a shit about that now. I don't I don't need those people anymore You know I I can communicate directly with people who are interested in my work and the big media companies or Whoever influenced them could remove a book totally the market and then that that subject is gone John Markle Legro's book. Right. It's perfect example of a sacred mushroom in the cross Fantastic book. Yeah, and if you've never read it John Markle Legro was a biblical scholar and a linguist who also Happened to be an ordained minister. He was one of the guys who was he was assigned to decipher the Dead Sea Scrolls did it for 14 years and wrote this amazing book which basically said that the entire religion of Christianity Originally was about consuming psychedelic mushrooms and fertility rituals Yeah, exactly fascinating stuff. Yeah, and it would they removed it. I mean that book was gone They didn't like the message at all. Yeah, young urban has has worked to Republish and it's it's available again now But for the longest time that book was gone. You had to find I owned two copies of it that I bought used Mm-hmm, and they were very expensive. You had to buy them from you know some strange book company that Found them so this is something the big big media can't do anymore The interest they serve they cannot do it anymore. You could find something tweet it So take a picture of it say if you were in Turkey and you found something unique You could take a picture of that to tweet it and and and and link an article to your website Poom put whatever you found on your website and then within Moments thousands of people would be downloading and trading it and it would just you know Friends he spread across the world. I've been doing that I've been making a point on my travels of of putting up a picture and and putting up my immediate reaction to something that I've something that I've seen and and it produces a lot of a lot of reaction and again It's a you know it goes it goes two ways because when people communicate with me I learn from them. It's not just that I'm giving I'm giving people so I'm getting stuff back Yeah, and I appreciate that my I think my real I have these conversations with people that I meet at shows all the time Will they say oh this pot the podcast changed my life and thank you so much? It changed my life too and my interaction with these people has changed my life as much as it's changed Their life the the the information that I get on a daily basis from people on Twitter Hmm in in forms me in a way that I've never been informed before constant all day long I mean every day I'm getting all these new stories that are tweeted to me and I retweet the fascinating ones as much as I can But it's a never ending stream and it's amazing. I love it. I'm so I'm so I'm so indebted I'm so happy I feel so obligated the whole the whole connection is a very rewarding connection for me as well As a matter of fact you are doing something quite special I mean I've been on the road and and it's amazing that people that I meet whether it's in South Africa Whether it's in some Midlands City in Britain whether it's in upstate New York, you know who'd listen to Joe Rogen You're reaching a lot of a lot of people that way and and this is special And it's eye opening actually well it's an amazing connection that we have it's it's amazing to be able to do what we're doing And it's a new thing. I mean it's it just it never happened before it wasn't around this way It's possible to change the world everybody says no the world is too big the power structures too great nothing can be nothing can be changed Nothing can be altered, but I don't think so. I'm really optimistic I think I think good things are good things are coming. There's an awakening going on. I am as well I'm very optimistic just based on the people that I've met that have told me to change their life I met no no bullshit at least 30 or 40 people that told me they lost a hundred pounds have to listen to this podcast That's incredible. Yeah, just people that just changed their diet started exercising and started getting their blood pumping and feeling better It started thinking positively surrounding themselves with positive people and That if that could be done on that scale it can that can spread virally That's totally can and that's a real measurable change in somebody's life That's that's setting aside ill health and discomfort and moving on to something better and more positive and I've talked to Maybe 50 or so people that have started their own podcast because of this podcast And I I'm hugely encouraging of that because I think there's no difference I mean if you're a curious person you speak a language that other people understand and you find information online You want to discuss it start a fucking podcast. Why not? I mean if it catches on it catches on if it doesn't catch on keep going until it does catch on the way I see it though. It's really it's really interesting looking at your story Okay, I mean so you've got this fight this fighter background MMA I don't know a lot about it. It stands for mixed martial arts. Yes, and UFC Yes, what is that ultimate fighting championship ultimate fighting championship and that goes back into your youth? Along way I saw I saw a little clip of you just kicking somebody FC? Yes. What is that? Ultimate fighting championship. Ultimate fighting championship. And that goes back into your youth. Yeah. A long way. I saw a little clip of you just kicking somebody. I don't know. So fast. You looked, it was incredible to see that. So you've got all of that. And I meet a lot of people who are interested in that. My son-in-law, for example, is a mixed martial arts fighter. And a really hugely important part of his life. But at the same time, you're combining it with this extraordinary interest in psychedelics and social change and all of these radical ideas. And intuitively, one would not immediately think that somebody who's into mixed martial arts fighting would be also into radical philosophical ideas. But it's precisely the combination of those two things that is really attractive, I think. Well, I think that the intuition or intuitively that it wouldn't be is just because people don't understand what martial arts really are. Right. And martial art, what a martial art really is, is the path that you go through in becoming excellent at a martial art is just developing your human potential. That's all it is. Right. And in seeking the truth about yourself and your own character, like as we were talking about those Kenyan men who endure extreme pain and they become stronger because of that, they become something special because of that. That seeking truth through martial arts is along the same lines. It's doing something incredibly difficult and in doing that, you grow as a person. And then in seeking that truth about your character, seeking that truth about your determination, your willpower, your focus, your discipline, you also start to seek truth in everything else around you and your government and your relationships and all various aspects of your life. If you're a diet, you see the relationship between your diet and your health and all these different things, they do fall into each other. They do. Psychodelics, all of them. Psychodelics absolutely because in many ways there is no more challenging adventure or experience that one can have. I mean, yeah, there's all kind of wilderness experiences we're going to have, but a deep journey with a powerful psychedelic is going to challenge you in every possible level as a human being and requires incredible will and strength to deal with it. A lot of people who don't work with psychedelics who are just brainwashed by the whole war on drugs, think don't understand. This is a deep personal journey which requires strength of character to fulfill. Without a doubt, I've done some terrifying things in my life, but the moment before you light the lighter that fires up the DMT is one of the most terrifying moments of all time, I totally agree. Especially if you've been there and you know what's coming. Yeah. Whoa, here we go. 15 minutes in a rocket to the center of the universe, exactly. Swarming with colors and geometric patterns and truth and fear and entities. Yeah. Yeah, I share that. I mean, the last time I spoke DMT was in the beginning of, end of September 2011, I haven't spoke to since because, and I will, but I had such a, such a, well, the word terrifying, it doesn't do it justice to what happened to me. It was just the single, hugeest ordeal that I have ever confronted in my life. And after you've been through an ordeal like that, you kind of think twice about just leaping, leaping back into it again. But I learned a lot from it. It was, it was hugely, hugely beneficial and to survive that and to come back from it. You know, you gather your strength from experiences like that. And that's why I think our society's foolish to try to just sanitize everything and not allow people to, to, to undergo these, these profound and important experiences. We'd rather we should be creating structures where it is possible for people to have those experiences and where they don't need to feel afraid of the law about it and where they, where they can challenge themselves in that way with good advice and with, and with wise and loving cares surrounding that situation. Absolutely. And I think that's one of the things that's beautiful about today's internet and these exchanges like we're having right now is it, let's people know what these experiences really are about and what, what the potential these experiences actually do hold. Because we're the victim of massive propaganda that has been going on for decades and decades. And it's really been for thousands of years. It's confused some really intelligent people. I've had some really disappointing conversations with guys like Michio Kaku, you know, talking about mushrooms giving you brain damage and like, such a shit. It's so, such a complete shit. It's such a brilliant man. Otherwise, it's like, yeah. But the brainwashing goes very deep. Yeah. And, and it, it says though it, it presses a button in certain, certain people that they actually just rational faculty shut down and they cannot, they cannot react to the subject in an intelligent way anymore. I do, I do find this again and again. It is, it is, it is a huge problem. It's a self preservation issue as well for people that are professionals because if you're a professional in any sort of a, anything where you're being judged or you're being looked at as, you know, possibly, oh, you know, we're looking at you for possible promotion. But we heard you're doing, what are you doing mushrooms in the desert? Yeah. What the fuck Bob? Yeah. You're ruin in the whole career, pal. You know, you're on the fast track. Yeah. Exactly. People are in danger of destroying their careers. If that, if that comes out, I mean, that's where, I guess you and I have some, some advantage because we, we have careers that cannot get really in between that. Get only help. Yeah. If I get caught with a bag of mushrooms at the airport, I get a bump. Everything is great. Right. Right. You were getting excited. My Twitter explodes. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I'm probably, I was saying I'm not flying with mushrooms, but my point being that yeah. And if you're honest about it, look, if you're doing something, you shouldn't be doing because it's harming someone and people find out about it, the, the repercussions are real and they should be. Yeah. But if you're doing something like psychedelics that harm no one and they're actually, and then you can have a rational discussion about the benefits that you've had from them, that helps people. It really does. It totally helps people. I find this, I find this again again, and that's the crucial distinction is, is, are you doing something which is harmful to others, which impinges upon the sovereignty of others, which makes the life of another person less rather than more? And the answer is, we're taking psychedelics. No, you know what? You're not doing that. That's an inner experience. That's your, that's your own experience. And as I've said many times, I mean, we have plenty of laws that deal with doing negative stuff to, to other people. We do not need laws that seek to govern control, manage, limit our consciousness. This is the, this is the heart of the matter. We're starting to see in our lifetime, these centers in Mexico, my friend Ed Clay runs one in Mexico, and I know there's some in Canada as well, where they have these Ibogaine centers, where people are going and completely curing themselves from opiates. Opiate addictions for folks who don't know are a huge problem in this country. I have lost a couple of friendships. One, it went horribly wrong, because I know the guy was on a bunch of different pills, a bunch of different doctors, and I just couldn't deal with them anymore. I had to get them out of my life, blaming other people for all of his failures constantly woe his me, and just on pills and these are prescribed pills. These are legal pills. He had a back injury and he went to one doctor in one state and moved to California and started going to another doctor and then having both guys send him prescriptions and taking both two times the amount of pills. And if you would take, you take a prescribed dose of opiate pills. You're very likely to get addictive. Even with the prescribed dose, it's a really difficult time to get off of them, especially if you're facing some significant pain. You just had a hip replacement. Did they prescribe you? Yeah, they did. I was given, but nothing extremely strong, but coding, which is an opiate. That's what Nike will use to have it, right? Does it? I believe so. I believe Nike will have coding. I mean, coding is actually a highly addictive drug. There's no doubt it is addictive. In Britain, they often mix it with a paracetamol, which is a less strong pain killer. And if you take those two pills in combination, you could get addicted to it within a week or 10 days. And it's the coding that you're getting addicted to. But it's the paracetabol that's really got to totally screw up your liver in the long run. And it's stunning, actually, that the big, pharmacutical companies are allowed to do this. They're allowed to get to deliberately addict people to hook people on very powerful drugs that really have very little benefit. I mean, if I, to be honest, if I had some terrible cancer, some terrible pain, some terrible suffering, I would be very interested in exploring opium or even heroin as a matter of fact. I think that nature has been kind to us. It's provided us with certain plants that can help us with pain. And the reaches of stage in, may reach a stage in life where you're terminal, why suffer that? Why suffer that terrible agony? It would be interesting, perhaps, to sort of bliss out a bit on that. But to take it regularly daily for small and minor pain, this is a huge mistake. There's no one's for. There's a new snail toxin that they've discovered that is a hundred times more effective than opiates and is non-addictive. And they're trying to figure out a way. There's a, this new drug is from the cone snail venom. And it's a hundred times more potent than any existing pain medication and completely non-addictive. And they're, they're coming up with this snail venom in a pill form that would just completely eliminate pain. I can see the, the big drug company is not wanting to do that. They'll probably run out with a hammer and smash every snail that exists. Getting co-hoots with some, some company to spray some shit all over the areas where these snails live and just whack them out all the sudden. They want to keep us, they want to keep us addicted. Well, the amount of money. I mean, people would say that that's a ridiculous thing or no, that's not what people do. But the amount of money you're talking about is absolutely stagnant. Bosely stagnant and enormous. Billions upon billions every month. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And you were talking about about opiate addictions of which the vast majority are addictions to prescribed pills. And, but, but then there's also, there's also heroin, heroin addiction. And again, Ibogaine and in fact, I ask a astonishingly successful in getting people off these, off these addictions in a very weird way. Very weird way. I'm not sure the exact mechanism of Ibogaine, but the people that have taken it have told me that it's both physically removed the addiction. And more importantly, psychologically alerts you to all the factors that have contributed to your shitty decision making in the first place. That's it. That's it. Exactly. All the errors in your thinking, all the errors in your personality body that have led you to this path that you're just trying to numb life with these pills. Yeah. Yeah. It's like a, it's like a teaching that you get. And that's the mystery of these plants. Actually, the teacher plants, particularly the two plants that go into the ayahuasca brew and then Iboga, that they're probably the most powerful in this, in this respect is that there is the, there's a sense of an encounter with an intelligence which, which communicates with you, which gets right to the root of your personal issue and shows it to you. And says, well, I mean, I've had some experience with this myself and shows it to you. And so this is actually how you are, you know, and you think, fuck, I never realized that really. I, I, I hid that from myself for so long. The ego, the ego. And that revelation is extremely helpful in handling and addiction. And no one's protecting you by making Iboga gain illegal. No one's protecting you from anything other than you getting cured from these illnesses and, and realizing the issues that you have in your life and in your personality. And you see yet another example of the fact that we live in a society that is completely insane. Our society is actually crazy. It's crazy. It's run by crazy people in pursuit of crazy motives. And it is designed to diminish human potential. I can't, I don't think it's accident. I think it's actually deliberately designed to minimize human. By who? Well, I mean, this is where I have to get into something like Gnosticism, which has been a long term, a long term interest of mine. And the idea that there is a, I don't want to use the word divine in terms of God because I don't go with, with, with God particularly, I do go with mystery. But that there's a divine spark in human beings and that there has been a project for thousands of years to deny us the opportunity to realize that part of ourselves, the spiritual lessons of ourselves, and, and to keep us chained in matter and locked in, locked in the material realm. And, and what we see in modern society is two things going on side by side. One is so-called materialist science, which tells us that there is nothing else to reality, except the stuff that you can weigh and measure and count. And any thought that there might be spirit that consciousness, for example, might not be generated by the brain might not be local to the brain. Any such thought is supposed to be, according to materialist science, complete nonsense. And then there's the actual materialism, which, which tries to persuade us through all manner of media and the way our societies run, that our sole purpose as creatures is to produce and consume. And that we have no other function here on this planet, and that we ought to define ourselves and measure ourselves in terms of our production and consumption. Is that really what we're being taught or is that just something that people find easy, that that producing and consuming is just easy. It's exciting. Get a new car. It's exciting. Get a new TV. That's exciting. Work and you, you know, you can wear clothes that this guy can't wear. Ooh, exciting. I think there's something to that that is just a natural aspect of being a human being and constantly having this desire for improvement and progress. And we measure that improvement and progress erroneously with objects. I mean, there was a culture of Native American Indians. I forget the, I forget the name of the tribe who had this ceremony called the Poplatch, where the, which happened like once a year and their project, what they had to do was the more things you could burn that showed that showed that you were a really big guy, you know, you just complete the ultimate conspicuous consumption as you take all these possessions and burn them, not because you're despising them, but because you're rich enough to just burn us. Oh, that's so stupid. I thought it was to free your soul. No, unfortunately not. Unfortunately not. Yeah, the consciousness not being projected from the human mind is a very confusing one to me because I see their point and I see your point. I see, I see what I see is I don't think that we know enough about consciousness itself to define what's going on. We can't be sure. I think it is possible that the mind could be some form of antenna. I don't know that. I think it's pretty clear that if you injure certain parts of the mind it affects certain aspects of cognitive function. I think that's pretty clear. It's pretty clear. Yeah, but that's true on antenna too. Yeah, if you damage it, if you damage an antenna, the picture on the TV screen is affected. Exactly. Yeah. Fuck up a radio. The insides of a radio. It doesn't mean that the signal's not still out there. It's just not getting in right. Yeah. Yeah. There's that and this also, there was a fascinating debate recently between Richard Dawkins and Deepak Chopra, which it was quite hilarious because Richard Dawkins is a very brilliant guy. Yes. But he's also kind of kuntie. He gets a little kuntie. Maybe he's rightly so. I mean, he's had to deal with so much quackery and fuckery his whole life and he's been a rabid atheist for the long time. He's made a career out of that. Yes, he has made a big career out of that. But one of the things that Deepak said that was really fascinating because they were talking about consciousness and consciousness being in atoms and consciousness being in and Dawkins was insisting that these things did not have consciousness. Which to me is, oh, I go, how can you insist? It seems to me, yeah, it seems to me that whether you clearly, he's a brilliant man with a massive amount of scientific data at his disposal for things that he can prove for sure. But to say that you know that atoms don't have consciousness is kind of silly. Because we don't. And the other thing that Deepak said that I thought was really fascinating was that he believes that what you're seeing in human beings, with human beings being recycled stardust, we literally are made of stardust. Star had to explode to create the very molecules that are inside of our body. And what you're seeing in a human being is the universe actually becoming aware of itself in a way that it communicate. It's a beautiful idea. It's a beautiful idea. It's a I think both guys are so rigid on what their side is, especially in a debate form. And Dawkins absolutely sure he's correct. Deepak, confusing the fuck out of everybody with word salad of quantum and dissonant. He just throws quantum out there like you throw salt on french fries. I don't even know if it's the right way to use it, but he just throws it out there and confuses the shit out of you sometimes. Very poor method of communication. He incorporates because it's not clear what he's saying. Even though I know what quantum means, I know what he's talking about. We're talking about consciousness being non-local. I understand all those things, but he says it in such a word salad way that it's like, what a, I don't know what you're getting at man. It seems to me like you're trying to confuse a shit out of people with a real elaborate sentence. Could be. And then win this debate or make a point that's hard to hold to win a debate with Richard Dawkins. Richard Dawkins is a very clever guy. I've met him and he's a formidable argument. It's not easy, not easy at all, but he is a religious fanatic in his own way. His non-belief in the meaning or purpose in the universe is a religious idea of a kind. It's not based on facts. It's not based on evidence. It's based on his opinion as a matter of fact, nothing more. It's also based on a lack of information. And when I say that lack of information, I mean one thing and one thing only, psychedelic experiences, he has not had them. He needs to have them. Without a doubt, he needs to have the wrong. I would like to, I would like Dawkins to smoke DMT. Yes. That's the one, that's the one psychedelic with which there is just no negotiation. You don't, you just don't get a discussion with DMT. It just does for you. And the other ones, even the DMT and I wasca, Dawkins could resist that. But the smoke DMT, once you hit the right dose, once you pass that fourth, fourth, big draw on the pipe, there's no negotiation. It is going to take you there and it's going to deal with you. And I would like to see Dawkins argue with DMT. You can't. He would probably argue with what the effects actually are and there's some sort of an assault on the visual cortex by various chemicals that distort perception and reality. That's what he did. Yeah. I mean, what it is though is data. And what it is is an experience and it's both things he's lacking in. He's lacking in that data and that experience. Data that he needs to have as a scientist. He's one of the, one of the people I would really like to see having that, having that data. I agree with you that he would probably find a way to rationalize it and put it and set it aside. But still, it would be incredibly useful for him to have that experience because he's been so influential in persuading so many people that there is nothing beyond this material realm. And DMT is a place beyond this material realm. I am prepared to admit it could be something that we're projecting out of our own minds. It may not be any reality but it feels like a real place. I appreciate you admitting that and I say that often as well. I think that it feels like a different dimension that's inhabited with intelligent something, whatever it is. Intelligent something. I do where I described as geometric patterns that are made out of love and understanding. That's what it feels like to me. I have never had a bad DMT trip in a sense where it turned evil. But I've heard people discuss really horrific evil entities that they've run into. And I often wonder by virtue of that whether or not what they're talking about is something that's in their psyche, something that's in their subconscious. Something that I bring into the party. My last DMT trip which I mentioned a little while ago which was extremely powerful and scary. This happened just in the two weeks before I gave up my 24-year cannabis habit. And I think I had some shit to go through. And I think the DMT was part of it. I then followed that with five eye wasca sessions. But I think the DMT was really helpful. And I may have mentioned this to you the last time we talked. But what happened as I went under, I had that fourth deep inhalation of the pipe and lay back. And I don't normally hear voices in DMT, but a voice spoke to me. And the voice said to me, your hour is now. Whoa, your hour is now. And my last conscious thought was shit yet. But only for only for 12 minutes. And then, and then, I felt myself being ripped apart. There were these things, these small things. I was on some kind of table and they were running ramming. They were tearing me apart. My body was torn to pieces, bits were cast off. It was like a cocoon was being ripped away. And then the voice comes again. There's like a trumpet call. And the voice comes again. And now the great transformation shall begin. And it was a weirdest and strangest experience. And I was in this flickering huge space. And these little beings were running around me. And they were doing that. And I was completely helpless. And at their mercy. And that that was scary. That's amazing. But it was not demonic. It was like, it was like this is stuff you need to go through. You need to do this. It's going to be very, very frightening. But it's something you need to do. And I did need to do it. And it was helpful to me. Was that the first time you had heard voices? Yeah, I did not hear voices speaking to me in DMT ever before. Wow. My experiences have been filled with voices. Oh really? Yeah. Say what? Well, one of the big ones is it's a really like childish thing that they would say. And this was like when I was about to leave. When I was starting to sober up, they would say, I love you 600 million five or a thousand times. Like a child would say, oh, I want to hear that. Yeah. I want to hear that more than I want to hear your hours. Well, I think I came into it in a good place. Yeah. I was in a happy place in my life. And I wasn't scared. I wasn't fighting it. But that I love you thing was really weird. The other thing that it said was the words of McKenna. And I think when I've tried to analyze this, I think that what it was was that I had listened to so much McKenna before I had gone into it that I had sort of stained my brain with this idea. And either my subconsciousness was saying this or they were whatever they are, whether they're part of my thought process. We're projecting this thing, this reminder, do not give into astonishment. And that was because it was so mind-blowing. I was flying down this bumblebee covered pathway, this spinning, when I say bumblebee not covered rather by colored, it was the very, there was very clear black and yellow stripes of all this thing, like very bright intense black and very bright intense yellow. And it was moving and like like, like, and I was shooting down this thing. And then it was saying do not give into astonishment. And it was the words of McKenna, but not in it. You know, like, it wasn't, I don't think I was his voice. I think it was like no voice. I think it was just the words that that thought. Well, that's the weird thing about the telepathic thing that you get from the DMT experiences, you understand the words, it's speaking to you in English, but it's not really speaking to you. It's just those things are getting into your brain very clearly, but I'm not really sure you hear them. Yeah. I mean, here is a here is an experience which it will want a pity to go through life and not have that experience ever. Yeah, I've said to many people like you screwing yourself, man, you're really, it's scary as shit, but boy do you get a lot out of it? Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, in my in my case, the previous most of the previous DMT journeys I'd had had not been terrifying. They had been gentle and healing and nice. I think that I was at a juncture in my life where I needed to make a change. And I think that that particular DMT experience followed by the five I was, Kajirneys helped me to make that change. And I'm I'm eternally grateful for that. It was it was a really positive and beneficial thing for me. Yeah, it was very positive and beneficial for me as well. I was, I think I've always wanted a change. Well, I want to change now. I mean, I always want more, more enlightenment, more, more, more serenity, whatever it is. Yeah. And at that time, I think I was just trying to figure out what are the possibilities and what what else is out there. And it was just this one big rush of impossible possibility. And that redefined my view of reality itself. It was really scary though. The last one was really slippery because after it was over, it was so intense and powerful that regular reality didn't seem real to me. And I was I was I I went through a period where I feel like my ego was trying to trick me by being scared of everything was scared of car accidents, trees falling in front of my car and buildings collapsing in earthquakes. There's all these thoughts that came into my mind that I just went on for days after the james. Yeah, not it's not intensely strong. It wasn't like paranoia or excuse me or anxiety. It was like this flittering thing that I go, no, stop it, stop it. But like I'd be on the highway and I'm like, this guy just fucking flips the fucking road and comes right towards you and smash his head on to your car. You're dead. All there was all this nonsense that was just entering into my mind. It's not not just being aware of traffic and you know being smart, but possibilities would and I think what you hadn't been doing that before. Never. Never. Okay. I think what it was was my ego trying to regain some sort of control. Is that my ego by protecting me or by keeping me paranoid and keeping me very base and primal and animalistic worried about safety and shelter and disasters and things like that. It was trying to regain some strength. You know, so humbled by the experience as a humbling experience. Yeah. It really is. It's one of the most, I mean perhaps the most humbling experience that is possible to have. And again, that's why that's why it's valuable. And who says we shouldn't have experiences because they're scary, you know, that these are amongst the most important experiences. It's possible to have. I hear you use flotation tanks. Yeah. How am I on my basement? Do you use it regularly? Oh yeah. Yeah. I've been using them for, I bought my house in 2003. So for for more than 10 years of how this in my basement, please describe the thing to me. You get you get into this. You've never done it. I've never done it. Oh my goodness. Where are you staying while you're out here? I was staying in Montefu with Fredless. Oh, it's perfect. I'll get you in if you want to go tomorrow. Okay. There's a place in Venice called the float lab. It's the best place in the country. And you can go in there and float. Yes. It's amazing. I don't need anything. I'd like to do two hours. Okay. If I have two hours. But if I only have an hour, I'll set a timer and I put a timer outside of the the the box so I can hear it when it goes off. Okay. But that's my old one. You see it up there. That's my that's a a samadhi tank that I had. Right. The one that I have now though is built by the float lab, which is far more complicated. It's a really immense huge seven feet tall nine feet wide or nine foot long. Yeah. Six foot wide. It's huge. Right. It's like it looks like a walk in freezer. Okay. And it has oxygen pumped into it. When you're in it, you're in water. Right. And it's salt water that keeps you so small. I believe you have a done. I haven't done it. No, we're going to change your life tomorrow. It's amazing. It's like a psychedelic experience except completely natural, completely safe. And you can end it anytime you want. Right. But that's my new tank. But when you when you climb into that thing, the the water is set to the same temperature as a surface of your skin. And there's a thousand pounds of salt in that water. It used to be 800 in my smaller tank. This one's a thousand. And so you can't sink exactly. Yeah. About 11 inches deep. So even if you did sink, we can't drown your mind. Yeah. And you're floating like half of your body is above the water. And as you live there, you're in total silence, total darkness, your ears are actually underwater. You close the lid on this thing. And you don't hear a thing, you don't see a thing. You have no input. And you don't feel the water because the water is the same temperature as your skin. So you're floating completely weightless. It's really great for your body. It feels great because you would alleviate all the pressures of gravity and stress and you feel your muscles relaxing and unwinding. And for me, the way I describe it is the first 20 minutes or so, it seems like a seminar on my life. It gets me to start examining. Russell's relaxing and unwinding. And for me, the way I describe it is the first 20 minutes or so, it seems like a seminar on my life. It gets me to start examining various aspects of my life. You start to go through a life review. Well, in the absence of sensory input, you know, even while we're having this conversation, it's very quiet in here, but we're having to deal with the fact that there's computers, screens, ceiling, your butt is bombarded. All those things are gone in that tank. In the tank, it's just your mind. It's the only place ever, the only environment on earth where your mind is untethered from your body. It's an amazing, amazing experience. And completely, save completely natural, completely beneficial, completely refreshing. It's amazing. Even if you're not into the psychedelic aspect of it, you just want to relax. It's incredible. I love it. It should be something that everyone has in their home. It would benefit so many people in so many ways. Do you get into visionary space? Yes, absolutely. Especially when you're in a smokish-moocish-mooc. Well, that's what I was going to say. So you can enhance the experience for certain mushrooms, mushrooms enhance it. But although mushrooms are scary in there, I like cannabis. Cannabis eating cannabis is my favorite. I like to eat enough cannabis that I feel like I fucked up in eight too much and then get in there. Right. And those are intensely psychedelic and very visionary. But what I like about it is you can end it pretty much at any moment. When you open the door, the cannabis is still effective. You still have the weirdness of that. But all the nutty hallucinations and visuals will all go away. You just step out. Yeah, you just step out. And you can get to that place without the cannabis as well. I know a lot of people that have really intense psychedelic visions while they're in the isolation tank. You're interesting. Well, this is an experience. I have to have. You're going to have it tomorrow. Do you have a day off? Are you afraid? I don't have a total day off, but I can get two hours. OK. We'll work it in. OK. We'll make it happen. Crash, who's the guy who runs the float lab in Venice, is a great friend and a great guy. I don't just say. He's a genius. He's the wizard behind the curtain that creates the greatest tanks on Earth. He's just nutty, nutty, dude. That just worked incredibly hard to figure out a way to make. There's tanks. There's like the samadhi tank, which is a very good tank. Very functional. You can use it. There's a bunch of different companies and half tanks. And then there's his tank. And the difference is like a modern BMW compared to a Model T Ford. Like literally. It's that good. Oh, it's amazing. He's just a genius. He figured out a way to pump oxygen into them. He also figured out a way to flush all the water through ozone. It kills all the bacteria. He has incredibly intense filtration systems for and five step processes of filtering the water. Like all of his equipment that he has attached all this stuff, nobody's rocking it like that. I mean, he takes it to literally the next level is not even a mile from him. He's gone. He's in a place all by his own with what he's creating at the front. And you're in total silence, total darkness. And you don't feel a thing. You feel like you're flying through space. Because your body is completely weightless. It's the weirdest feeling ever. But it's amazing. You've convinced me. I can't believe you haven't done it. But you're such a psychedelic adventurer. I would have thought that a bit a part of your daily life. It hasn't been. We've got to set you up with one in England, man. We've got to send one over there and have send a crash over, have them set you up in your basement or something. I wouldn't live in a house if I didn't have space for one. Literally, it's that important to you. To me, it's massive. Any time I've got something I'm thinking about or trying to work on or new material ideas, I go through Jujitsu moves in there. I go through scenarios. I'll visually spar. OK. Yeah, it's amazing. It's you don't get an opportunity to have the mind at its full resource capacity other than in that tank. In this world, constantly bombarded my sensation of all kinds. We're torn apart. I can't wait to talk to you. I can't get out. Have you seen this new skull that they found a 1.8 million year old human skull? No. Yeah, this is an amazing discovery that they found. This first completely preserved, and we see a gold-committed from the early Pleistocene. Yeah, yeah, yeah. See if you could pull that up, Jamie. It's 1.8 million year old skull. But it's a really amazing find. And they found it in Georgia in Eastern Europe. And it's the fifth such skull from this region. But it's 1.8 million years old. That's really old. That is, that is. Yeah, there it is. Right here. We'll see if there are any still images of it. But they're completely, it's thrown a gigantic monkey wrench into our timeline of human evolution. They found stone tools and cut marks on animal bones, which indicates that the hominids were actively involved in meat processing. This is amazing. But is it a recognizable species of early man? It has quite prominent brow ridges. Yes, it's some sort of early man. What they're calling it, let's see what they're calling it. They haven't received a name yet. Have they been losing? They've got a lot of blue in it. They've got the size of the brain. That's a good question. They're calling it skull five. It says here skull five is different, different even in the four of the skulls found in demonicity is the name, the area. It's found in 2005 and completely and ultimately matched a jaw found in 2000 to make a complete skull. After eight years of study scientists on Thursday published a paper on the Journal of Science revealing that skull five is simply not that different from others. The five demand, the manysy individuals are no more different from each other than any five modern humans or chimpanzees, a neurobiologist, blah, blah, blah. So the brain case itself is very small around the third of the size of modern humans and at the same time or for a species is quite large. Yeah, I'm not sure. I'm not sure I need to read it. I'm not sure how much that changes history. I mean, we know that there were humans species around one point, eight, one point nine. Our ancestors were making tools two and a half million years ago. So this is well within that time frame. I think what maybe what it's showing us is that there have been many lines of human down through the ages. And like this one that they call the hobbit, you know, Florian, it's time little creature which lived until 18 or 16,000 years ago in in florist in Indonesia. That was completely unpredicted as well. There may be there have been many human types and we don't know where we actually come from in this whole in this whole picture. Yeah, these last hominids that they keep discovering like homofluoriensis and like that, a Russian one that they found that was basically 40,000 years old, a completely different completely beautiful geomety. You've got a Soviet Soviet. Yeah. Fascinating, fascinating stuff. And 40,000 years ago, a blink of an eye. A blink of an eye. Nothing. Just a completely different type of human. Yeah. So again, what it adds up to is a realisation that we know nothing actually. We know very little. We come out of mystery. We live in mystery and we end in mystery. Have you heard of the orang pandeck? Yes. This is cryptozoology. Yeah. That's Malaysia. Yes. For my wife comes from Malaysia and it's a kind of yeti, or Malaysian Bigfoot. Well, it's tiny. But it's a wild creature, a man-like creature that lives in the woods. Well, very similar to homofluoriensis. And so the suggestion is orang pandeck is homofluoriensis or whatever is called still alive. Yeah, that's still alive. Hang it out in the woods. It would sound ridiculous, but this homof would call a hobbit man. This hobbit man was only 13,000, 14,000 years ago. Yeah, very reasonable. Within the span almost of human history. I mean, go back to be in Turkey, where I've just been, it's 12,000 plus years old, making these massive, great, megalithic pillars there. So this creature on floris is just that period, just the same age as that. So the world was filled with all kinds of different creatures. By the way, on talking about Indonesia, I'm going to Indonesia on the third of December because there's been a new site, or rather an old site, which has been radically redated in Indonesia. Really? Which is called Gunung Padang, not that far from floris as a matter of fact. It's a megalithic site with gigantic basalt columns. And this place has been known since the early 20th century, thought to be about three or four thousand years old. But there's an Australian geologist called Danny Hillman, who's been working for the Indonesian government on a site survey for the last five years. And he's just in the last month or two, come out with this explosive finding that he thinks this site is possibly as much as 20,000 years old, which a megalithic site, 20,000 years old, that completely rewrites history. Go back to the tepe already pretty much rewrites history, but this place in Indonesia totally does it. And when you take the two together, so I'm going to go out and take a look at that site and meet Danny Hillman. What is the name of it again? Can you spell it? Gunung Padang. Whoa. Gunung Padang. I may be able to show you a picture of it. Yeah. Jamie, put it up. That is good in padding. Yeah. That is totally good in padding. I use that picture. So all these stones and what made them date this to 20,000 years? Well, was the chance? OK. So the previous dating has just been based on the surface layers. And Danny Hillman and his team have been down deep into this man-made hill on top of which the surface layer stand. And they've gone all the way down and they're finding big megalith right down at the bottom. And they're finding associated carbon that allows them to date it to up to 20,000 years old. So this is a real huge game changer that's taking place there. So when they date it, when they carbon dated down to 20,000 years old, is it based on organic material that's to be used? Yeah. Because you can't date stone. But what you do is you get into undisturbed layers, deep down in that man-made hill that we're looking at on the screen right now. You get down into undisturbed layers where you're finding megaliths at the bottom covered by earth, being covered by earth for 20,000 years. And amongst that earth is organic material fragments of bone, fragments of charcoal that you can date with carbon dating. So you can then say that those megaliths are at least that old. At least most likely much older than that. But there at least that old. And the weird thing with this place has in common with go backly teppy is that both of them are man-made hills, which appear to have had some kind of deliberate burial of the earlier layers, like a like a time capsule. So I get this feeling that stuff is coming out. And it's been being suppressed for a long time or ignored or just not reckoned with for a very long time. Well, go backly teppy was a real game changer because that was the first time that they had found anything that you had to date back to at least 12,000 years. Yeah. Go backly teppy. Go backly teppy is really important. And that's why I was glad to be able to go there in September and spend a lot of time just gently getting to getting to know this site. The reason the reason it's important is because it was deliberately buried. And what it raises is I just want to show you this cover from new scientist magazine. Can we can we show this? Yeah, sure. There it is. The true dawn. No, there we get that up there. We'll pull it up or have Jamie pull it up. Civilization is older and more mysterious than we thought. Wow. This is the new scientist magazine in the beginning of October 2013. Now new scientist was one of the magazines that attacked me massively back in 1995 when I published fingerprints of the gods. And what did I say is in fingerprints of the gods? Civilization is much older and much more mysterious than we thought. And now they come out with this cover. You know, so I got to feel a certain feeling of, I don't know, almost smugness. Oh, yeah. Sure. Listen to me. You can hear your voice. You just get all giddy. It's fun. I mean, it's fun to see them doing that. And the reason they're saying that is it got a lot to do with Quebec teppy. Yeah. Because Quebec teppy is something completely unpredicted that what I'm supposed to be hunter-gatherers at the end of the upper palae lithic who are not supposed to have the kind of organizational skills, the architectural skills to put together gigantic megalithic circles. There's one of the pillows that I went and took a look at, which they never removed it from the quarry because they found a fault in it. And that one weighs more than 50 tons. You know, it's a gigantic piece of stone. And the other intriguing thing about Quebec teppy is which I learned from Plushmit when I was talking to him because they've done ground penetrating right now. So right now when you go to the site, you see four substantial stone circles on the scale of stone hinge above ground. Could you put the microphone cost for you first? Yeah, sorry. You don't want anybody to do that. Yeah, yeah. When you go to Quebec teppy now, you see a group of stone circles, four of them above ground. There it is there. And what they've done is they've done ground penetrating radar over the site. And they found that at least 20 times as many stone circles are still underground and possibly as many as 50 times as many. So it's just a gigantic site. And why it's important is that whoever made it 12,000 years ago deliberately buried it 2,000 years later, 10,000 years ago. So that meant that the carbon dating record has not been contaminated by later cultures. It's a perfect pristine time capsule and lo and behold, the date that it prints out is 12,000 years old. Now that then raises questions over lots of other megalithic sites all over the world which have been contaminated by later cultures. The megalithic sites of Malta, for example, look very likely, go back to the teppy. They look very likely to be back to the teppy, but they're only supposed to be 5,000 years old. I would now say we need to reconsider that evidence because those sites were contaminated by later culture. Maybe the carbon on which they were dated was introduced by a later culture. Maybe it doesn't belong to the period of the construction of the megalithic. Well, this alone, this one discovery alone really is a huge game changer because now we know that people were capable of doing something like that 12,000 years ago. And not a task to be underestimated because you're in an area where there isn't a lot of water available. So you're bringing in hundreds of people, you're organizing them into teams to construct these gigantic megalithic circles. You're feeding them, you're watering them, you have site planning and arrangement. All of this is the kind of stuff that you expect much later in human history. You don't expect it 12,000 years ago and it raises that big question, could there have been a loss ofisation? Could we be looking at the work perhaps of the survivors of a loss ofisation? How do we know that they covered it intentionally? There's a deliberate infill, the nature of the earth that's been put into it. You can pretty much say here were people with spades pouring this earth in all in one goal, filling it in. And amongst the earth there are bits, there are fragments of bone, there are fragments of carbon and that's how they've dated it. It's not a natural sedimentation that built up over a long period of time. It's something that was done all at once in a planned and organised way. So for some reason, and the close-knit, the German archaeologist who's running the site is not clear what this reason was. For some reason, whoever created this place decommissioned it at a certain point about 10,000 years ago, they closed it down. And then this is eerie for the next 10,000 years it remained untouched. And nobody went there and nobody saw it. Back in the 50s some American archaeologists were attracted to the site. They saw bits of cut stone lying on the surface. And the cut stone was so good that they concluded it was recent. They thought it must be from the Ottoman period, you know, 1500, 1600, something like that. And they ignored it. And it was a really lucky turn of the spade by Klaus Schmidt, this German archaeologist that revealed that that's not the case at all. And that these are 12,000 year old megalithic pillars. And not only that, so we have this incredible innovation in architecture taking place. Stone circles on the scale of stonehenge, but 7,000 years earlier than Stonehenge being created at Quebeclie-Tepi. But at the same time, mysteriously agriculture starts to appear in that area. There hasn't been agriculture there before or anywhere so far as we know. And suddenly it starts to appear. They're domesticating cattle, they're domesticating wheat. And beginning of the agricultural revolution, so it's like a center of innovation that we're doing something unique as far as we know in human history in terms of architecture, we're doing something unique in terms of economics producing the first agriculture. And I can't help feeling that this thing happens so suddenly in such an extraordinary way that maybe this is the missing link that we're looking at. We're looking at the fingerprints of a lost civilization, the survivors of a lost civilization who settle there with all these skills already in place and introduce them into the local culture. And what we call this period 12,000 years ago, plus is the period when the earth went through gigantic cataclysmic events because it was struck by a comet. Yeah, that's the other piece of the puzzle, the nuclear glass that they found. How do you say this stuff? Try-try-night-tight-trit-trit-trit-trit-trit-And that they found this stuff all over Europe and all the... the world at that precise end. Well, I precise. 12,000 years ago. Yeah, and a layer of platinum in the Greenland ice cores. All of this says Earth was hit by a comet at that time. Is that the Holocene? Well, that's the beginning of the Holocene is our period. It's the period we still live in now. But it's in archaeological terms. It's the juncture between the upper Paleolithic and the Neolithic. That's what we're talking about here. And you have this episode that geologists call the Younger Dryas, which is an episode of sudden deep freeze strikes the Earth. The Earth has been emerging from the ice age until 12,980 years ago. And amazingly, you can date it that precisely. Give or take five years. This happened 12,980 years ago. And then suddenly the Earth flips into this 1,000-year deep freeze that nobody's ever been able to explain before, that they called the Younger Dryas. And now we can say for sure that the Younger Dryas was caused by huge amounts of dust being projected into the upper atmosphere of the Earth by this comet impact. And that that dust, enshrouded the whole Earth and set in motion a kind of what we would call a nuclear winter today, where the sun's rays could no longer reach the Earth. And the Earth went back into a deep freeze. And for me, this is the smoking gun that lost us a whole civilization. And I was just yesterday. I was, I've come here from North Carolina. And I sat down with Randall Carson, who has been a mad him. You met Randall. He's a very, very fascinating man. And he's been working away quietly on this subject for years and years and years. Long before the evidence was in for a comet, he was predicting that this is what caused it, that there was a comet impact. And he's got this very, very fascinating theory. And he's going to take me next year on a field trip into the Pacific Northwest and into Canada to look at areas where there were these massive outflows of floods from the ice cap. And what Randall is suggesting is that at least some large fragments of the comet that hit the Earth 12,980 years ago actually hit the ice cap. They landed on the ice cap, which was still then a mile deep. And they pulverized it. They turned it into water immediately. And that's why you have these gigantic outburst floods, which carried down huge boulders and strewn them all over the landscapes. A very, very exciting theory. And it's great to see Randall's work being vindicated, because he's been ignored for far too long. And I'm looking forward to doing a fascinating field trip with him next year. Yeah, I met him in Georgia many years ago at the punchline comedy club, had a long and really interesting conversation about him with him rather about the Holocene comet. Yes. Well, that's exactly what he's talking about. He's one of these guys who is just so far ahead of his time that nobody saw it. Nobody realized what he was onto. Now everybody understands that the Earth was hit by a comet. And there's been a big scientific argument about this over the last five or six years. But it's really settled now. The evidence that all over the world is clear that this happened, but Randall was onto this years before anybody else. And what he's done, what he's also doing is just taking it, taking it that bit further. Because we have these mysterious floods that occurred in precisely that period, which have traditionally been called outburst floods. The idea was that the ice caps gradually melting down, filled up these huge glacial lakes. And that eventually the ice dam, in closing the graced glacial lake, would break. But now it looks like we're looking at ice dams a thousand feet high in order to account for the massive flow of water. And what Randall's suggesting is that that theory is actually wrong. It wasn't the out-best floods from graced lakes. It was the comet hitting the ice cap that turned all that ice to water and produced a gigantic, gigantic outflows, carrying down boulders, you know, the size of houses and dumping them over the landscapes. And then you have to consider anything that lay in the way of those floods, anything that lay in the path of floods on that scale is gone, gone completely wiped out from human memory. And you also have to consider the fact that we absolutely know that these events have taken place in a much greater scale over the course of the earth. There's been mass extinction events. So this is not preposterous. It's not preposterous. It's completely logical. And it's time that historians and archaeologists abandoned the model that everything just proceeds smoothly and gently in the way that we've seen it doing for the last few hundred years, which is called uniformitarianism. And embrace the thought that cataclysmic events are a key part of the history of the earth. And we should know this already. There's massive amount of evidence for it. It's not something we even need to argue about, but history proceeds on the basis that there is no such thing as a cataclysm. In fact, it's cataclysm that have written the story of human history. Well, not only that, when you stop and look at all the ancient stories, the epic of Gilgamesh, the Bible, the flood of the art. Exactly. There's so many stories in involved cataclysmic events. All about floods and cataclysm. The idea that those are just fiction is totally, totally crazy. And they all say that there was a golden age, that there was a former civilization, that mankind had attained to a very high level. And then we angered the gods. It's often put that way. We angered the gods. We fell out of harmony with the universe. There was something went wrong. There was some kind of moral. Yes, please, I would love some of that. This is a field. OK. There was some kind of moral decline. Like now. Like now. Like now. This is what I often say that if I were to look at our civilization in mythical terms, there's never been a civilization that looked more like the next lost civilization than ours. I don't want to spread gloom and doom. I don't believe in spreading gloom and doom. I think we should think positive. And I have said earlier, and I maintain this. I'm very optimistic about the future of the human race. But let's not pretend that it's all roses in the garden. There's the terrible things are happening in the world today. We have unbelievable arrogance, unbelievable pride, cruelty, an economic model that makes millions, and I mean, countless millions incredibly poor and allows tiny, tiny numbers to be incredibly obscenely rich. And the whole system is skewed in the interests of that tiny, tiny fraction of 1% of the wealthy. And unfortunately, it's as bad as it's possible to get in America. It's bad in many other countries, too, but it's really bad in America, the skewing of wealth. And the brainwashing of the population to keep people quiet, to stop people and think of the mind control operates in our society. It's like a pressure cooker, something's got to give. And ours is a culture which is literally destroying the earth. I, the Amazon jungle, this amazing sacred realm, this incredible home of biodiversity, this beautiful, beautiful place, the destruction that's taking place now, only a society that is truly insane could allow that to happen. That's unfortunately our society today. So we need to wake up. And you want to talk about the writing on the wall as far as a powerful, advanced civilization being completely wiped off the earth. How about our writing is all going to the cloud. We have this crazy trend where everything is going into these databases and hard drives. And when those are destroyed, there will be nothing to hold on to. Nothing to read. All of our knowledge will be memory. I mean, it's almost ensuring that there will be nothing remaining. Total wipeouts. So this idea that I've talked about many times over the years that we are a species with amnesia, we are going to be a species with amnesia. And also again, and our culture has not, has not at all looked at the, at oral traditions. We've destroyed the oral tradition. You know, we've put everything into the written form, now beamed it up into the cloud. And one disaster, it's all gone. And at least in a written form, you have books. We don't even have books anymore. We have electronics. We have electronics. We have electronics. It's just, it's so crazy to think that all it takes is one asteroid will impact that wipes out the grid and all that stuff's gone. All that stuff's gone. You can access it anymore. You have to rebuild the entire power grid. And if the future, I mean, if we lose one or two generations, if we had a Holocene type incident again or a big comment hit and wiped out 50% of the population. And we had to sort of refigure out databases and refigure out hard drives. We're not going to. We're going to gather food and we're going to figure out agriculture. We're going to figure out some real primitive ways to live life. But most of that stuff with three, four generations later is gone. It's gone. It's gone. Completely, completely gone. And I mean, we have these gigantic populations now, based in cities where actually the food supply is incredibly fragile. It's like two or three days of food is available in any city at any time. Consider the implications of that. If that supply chain breaks down. And it was very clear on record now. Look what's just happened in the Philippines. Look at Hurricane Katrina. We cannot deal with natural disasters. We can't. That was a big one, too, man. That was a really, really scary one. But the Philippines superstorm, a storm the size of Germany, you know, believable. Thousands, 10,000 more people killed and very slow reactions to do to do anything about it. We are very bad. Human race. We go all this tech. We got all this wealth. We got all this complacency. But actually, when the universe strikes us, we are unable to do anything about it. And that's what's true in the most wealthy country in the world, in America, as we saw with Hurricane Katrina. And this is three times bigger than three times bigger than Katrina. They showed some a city that was 200,000 people. There's not a single structure left standing. Unbelievable. Just, and that, by the way, there have been bigger ones. There have been bigger storms throughout history than that. There's been bigger impacts than the Holocene one. And the other thing about the universe is that our orbit, like where we are, is stable. And we have the moon, which helps our orbit be still. But there's hundreds of thousands of near-Earth objects that are just floating around out there that could easily come down, collide into each other, slam into Earth. Absolutely. And that's a wrap. Absolutely. This, again, is something that needs to be taken very, very seriously. Again, I want to say, let's emphasize the positive and let's emphasize positive thinking. But let's also be rational and reasonable. And when you look at the orbits of near-Earth asteroids called Apollo objects, it's like looking at a cat's cradle of harm that is surrounding this precious jewel of a planet. And we don't even know them all. We know a tiny fraction of them. What's become clear is we only know a little bit of these things. Some of them 10 miles wide, which are winging through outer space and can hit us at any time. And then comments, then comments. Some comments can have 12,000 year orbits. The suggestion that we're seeing a lot of increased meteor activity as well right now, a lot of action going on. And the suggestion, and again, rather, Carson's work has been really important in this area, is the torrid asteroid. The torrid shower is a remains of a disintegrated comet. And in that shower, there may be huge things the size of cities, which are. asteroid comet, the torrid shower is a remains of a disintegrated comet. And in that shower there may be huge things the size of cities which are flowing through and crossing the orbit of the Earth regularly. It's not just pretty little lights in the sky. One day we're going to run into something, something the size of New York, which is going to hit us. So this is a matter for caring concern. And again, look what we do. We spend billions, trillions, limitless, endless amounts of money in inventing new ways to destroy each other. And very little on actually looking at how to protect the Earth. How could they protect the Earth though from something like that? Well if we don't look into it we certainly won't have an answer to that question. Some of them don't they come from behind the sun and we can't see them because of the gravity. You can't see them come. You can't see them come. But if the kind of focused scientific effort that we're presently put into creating weapons of mass destruction so that we can all fight each other, if that kind of effort we're put into making sure that we understand the orbit of every single asteroid that's out there we identify them and find them, well we'd be a lot safer than we are today. There's no profit in that Graham Hancock. I know what you want our corporate stockholders to do. That's ridiculous, sir. Yeah. It's almost mimics the cyclical nature of life itself. It seems like civilization builds up to this incredible point where it's like completely out of control and just reckless and wild and then boom gets knocked down and then builds back up again and boom and it's almost, I'm not suggesting that these things floating around in space are there for a reason. But if they were, I mean they would be like little reset buttons. Yeah, I mean that's where they have one of the dinosaurs. And that's why the ancient mythology which consistently says, right or wrong, consistently says that mankind is implicated in these cataclysm, our behavior, our wickedness is implicated in this in some way. I think it's worth listening to that a little bit. And maybe this time we don't have to go through the reset. Maybe it's possible for mankind to actually wake up now that we are globally connected. Now that we do have this possibility of all talking to our other, before it's too late, we can reset ourselves in a positive direction. I feel like the only way we were is if we knew something was coming. I think that's almost the only way and we would have to be informed and then we would have to believe it and then there would be disputes and I'm sure the Republicans would start laughing nonsense. We'll show you right here. The same scientist that brought you climate change are telling you right now on our last road heading around. Sadly they would say that Jesus is going to protect us. What we need to do is cut taxes for corporations and ensure that we can move to Mexico with our factories. Yeah, I wonder. I wonder if we would really pay attention if we knew that we had a year left, if we had a year to go and think of that, think of that, what a difference, what a situation that would be, think of that. We barely pay attention to what we're doing that's really obvious, like the polluting of the ocean or the destroying of the poings, the fish out of the ocean, alarming, great, it doesn't allow them to recover. Insane, all of it about the pursuit of short-term profits, all of it about immediate payoffs, nobody thinking long term. Again, I come back to this. We are a deranged society and little nodes of sanity are beginning to wake up all around the world, but maybe it's not in enough time. Isn't that, doesn't it also go back to what you were saying about psychedelics and how beneficial psychedelics can be? Because one of the main themes of ayahuasca is save the planet. It's save the planet. It's a universal theme of ayahuasca. And then you're a later. Anybody who works with ayahuasca enough is going to start picking up that message. That this beautiful earth that we have, this gift that the universe has given us is precious beyond measure, precious beyond imagination. And that we are part of it and that we must treat it with love and respect and reverence rather than in the horrific way that we do. And that part of treating the planet with love and respect and reverence is treating fellow human beings with love and respect and reverence at every level. This is a very strong message of ayahuasca. It is a message. It is fundamentally a message of love, not in a wishy-washy way, but in a really firm and clear way. That is the salvation of the human race. Bill Hicks said it, you know, the love is the opposite of fear. Fear is what presses our buttons today. It's what's used deliberately to press our buttons. And what's the opposite of that is love. That's what we need. Yeah. And then Bill Hicks did a lot of mushrooms and what a brilliant, brilliant man he was. Oh yeah, he's one of my common heroes. For sure. There's a 19-year-old inventor who found a way to clean up the world's ocean in under five years time. This great Pacific garbage patch, this young kid has figured out this machine that would absorb all the plastic material in the ocean. Really fascinating stuff. There's an article about it on this is VR-zone.com. But I'm sure if you do a Google search on that, you can find several different sites that have covered that. But it's like this machine that would essentially sit in the center of the ocean and start sucking all the plastic up. We have a huge, huge, huge problem with this. This plastic in the ocean is something that no one even considered in roughly a decade or so ago. And when they started being aware that all the stuff that we're littering on, whether it's throwing it off a boat or just finds it's way of the ocean through drainage pipes or what have you, we're dealing with a massive, massive amount of material and material that's not biodegradable, that's being turned into this sludgy, shitty stuff that's floating around. It's a kind of symbol of everything that's wrong with our culture, actually. Yeah, it really is. This guy's idea is going to be taken off itself. Well, hopefully, it's pretty amazing that this 19-year-old kid might, the point being that what I find fascinating is that when our back is up against the wall, like when someone realized, oh my God, we have this country-sized patch of plastic that's floating around in the ocean. When your back is up against the wall, people start thinking, when people start thinking, they start innovating, when they start innovating solutions come about. And maybe even a solution when they say, hey, you know what? That plastic is actually, you could turn that into stuff. That actually could be used as fuel. That actually could be used to create things. That actually could be used in a beneficial way. But then the problem is going to be, how do you keep people from continuing the same process and repolluting it again once you've cleaned it up? Yeah, psychedelics. Yeah, I think it'd be the only way. The realization that the huge kick up the ass that comes with a major responsibly taken is like a doneic journey. And then there's also the challenge of our current trend in these gigantic cities. These gigantic cities aren't sustainable. They're not agriculturally sustainable. It's sustainable. It's sustainable. So how do you figure out a way to stop the trend of these gigantic cities or provide food or figure out a way to be in a sustainable environment and still have modern conveniences and technology and medicine and all those. Very difficult. Very, very difficult problem. If possible, hard to solve. But like all of these gigantic problems, if we begin to solve them at our personal level within our own sphere of influence, within where we live in our relationships with other human beings, that's a good start. That's where we do have power. That's where we do have choice. We cannot change the world, any one of us. But we can change the way we interact with others. Yeah, and it seems like that's probably the best way to fix this whole mess is to fix it on a macro scale or a micro scale. Fix it in individuals and spread it like a virus. Spread this newfound realization of what we're really doing, what our impact really is, the awareness and this sort of newfound idea of connectivity that we have and that we're starting to grasp all the, because of this internet culture, because of this new area, in history, this level of information. This new level of information, that's where it's happening. And that's where I take hope. Because I meet young people every time I go out and give a lecture, give a talk. I meet young people who have come there and they're thinking in a new way. The old ideas of nationalism and patriotism and all that bullshit have gone, these are people who are thinking in terms of humanity as a whole. And I'm thinking in terms of what a glorious gift the universe has given us with this planet and we have to live right. There is a tremendous spirit in the world today. Well one of the benefits of travel is that travel sort of erodes the idea of nationalism in a way where you meet these people in these other countries and you realize, well they're just like me. They're just like me. They might talk in a different accent or speak a different language, but they're just people. And I think one of the reasons why people have nationalism is based on a fear of those other people. Again, fear is the theme. And this is fear that can be manipulated, the powers that run the world at the moment are deliberately manipulating all the time to divide us from one another and prevent us from realizing. Amongst those powers are of course all of the big states and government apparatus and are of course all of the big religions. Christianity Judaism and Islam are all in the fear business as well. They're all in generating fear and telling us that this is the only way to do things and we are different and this is the right way to do things and that is the wrong way to do things. And that's the old model. The big corporations they're part of that too. You have to rely on us. We will be the answer to your own or your problem is such bullshit. That's the old model and that's the model that is bit by bit day by day. One step at a time, one brick at a time getting replaced. It truly is isn't it? And the model of government itself is a giant chunk of fear with a little bit of hope. Exactly. Exactly. And the hope is all lies. Yes. The hope is all silly. The hope is basically bullshit provided by corporations so they can keep fracking. Yeah. Yeah. The honestly thought, the fracking, yeah. All fear. All fear, fear generated. And this is what we need to move beyond. Government, I think the way we've known it for the last centuries and the way it's come to today, it's done, it's over, it's stories over. It's hanging on, it's fucking everything up as badly as it can. It is done. That is a model that will no longer work. And whether or not it wants to or not, it will slowly be phased out. I think that when you're talking about, it's interesting that I think that the very practices that it's using right now that our government is using are going to aid its own demise. The practices of the NSA monitoring everybody's email and constantly spying on America. So ridiculous socially where people are just completely up and arms and upset about it, but also that technological trend is going to lead to ultimate truth. Yeah. And that's a real issue with the government because the government relies on deception and bullshit and bribery and special interest groups. Absolutely. Absolutely. They can't keep that up if you have ultimate truth. You have ultimate access to information and the boundaries between people and that information are all gone. How are you going to run a country? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So the seeds of their own destruction are already planted in the mechanisms they're putting in place. Yeah. It's like if you've ever seen, there's a method of hunting wolves that the Eskimals use where they would take a very sharp knife and put it in the ground and put blood on the knife. And a wolf would come along and start to lick the knife because the blood on the knife taste is on blood and continue to lick and bite the blade and bleed to death. I didn't know that. Yeah. That actually happens. Oh yeah. It's a method that the the the Inuit people devised of hunting wolves. Yeah. They would plant these knives in the ice. Yeah. And that's what our governments do. It's exactly. They're they're licking their own blood and they don't even realize it. But these things like the perfect example is I don't know if you know the story in our country of general Patreus, who is the head of the CIA, was exposed through the head of the CIA is that that's supposedly the number one spy in the country, right? That's the head. Well, he he was he was fired because it was exposed that he was having an affair and that fair that fair was exposed through email exchanges, right? Well, the FBI examined the CIA. So the FBI is ratting on the CIA and getting rid of the number one CIA guy through email through a transparency and email exchanges. Absolutely completely fascinating. It is because it's that this is the this is the main government entity that's involved in spying. You know, other than the NSA. And it's just it all like you guys are going to get exposed to everyone's going to get exposed. He's going to get exposed. And the the real problem isn't in affairs. I mean affairs are obviously an issue, but the real problem is going to be in the structure of power itself and what when the influence is so clearly exposed, the influence, whether it's of special interest groups of corporations of lobbyists, whatever it is, when it's so clearly exposed that it cannot be tolerated by rational people. are buried anymore. And there's this growing anger about all of this. This is what the people in the people in big government who are who are advocating this continual surveillance and invasion of our privacy in every in every post. But they don't get the anger in society. People are just not prepared to put up with this shit any longer. And I think it's a great thing because I think there's nothing wrong with government. There's nothing wrong with having a mayor. There's nothing wrong with having a president. There's nothing wrong with police. As long as everyone's honest and rational and ethical truth is the key truth is the key. And they'll be forced to do that. It's not like we're advocating that the government needs to be destroyed and anarchy nonsense. We want honest. Honestly, it's possible. And if it's forced, then then it's forced. But if it's forced because of technology and innovation, instead of some crazy radical, violent revolution, it's just as powerful. In fact, more. Much undeniable. Can't just build up a wall to keep the internet out. No. No. Definitely. The truth, the truth is the truth is key. This is what matters. And also those who go into government, there shouldn't be this huge status and power associated with it. It's a mistake. It should be done. It should be the person who doesn't want to go into government. That's the person who should be in government. Yeah. It's unfortunate that that is how it's been for a long time. The people that shouldn't be president or the ones that want to be president. Yeah. It's been that way for a long time. Give them my Alaska. I would hope. I would hope also that the trend is moving. I mean, if you go back to these people that we're talking about that existed, these prehumans that existed 1.8 million years ago and the way they conducted each other, conducted their lives. And then look at how we conduct our lives in 2013. It's been a massive, incredible amount of progress in understanding each other that this trend will continue. And if we don't get hit by some kind of giant meteor that we will ultimately reach a level of understanding that will sort of make this happen whether or not psychedelics are involved or not. Will just reach this level. As I say, it's happening. It's happening now. It's interesting that psychedelics are a catalyst in it. They come up again and again in the conversation. And what it boils down to is the recognition. And I've been banging on about this for a long time, the recognition of the adult sovereign individual that we have a right to explore our own consciousness. That is a grotesque invasion of our privacy and our sovereignty over our own bodies. That a government would even have the temerity to suggest that it's got a right to punish us for doing that. This is not the issue of the psychedelics themselves. It's the issue of the right to make sovereign decisions about our own bodies and our own consciousness. And this I see a big awakening all over the world taking place. Yeah. I litmus test. I agree. And it's one of those things we're going to look back on through history and the way we look at the Inquisition, the way we look at burning witches, we're going to look at the prosecution of people for using psychedelics. And it's just as ridiculous. Going to go back on it with horror as a horrific episode when human society made terrible mistakes. Your book Supernatural is a fascinating book. I really enjoyed that. And that details the concept of human beings learning from psychedelic experiences and actually it giving birth to a new level of creativity and a new level of culture. Yeah. I believe that there's no doubt that psychedelics have played a huge unrecognized role in the human story. And I want to pay tribute to Terrence McKenna for being one of the early people to recognize that again, in so many ways, Terrence McKenna had just an incredible genius. That stone-daped theory that he came up with is absolutely key to this. And again, he was far ahead of his time. Academics followed behind him in this. In this, that we need to recognize that these demonized plants have played a huge role in the human story. Just in my recent travels in South America, I was in a place called Karal, 200 kilometers north of Lima in Peru. And now back in the 90s, people were saying that there was no, there could be no relationship between old world pyramids and new world pyramids because all the pyramids in the new world were much younger. That story is now gone as a result of Karal and another site, Banduria in Peru, which are definitively 2,500 to 3,000 BC, the same date that is put on the great pyramids of Giza. And what's fascinating at Karal is a couple of things. Obviously, there was a big city complex there 5,000 years ago and absolutely no evidence of warfare whatsoever. It was traditionally believed that the evolution of cities was connected with warfare in some way that people came into cities to protect themselves from war. No warfare. None whatsoever. These people did not make war. Secondly, they were using psychedelics. Quite clear evidence of this. So this unexamined part of the human story needs to be brought back into prominence. We need to realize we owe a lot to the visionary plants and we're making a mistake to create a society that seeks to cut us off from that source of learning and that source of teaching. It's not an accident in the Amazon that they call these plants teachers. They are teachers. And I think it's also very fascinating that the academic world has in many ways, and many especially the older academic world that grew up without the internet, has turned their back on the concept of psychedelics being beneficial to the point where it's laughed at and poo-pooed to the point where a mechanos psychedelic stone-dape theory is, if you don't know, the theory has theory involves the evolution of humans, the doubling of the human brain size, directly related to the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms. It's an incredibly controversial theory, but when I had Dennis McKenna on the podcast, Dennis explained it in a very scientific way that would show how the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms would correlate with the creating of language, with the expansion of consciousness. It's an incredibly intricate and detailed idea that's completely ignored by so many mainstream people, but if they have had, excuse me, if they have had any psychedelic experience themselves, they would know what an incredibly different experience that is than the normal state of consciousness. If you were looking for a culprit, a thing that would change conscious beings or intelligent beings, like lower hominids, something that would just rock them out of their current state, what better thing than psychedelics, what other culprits that you could connect to a doubling of the human brain size? I've seen it attributed to a bunch of different things, like consumption of fish, the throwing arm, all these different things like, don't bear is eat fish, not these stupid as fuck. I guess Omega 3's would help a little, but man, humans are a different thing. Humans are a very different thing. I have no doubt in my mind, it was psychedelics that played that role, and that's one thing that I looked at in supernatural was this whole issue of the cave art, because that's where in the long evolutionary story of the human species you suddenly find us confronting ourselves. We're looking at this amazing symbolic art, this incredible works, and these very mysterious, eerie spaces that you go into like the cave of Lascaux. And from the nature of the art itself, it's clear it was visionary art. These were people who were working with psychedelics and painting their visions, just as shamans do in the Amazon today. Did you see Werner Herzog's documentary? Yeah, I did. The cave of shoddy dreams? About shavo. Yeah. I mean, wasn't that like 40,000 plus years ago? 33,000 years ago. The cave of shavo. Amazing. Amazing place. Yeah, just so strange to think that these people, it's so hard for us to, when you get to a number, even a thousand years, it's like, I can't see it. It's too far away. It's almost like it's over the curve of the earth. It's like a thousand years. It's like, you know, wrap my head around what it was like during the Genghis Khan era. Never mind. 33,000. Yeah. That's where it gets like incredibly squirrely. And when you talk to guys like John Anthony West, it started talking about the hieroglyphs that depict a civilization and not just that, but named the pharaohs of 30 plus thousand years ago. That's too loopy. I mean, this is something that really annoys me about Egyptology. John Anthony West is just such a brilliant man. He's an old friend of mine going way, way back to the 90s, super, super guy. And he's done so much to bring to light the mysteries and the magic of ancient Egypt. And he's absolutely right because you go to the temple of Seti I in Abidos and you will see a mural carved in in high relief on a wall in a corridor where shows. The pharaoh Seti I showing his young son Ramesses II, the list of all the pharaohs who've ruled before their time. This is called a king list. Egyptologists, they take these king lists and they use them as the basis for the chronology that we are given of ancient Egypt as long as it fits into their reference frame. So the king list is fine. It's accepted back to 3000 BC, the first dynasty when civilization is supposed to have begun. They then completely ignore the fact that the king list continues long before that for tens of thousands of years, as much as 36,000 years before that, lists of pharaohs and the time when the gods walk the earth. All of this is in the king lists as well. So the Egyptologists grab the bit that fits their prejudice and ignore the rest and say oh well the ancient Egyptians were just making that up. Yeah and then there's of course the water erosion on this fence that John Anthony West and Robert Shock exposed. Exactly. So really in my opinion one of the most undeniable things that I've heard people deny. Yeah. The most is one of the most important pieces of evidence for a lost civilization. This is John Anthony West and Professor Robert Shock at Boston University. The evidence that the Great Sphinx was reigned upon for thousands and thousands of years. Now what's interesting and again, go back to the topic comes into this story is that Egyptologists at the time said look, there's no way that the Sphinx could be 12,000 years old. The geological evidence must be wrong because if there was a culture that was capable of creating a monument on the scale of the Sphinx 12,000 years ago, well why we would find other monuments that are 12,000 years old, other big monuments and they regarded that as the killer argument against the geological weathering of the Sphinx that you know that Shock and West must just be wrong. Well now we have go back to the teppy and it is 12,000 years old and it is on the scale of the Sphinx and it's not even that far from the Sphinx. You know and suddenly that old argument about the Sphinx which was dismissed by academia back in the 90s, they're going to have to reconsider it very, very carefully. That Charlton has to host a documentary on Sphinx which is John Sphinx. I believe it was on NBC. It was on NBC. I watched it, I found it incredibly fascinating but infuriating when you hear that Egyptologist just laughing at Robert Shock saying where's the evidence of this culture? Show me the putche. And what's crazy is what do you think that would be there when you're dealing with something that's that old? I said about a thousand years being over the horizon, I can't see it. 12,000 years, you might as well just be speaking another language, I understand. My stupid brain can't wrap my head around how long ago that is. Terribly, terribly little. What would be left? If you left a car outside for 12,000 years, you came back 12,000 years later. You would find zero. Absolutely nothing. The earth would just reabsorb it. What would be left would be the stones. And that's what we're left with. I was just in in Tuanako in Bolivia and there are stone structures there, beautifully cut, unbelievable precision cutting of the stone. They looked to me like they had metal parts fitted into them at some point. The metal's gone, the stone is left and we're left to wonder what was going on there. So yeah, the passage of time rubs out all memory and all traces and it's very easy to get the wrong idea about the past. But places like Gabbakli, Tepi, places like Gudong, Paddang and Indonesia are going to change this. What year did people start using metal? You know the ancient Egyptians, they didn't make iron, but they knew meteoritic iron. The only form of iron that was available to the ancient Egyptians was iron that came in in meteorites. And there is the odd knife that's been crafted from meteoritic iron. But the metal that they used, if you go back to 3000 or 2800 BC, was copper. But they had a way of hardening the copper. Some lost technique of making the copper harder. That was definitely present. How do we know that? This is the orthodox view that I wrote because the copper was used to cut stone and copper, you cut stone with copper, it's way too soft. So they must have been some method of making the copper harder. This is the argument. But this is the orthodox view. We don't really know what they had. Maybe metal wasn't the only way to cut stone. This is where I've maybe get a little bit mystical. But maybe because our society has done things a certain way that we use mechanical advantage, that we use machine tools, that we want to look for that in the past. But maybe there are all sorts of untapped faculties of the human mind that the ancient we're working with in one way or another. Certainly when you go to a place like Saxe-Waman in Peru, outside of Cuzco, and you see these gigantic blocks of stone, 150 tons each, fitted together like jigsaw puzzle, the edges kind of melting into one another. The notion that some sort of heat might have been used to shape these stones, we get us to make weird kind of sense. Some sort of heat heat. That's fascinating. And there's vitrified stone up there. In my journey in Peru, I spent several days with a local guy called Jesus Gamara, who is now 77 years old, and his father, Alfredo Gamara, was working on that site back at the beginning of the 1900s. And they, as a family, have been studying the megaliths of the Andes for 100 plus years now. And they are actually descended from the Incas. So you would think if anybody had an investment in saying that the Incas made all this, it would be them. But they say no. Jesus Gamara is adamant. The Incas have been wrongly handed the majority of the architecture in the Andes by archaeology. The Incas only did a fraction of it. And most of what they did was pretty poor quality. The great stuff was done by earlier civilizations. And he took me and he showed me vitrified stone, which has been subjected to fantastic heat and melted and shines in a way that's really stunning and striking and convincing when you see it. That some kind of technology that is not the technology that we use today was being employed to put these stones into place. And archaeologists have dismissed such ideas for a very long time. But I'm not sure how much longer they're going to be able to dismiss them. I don't know how they can dismiss those enormous stones that have strange shapes that are fitting. Like a gigantic jigsaw puzzle. It was like giants, 100 feet tall, decided to make a three dimensional jigsaw puzzle. Yeah. Tell Jamie what those images would be to pull those up. What would they be? I may be able to show you an image. But have him pull it up. OK. Well, Sacsevaaman. This is a C-S-A-Y-H-U-A-M-A-N. Sacsevaaman. And it's also, there's one stone that George Eosucholo showed me where it was carved out of this piece of stone. There's this slab carved through the back of it and removed. And they have no idea how they got through this stone. And yeah, they look at that image. Oh my God. That's me. Pull it towards you this way. This way? No, no, no, no, no, no, no. Just flatten. Yeah, there you go. That's insane. That's you standing next to that stone. That's me standing next to that stone. And look at the. That's why? No, no, no, no, no, no. Just flatten, yeah, there you go. That's insane. That's you standing next to us now. That's me standing next, standing next to that stone. And look at the way those stones are fitted together. I mean, that is a really monstrous thing to do. It's a gigantic work of art that they've created. And it goes on for hundreds of feet. This is not just that section. It goes on forever in these huge walls. And it does feel like a three-dimensional jigsaw puzzle. And so beautiful, too. I mean, the way they did it, it's not, they didn't make everything square and level. No. They just decided to use this sort of method of turning these stones into these puzzle pieces. When you go, when you go, look at it up close and you realize that you can't get a sheet of paper in the gaps between the joints, you realize that you are looking at some sort of technology that we don't get. There's something that there was some way that these people were able to do this and make it incredibly difficult for themselves if it was done in any modern way. What's the mainstream explanation for that? Oh, ours and ours of patient labor by tens of thousands of people grinding away at the stones and making them off it. Consider the planning, you know, to make that happen. Let me show the whole wall. I've got a picture of the whole wall. We could pull it up if you just tell us what picture is. There's the whole wall. Oh, my God. That's amazing. When I say the whole wall, I mean, that's just a section of the whole wall. That wall runs for hundreds of feet in all directions. The planning that's involved in making no single block of stone is the same size as another. They're all different sizes. They're all tongue-and-grewed into each other in this incredible way. And it really feels like they were melted. They were kind of softened. That's what Jesus Gamara says. He says these stones were softened by some technique that we don't understand. He thinks heat was involved. They were softened. And in a soft state, they were fitted together and then they solidified. Is that possible that they figured out some way to make a blow torch or something? I think it's possible. But even then, how do you push them into place? Not a blow torch necessarily, but something goes on that defies explanation there. And I don't think we need aliens to explain it. I think it's human work. I think it's human workmanship, but it's at a level and at a standard that we do not fully understand. Yeah. The alien thing gets real weird. Well, I have been, I've had the privilege of traveling around this planet for the last 25 years looking at ancient sites. Look at that. And there you go. So amazing. That's sexy. What a month. How big are the largest stones? About 20 feet high, 150 to 200 tons in weight, 6 to 8 feet thick. Just monstrous. So 200 tons is 400,000 pounds? Is that what it is? 200 tons. 200 tons. So it's more than that. So I think about in kilos. A ton is a thousand kilogram. Oh, your kilo, man. A kilo, man. I don't do it in pounds anymore. At least you don't do it in stone. Oh, yeah. When we go to England and do UFC weigh ins, we have to say, you have ten stones. It's stone. I mean, everything. There were 14 pounds in a stone. Yeah. Okay. So ten stone, you're 144 pounds. Yeah. Yeah. It's weird. It's really complicated. Yeah. There's actually one, man. Now, the point, looking up at the top left of the screen there, there's some inferior work on top of the better work. And what Jesus Camaro is saying in the inferior work was the work of the Incas, but the other stuff is much older. So the smaller rugs that were easily manipulated. Yeah. Now, they were copying the older style and respecting it and overbuilding and building around it. But they were honoring an earlier work of construction. And the conventional dating of this is very recent. The Incas were wiped out by the Spanish. 1530, 1540, they were destroyed as an empire. They'd only existed according to history for 150 years before that, 200 years before that at the outside. And all of this work, this incredible, megalithic work that's all over the Andes Mountains, you can't just come move for bumping into it, all of it is supposed to have been built in that 200 year period by the Incas because archaeology can't just can't bear the idea that there might have been some earlier culture. Why date it then? It seems like if it's so confusing and so there's so many open-ended questions where when you see these enormous pieces, when you see them fitted together, when you don't have an explanation for how they did it, you're not exactly sure who did it because the history gets really murky when you get that far back. Why date it? I agree. Why date it? I don't understand why they have to do that. It seems to me that archaeology comes to history with a pre-existing reference frame and makes everything fit into it. And that's been the mistake of science down the ages. There was a long period, a very good example of this is the notion that the notion that the sun revolved around the earth. That was based on a pre-existing reference seem to make sense. Get up in the morning, look at the sun, it rises, goes through the sky. But it was complete nonsense. It's the earth that's going around the sun. You have to change the reference frame in order to see what's really going on. And I think that's the problem with history and archaeology. But in fact, if any, has this go-backly-tepied discovery, changed archaeologist's view of back-dating things. As I mentioned, I liked Clash Mitt when I met him. The archaeologist who's working on go-backly-tepied. I thought he was charming and enthusiastic and I enjoyed his energy. But when I asked him about it, when I said, so what does it feel like to be the man who discovered the site that's rewriting history? He said, no, it's not rewriting history. It's adding a new chapter to existing history. He still wants to fit it into that reference frame somehow that we have to, okay, we have to completely rethink our ideas about the upper paleo anything. But somehow, desperately, we must look at this site in a way that's not going to rock the boat too much. And I was sad to hear that. I think especially when he himself admits that at least 20 times as much, if not 50 times as much as still under the ground, awaiting to be excavated, I think a little bit of provisional thinking is needed before. Do you think it's either? Do you just attribute that to him being a professional academic? Yes, I think the professional, professional academia, particularly in the realm of archaeology, encourages those who are working in the field to think in terms of the existing paradigm, not to think in terms of challenging the paradigm. Because it's dangerous, if you challenge the paradigm, you're going to be ridiculed by your colleagues and regarded as completely lunatic and attacked and insulted. So it's better not to challenge the paradigm. But what a fascinating area of research to not challenge the paradigm, an area where you have so little information about what could have possibly happened when you get back to 5,000 years ago, 6,000 years ago, 7,000 years ago, and you're trying to piece these puzzles together to pretend that you have the entire timeline. It seems a little silly. It's pretty crazy. It seems so, I mean, it's one thing if you're trying to pretend that you have a timeline when you're dealing with something, or excuse me, to pretend you have all the information when you're dealing with something like mathematics, or when you're dealing with something like very clear manuscripts. We have the Dead Sea Scrolls, very clearly, excellent out of years old. This is the thing with history where you have written documents that you can draw upon, where you have those written documents. You can be reasonably certain about what's going on. The further back we go, we don't have the written documents. Beyond 5,000 years we have no written documents. And to draw fixed and firm conclusions about what happened before 5,000 years ago on the basis of a few things dug out of the ground. It's not good enough. It's a mistake that's being made. And that, I believe, is going to change. It's going to be painful. It's going to be slow. It was painful to change the telemaic system to the Copernican system, but it will happen. The system will change. And the backdating of this Sphinx, has there been any progress on that now because of go backly tapping? Because what Robert Shock did in exposing the erosion, the water erosion, we briefly touched on this before. But I've seen people dispute it and boy, it seems so forced and labored. They're disputing. Exactly. Exactly. I have no doubt that Robert Shock is right. Robert Shock and John Anthony West, they're right about the Sphinx. And they have been attacked in all kinds of ways and all kinds of elaborate contorted explanations have been given to explain away that kind of weathering. But the fact is they remain to be right. And now we have got backly tapping. Now on the other side of the world, we have gone on pardon. We have sites that are 12,000 plus years old, indisputably. So I think it's sooner or later will cause a reconsideration of the Sphinx. I hope so. And that's something that I also intend to focus on. Well, I think it has to. And as soon as Jamie gets back from the bathroom, we'll show some of the images of the Sphinx enclosure that led Robert Shock, who is a geologist, to very clearly proclaim that what you're dealing with is thousands of years of water erodes, as if you have a water erosion. The smoothness of it, the curves, the fact that there's all these fissures that indicate water running down. And then the area, I honestly think Shock, Robert Shock and John West are going to be seen in future generations as the Copernicus of their time, that they saw what nobody else saw. And they had the courage to put the information out there. And they were attacked for it. And people don't get burnt at the stake these days for proposing alternative ideas. But in a kind of way, we do. There's the vicious nature of the attacks on people who propose an alternative view of history. But I think in our lifetimes, we will see this change. And if folks haven't seen or haven't heard me talk about John Anthony West's amazing documentary series on Egypt, it's called Magical Egypt. I can't recommend it enough. It is absolutely fascinating. So in depth, I believe is it six or seven DVDs? I don't know how much that big collection of DVDs. It's a massive, massive amount of work. And John is a man who's devoted his whole life to understanding an alternative understanding of Egypt, done with great wisdom and great care. Yeah, it's a really, really incredible series that I've watched many, many times over and over again and tried to absorb as much of it as I can. But it's so staggering. And he also showed very clear that there's some different styles of techniques of building and that these older techniques that you find or different techniques are all on a lower level of the soil. It's exactly exactly like it is in the Peruvian Andes and Bolivia. But what has happened, I think, is that archaeology has taken the work of the latest culture to work on the site and handed the whole site over to it. Actually, geese is a very complicated site. You have the subterranean chamber beneath the Great Pyramid. Why do we have to believe that that is from the same date as the pyramid itself? You have the so-called mortuary temples and valley temples, these gigantic megalithic structures. The valley temple beside the Sphinx is actually made of blocks of limestone that were cut out from around the Sphinx to create the body of the Sphinx. So if the Sphinx is 12,000 years old, now, I honestly think it is, then the valley temples are 12,000 years old as well. What we have are very complex multi-layered sites where there's a very ancient megalithic layer of architecture and the later culture comes along perhaps venerates that, perhaps over builds around it and attempts to copy it in some ways. And the mistake has been both in the Andes and in Egypt that the later culture has been attributed with all the work. We need a more sophisticated, more in-depth exploration of this. And I think Quebec litep is going to force us to do that. Jamie, if you could pull up some of the images, the Robert Shock created of the water erosion as opposed to, I mean, you showed it in an animated or illustrated image of it before. But it's pretty fascinating stuff. And that seems to me to be the one smoking gun in Egypt that sort of points to it. It's a smoking gun for sure. It's a smoking gun, which the mainstream academia has tried to ignore the smoke. But the smoke is there. And go back to the epi-gunning pattern. Other sites are going to force them to reconsider that. What are they going to do if they dig up something that's 30,000 years old? I mean, well, I hope that they're not going to hide it and pretend it would. Well, I know of cases where it's happened. I know it happened in Malta. What happened in Malta? In the hypergium, which is an underground structure in Malta of amazing undergrounds. This should be on everybody's bucket list, by the way, the hypergium in Malta. It is an incredible place. It's like a huge temple complex cut out underground. And there are traces of red ochre paint on the walls. They look much more like the caves, the painted caves than they look like stuff from the Neolithic. And there was at one time a figure of a hybrid creature, a half bison, half bull. Which a figure would be normal in the painted caves from 30,000 years ago, but doesn't fit in with the idea that the hypergium belongs to 5,000 years ago. And this was solved by a certain gentleman who shall remain nameless who had the bison bull scrubbed off the walls of the hypergium in Malta. It was literally scrubbed off. I reported this at some length in my book Underworld. Who do they think scrubbed it? Well, we know who scrubbed it. It was the former director of museums in Malta back in the 60s. He scrubbed it off the walls. And when I took the National Museums of Malta to task over this, when I was back there making a documentary with Channel 4, we put in a formal document to them, asking them to answer this charge. And they refused to answer it. They would not comment upon it at all. So yeah, I mean, archaeologists do actually sometimes do incredibly dishonest things to maintain the view of history. That's so sad. I mean, just think about the whole cycle of thinking that goes from being a young person wanting to explore history, wanting to become an archaeologist, getting involved in archaeology, getting involved in academia, and then destroying evidence that's contrary to what you've been taught or our teacher. It's the opposite of some. It's so scary. It's so scary that human nature, even in a scientific work sometimes, finds its way to rear its ugly head, that the nasty aspects of the nasty aspect of the human nature can even find their way into archaeology. Most unfortunately. Yeah. That they can't in certain sciences because it's so cut and dry, mathematics and physics. But in archaeology so much is based on interpretation and interpretation of very limited facts, actually. So what's next for you? What do you do from here? Well, I am writing at the moment I'm researching and writing a sequel to fingerprints of the gods. Fingerprints of the gods was published in 1995. The reason I'm doing a sequel is because of the new evidence. We've talked about Gunung Padang in Indonesia. We've talked about Gobekli Tepe. We've talked about the comet. The comet, for me, is the cataclysmic smoking gun that explains how we lost a whole civilization. And a whole lot of material like this. I'm not going to write an update of fingerprints of the gods. I'm going to write a completely new book. In that book, I'm in the process of researching. That's why I'm on these travels at the moment. That's why I'm going to Indonesia at the beginning of December. That book will be published at the end in the fall of 2015. I'm due to deliver it to the publishers in December 2014. It'll be published in the fall of 2015. And I see this as in a way a kind of summation of my life's work on this whole issue of a lost civilization. And I feel very committed to doing it. But honestly, my heart these days is in writing novels. Really? I love writing novels. So it took a long time for you to break away from you originally a journalist. Then went from journalism to writing about ancient history and alternative view of ancient history. But it was a psychedelic experience that you two wanted to write. It was a psychedelic experience with ayahuasca back in 2007 that sat me on the track to write my first novel, which is entangled, which is a story of two young women one living 24,000 years ago. In the Stone Age, one living in modern Los Angeles whose destinies are entangled. The time is not what it seems that it's a kind of spiral or a cat's cradle into crossing lines rather than an arrow. And they are brought together by a benign supernatural force who I call the Blue Angel to do battle with a demon who travels through time. And then since then, I've written War God, which is a novel about the Spanish conquest of Mexico, did get a British publisher for that book that books been published in Britain. And it did OK. It did well enough at any rate for the publishers in Britain to commission volumes two and three because it's a series. I couldn't get any American publisher to take that book on. But because publishing sees people in terms of brands, and I am branded as a nonfiction author and how dare I write fiction as well. How dare I do that. You know, and life is short. I want to try many, many things. And so what I've done is published it pretty much effectively, self-published it in America through Amazon. And the book is available on Amazon.com. That's what it looks like, by the way. The US edition. People can also order it from book shops, but it's easier to get it from Amazon.com. What is that on the cover? Well that's actually derived from an Aztec image of a skull found on a ball court because they played this terrible game of ball game where the loser had his head cut off. And war god is the story of the Spanish conquest of Mexico. And if I could say to anybody who's listening, special offer for the next 10 days only, go to my website, which is grahamhankock.com. And click on the war god section and you will find links to get it on Amazon.com either as an e-book or as a printed book. And what I will do is write to me at the address that's on my website there, which is war goddedications.com. I will write back to you and I will send you a signed dedicated book plate. That's essentially a label. You buy the book from Amazon in the normal way, but you will receive through the post from me if you write to me and give me your postal address. You will receive through the post from me a signed dedicated book plate to place inside it. Wow, that's awesome. But that's 10 days that that offer is available. It's a beautiful image. That's war goddedications. War goddedications.com. That's a beautiful image, that image of the Aztec skull. It had read something somewhere where scholars were they were contemplating whether or not they were incorrect about the sacrifice and they were saying that there may be a possibility that they played a game where they sacrificed the winning team. Human sacrifice was conducted on an industrial scale in the Aztec Empire. I've investigated this very, very thoroughly. This novel is a novel. It's a work of fiction, but I've thoroughly grounded it in the historical facts. This was a tough history to investigate. The Aztecs were truly a terrifying culture. The Spanish who turned up with 490 men in 11 ships on the Gulf of Mexico in 1519 were if anything and even more terrifying culture. These are two martial cultures who were brought together in this horrendous conflict. It was a different time. It was a different world than in 1519. I've tried to tell the story through the eyes of ordinary human beings. My main heroine is a true historical figure, a woman called Marlinal who became the mistress and the interpreter of Cortez. When she enters history, she's given to Cortez as a surrender gift by the Maya. When she enters history, it's already clear that she has a grudge against Boctezuma, the Aztec Emperor, and that she is going to use Cortez as her instrument to bring him down. I was just interested in her quest for revenge against the Aztec Emperor and also to have a woman who's a hero in a story rather than just a man. What is the, trying to think towards the first one? What is the origin of this horrific level of human sacrifice? What started it all with the Aztecs? Well, that's a reason why I've written war god as a novel. Because for the Aztecs, they believed that they were in touch with a supernatural entity that they called Whitzeloposhli Hummingbird. I use his name in the English translation in the book Hummingbird. Who is there? God of War. He's there. He's there. War god. And this is an area where we have to recognize that there is a dark side to psychedelics. I am a big fan of psychedelics, and I do think that psychedelics have a hugely important role to play. But the Aztecs were using psilocybin mushrooms in their human sacrifice rituals. And Moktezuma was encountering this demonic entity hummingbird in psilocybin trances and was constantly being given incredibly bad, even wicked advice by him. And that's this. So I'm playing with the idea of dark spiritual forces at work behind human history, manipulating Moktezuma, manipulating Cortes, and plunging mankind into the sea of cruelty and misery. And what redeems the story for me and does it at all times is that the human spirit still shines through, even in the darkest times. There is courage, there is decency, there is love, people struggle to show the best in themselves and to deliver the best in themselves. So I've tried to show both sides. This book is about the battle of good against evil. And it's not that the Spanish are good and the Aztecs are evil because the Spanish were wicked, wicked, wicked as well. And they did terrible things. They fed people to dogs. They burnt people at the state. What is actually burning somebody at the stake if not a form of human sacrifice? That's what the Spanish would do. To their god. They were sacrificing people to their gods. No different from the Aztecs, in that respect. The level of sacrifice was so insane. I tried to explain it to a friend of mine. And he literally told me I was bullshitting. When I told them that 80,000 people were sacrificed. 80,000 were sacrificed. A period of like four days. Four days with teams of killers, 50 teams of killers working at the top of the Great Pyramid to process people within a minute or two, process them. Think of it. That's how it's done. It was done on an industrial scale. Cues of victims stretching a mile in every direction marching up the pyramid and having their hearts cut out. And all of this in honor of a demonic entity, which the Aztecs passionately believed in. They believed that he needed to be fed human hearts and blood. What did they call? They called him Whittleoposhly, which means hummingbird at the left hand of the sun. He's the war god after whom this novel is named. And the way I look at it, the same demonic entity is manipulating both Mokdisuma and Cortez. He appears to Cortez in dreams and takes on the disguise of Saint Peter. He appears to Mokdisuma as the war god, but it's the same demon that's playing with men. And that's one reason why I wrote this as a novel, because you can't get into this stuff in a non-fiction book. But it's very real. It's a very real part of human history. The whole shape of the world we live in today, the terrible genocide that happened in North America, the destruction of the North American Indians, the conquest of Peru, the whole relationship of the European powers to Africa. For example, all of this was based on what happened in those years between 15, 19 and 15, 21 when the Spanish conquest of Mexico unfolded. And I think we would lead onto a dark track. And how it could have been if those two cultures, if the Spanish and the Aztecs had met one another in a spirit of mutual learning, how much there was to exchange, how much each side of the Atlantic could have learned from the other instead it becomes this kind of conflagration of blood. But it's difficult to place ourselves in the mindset of the people of that time. It's difficult for us to do that today. And I have to say, when you look at the Spaniards, I mean 490 men turn up on the coast of Mexico in 11 ships and they are going to take on this empire that can put 200,000 men into the field that will, if they catch you, will march you up the pyramid and cut your heart out. And many Spaniards were sacrificed in sight of their colleagues. It was an extraordinary time. It was an extraordinary event and men of those times were different from men of today, I believe. Is the mainstream explanation for human sacrifice? What do they believe started off? Well, that it's a feeding of psychic energy to supernatural beings. That's what human sacrifice is about. That you take the psychic energy of the individual you're going to kill. You kill them. Take their psychic energy and feed it to these vampire-like creatures that are lying in the beyond that thrive on human misery and pain. And you know, who are we to say that such things do not exist? We don't understand the nature of reality. And if you look at human culture today, I mean, look at wars, look at wars that are happening in the world today, look at the tens of thousands of people that are being slaughtered in warfare today. That's also a kind of human sacrifice. I think we have to consider the possibility that some kind of demonic force is thriving on this and being nourished by it. And that's one of the things that we need to do as human beings is to separate ourselves from that and say, no, we will not do that. We will not feed that energy. We will not offer lives to the beyond. I don't go with you on that, but I do in a way. I don't believe in demons, but I think it's undeniable that there have been massive groups of people that have participated in horrific things. So what is that? Is not demonic. I believe it's demonic. I can't prove it. I can't prove that that's the case. I just think we should stay open to that possibility that the nature of reality is so complex and so multi-layered that there may be much more going on than we think and that if we just confine our explanations of things to purely economic and material terms, we may be missing part of the picture and that when the ancients spoke of angels and demons to use ways, I'm not saying that I believe in angels or demons as such, but when they spoke of light and dark forces, negative and positive forces playing on the human race, maybe they had something going, maybe there was something to that. I always consider the fact that human beings have this incredibly broad spectrum of possibility, incredibly broad spectrum of behavior and personality of circumstance of genetics and that there's this yin and yang of life. There's this pull and push of life and that the extreme ends of it are good and evil. Good and evil. It may not be a demon but it might as well be a demon if you're marching 80,000 people off the side of a pyramid and cutting their heart out with a fucking stone tool. Yeah. That's demonic. It might as well be a demon and that is worth considering. And the question is what is going on here? I have a very dear friend called James Tiburon who refers to this world that we live in as a university of duality, that we have lessons to learn from duality. Maybe duality is not the whole thing. Maybe there is an overarching unity and oneness in all things. But right now here in this incarnation on planet earth, we have to learn from duality. And the thing about duality is human beings can choose. We can always choose even in the most straightened and difficult circumstances. We can always choose for the light rather than the darkness. We can always choose for good rather than evil. We don't have to take that act that causes pain and suffering to another human being. We never have to do that. We can always choose not to. The alarming thing is that people often will choose the act that causes pain and suffering to others. And we are defined by our choices. And this is where we need to grow up as a species and start to choose the light. Do you think that this broad spectrum of possibilities, whether it's possibilities of thinking or behavior, it's almost there to educate us as to the possibilities, destructive possibilities, that this huge spectrum that we have is so open-ended and so massive as to indicate that there are these extreme variables. And these extreme variables can push us by understanding of the consequences into a more positive way. And if they didn't exist, if these horrific ideas of war and of human sacrifice didn't exist, maybe we would appreciate love as much. We would not appreciate love as much. We would have nothing to learn from this strange and troublesome and mysterious and beautiful thing called being a human being. We have to learn here because there are those two different poles, the extreme end of which are good and evil, with all kinds of gradations in between. That is what teaches us. And it's the choices we make day by day as we go through life that define us ultimately. Now, whether there is any transcendental consequence to that, something beyond this life, something that some reckoning to take place as the ancient Egyptians certainly believe there was, I don't know for sure, but I do know that a lifetime of making decisions that cause pain and suffering to others and that detract from their sovereignty is a life that ultimately the person who has lived that life is diminished by it. I want to know how they got 80,000 people to get in a line to get their hearts covered. is a life that ultimately the person who's lived that life is diminished by it. I want to know how they got 80,000 people to get in a line to give their hearts cut out. Terror, total terror. They were the dominant military force in the Valley of Mexico. They were very dominant. They asked how to have a huge secret police force. They spied on one another, they spied on their neighbor. They would carry out human sacrifices as object lessons to their neighbors. You will pay us tribute or this is what we will do to you. They skinned people alive. They were truly, truly awful. And it was their awfulness. It was the horrific nature of Aztec behavior that led them to lose that battle against Cortez. Because Cortez, their numbers are crazy. Cortez, 490 men, Aztecs 200,000. It's pretty obvious who's going to win. How does Cortez win? He wins because the Aztecs neighbors hate the Aztecs. They have lived in terror of them for 200 years. And they see him as a liberator. They see him as somebody who's going to lift this yoke off their shoulders and allow them to be free. Of course, they didn't know that he was just going to make things worse. But in the time, in the nature of things at the time, that was how it was felt. I mean, it's the fact that there were 30 million people in Mexico in 1519. And 50 years later, there were just one million. The Spanish were responsible for a genocide of 29 million people. So they didn't make things better, but it looked like they'd make things better. And they came as a kind of karma. And here's the weird thing, again, I'll show this cover, because beside it is the feathered serpent in this photograph. And that's Quetzalcoatl, the feathered serpent who is there. And this is another reason why Cortez won, because he was able to play on the prophecy that a God of peace would return. And that that God would overthrow wicked king. And he was the feathered serpent. He was Quetzalcoatl. And it was predicted that he would return in the Aztec year one read. And it so happened that Cortez landed on the coast of Mexico with his tiny army in the Aztec year one read. 1519 was the year one read. So the return of Quetzalcoatl was a key part of Cortez's victory. And my heroine, Malinal, is the person who tells Cortez about this. She's the one who shows him how to exploit this and how to play mock consumers superstition and fear to represent himself as this God. But of course, Cortez is not a God of peace. He's a God of war. It's quite a coincidence. It was amazing. Amazing, Coincidence. Is that what it is? Or is it a prophecy? Again, you have to wonder. You have to wonder how this could have happened. Because the prophecy was quite specific that Quetzalcoatl and his companions would return in the year one read. They would return in ships that moved by themselves without paddles. What were the Spanish ships with their sails, but ships that moved by themselves without paddles? They would be dressed in shining metal armor. And they would deploy weapons called Chihucoatl, which means fire serpents, which would dismember men at a distance, i.e. guns. All of this cannon. All of this was right there in the prophecy. And Cortez was able to step right into that role and turn around what should have been an obvious defeat for his tiny force into a stunning victory. That is absolutely fascinating. So many correlating ideas come together. And that's why I want to write a book about this. That's why I thought I want to get inside the heads of the characters and deal with that battle of good against evil at a level that one can't do in a non-fiction book. How old was this prophecy? Well, that image that I showed of the feathered serpent. Again, I show it. That image of the feathered serpent, which side of my screen am I on here? That image of the feathered serpent is from Laventa in the Gulf of Mexico. And that is in the oldest archaeological strata of Mexico. That image dates to an archaeological strata that is about 1,500 BC, 3,500 years ago. The stone itself may be much older than that, but the strata it's dug up from was already 3,500 years old. So this notion, and there are many images of people with kind of caucasian features found in the same strata. This notion of mysterious strangers who were in Mexico at some time and who would return is very ancient in the Mexican system. Wow. And how did they, I mean, there's a very different language that they used than ours. And it was very difficult for them to decipher a lot of the, especially the Mayan, where they were in the Aztec, the way they're, what exactly they were saying. How did they figure out that they're saying ships without oars and things, fire guns? It's an interesting point that you raise. So when Cortez first lands in Mexico, he lands in the Yucatan. And the people who live in the Yucatan are the Maya. They're not the Aztecs. They're the first people he encounters. And there he has an incredible stroke of luck. He can't speak a word of Mayan and nor can anybody else in his group of Spaniards. But they discover that somebody who looks like them is living on the mainland as a prisoner of the Maya. They're the Spanish first landed in Cosimo, all of their resort today. And the Mayan tribe on Cosimo were relatively peaceful, but the people on the mainland were not. And the Maya of Cosimo came to Cortez and they said this, with sign language, they pointed at him and they said, Castilian, they actually told him he was a Castilian. And Cortez thought, how can they know I'm a Castilian? That's what the Spanish called themselves. And gradually through sign language, he figured out what it was, that there was a Spaniard who had been shipwrecked on the coast of Mexico. At some point it turned out it was 11 years before. In fact, 26 Spaniards had been shipwrecked 11 years before. 25 of them had been eaten by the Maya. But one, here on a more aguelar had survived. So Cortez grabbed him and I tell this story in my book. And Cortez became, aguelar became Cortez's first interpreter. So suddenly, because he spoke fluent Maya by then, he'd been living amongst the Maya for 11 years. And he spoke Spanish as well. So suddenly they could understand the Maya, they could communicate with the Maya. But then when they went on and they encountered the Aztecs for the first time, the Aztecs spoke another language and that language was Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs. And aguelar suddenly became useless. He couldn't speak Nahuatl and that's where my heroine, who's a true historical figure, Malinal, thrusts herself forward. She's already been handed over to Cortez as a prisoner. She speaks fluent Nahuatl and fluent Maya. And she communicates to Cortez, look, I can work with your man, Aguilar. I will give, you will put the words from Spanish. You'll speak Spanish. Aguilar will give me those words in Maya and I will translate them into Nahuatl. And the reverse with the Aztec ambassadors and within weeks, she has replaced Aguilar. She's a genius. She masters Spanish. She becomes Cortez sole interpreter and she is communicating for him with the Aztecs. And there's an amazing scene where she encounters Moktezuma directly. She and Cortez face to face with Moktezuma. And in those days, if you looked Moktezuma in the eye, you were killed. This is what the Aztecs, nobody could look him in the eye. They had to fall on their faces. And the local accounts from the time tell us how Marlinal standing there on the causeway outside Teloshtidlan looked Moktezuma straight in the eye. She never lowered her eyes for a second as she gave him the words of Cortez. And I'm just fascinated by the courage of this woman and what drove her to use Cortez as her instrument to bring Moktezuma down. And she's a real historian. She's a real historical figure. There's still a statue of her in Mexico City today. She became not only Cortez's interpreter, but also his mistress and the mother of his child. And by all accounts, she was a very beautiful woman. I would be disappointed if you didn't bang her. You can't find a single Aztec painting of Cortez that doesn't have Moktezuma in it. And she was in the heart of every battle. And there's another Spanish writer of the time who spoke about her as Bernard Diaz, a common soldier who wrote a memoir called The History of the Conquest of New Spain. And it's he who tells us of Marlinal's beauty, her grace, her courage, her job. She's regarded as a traitor in Mexico today because she Cortez said it. He said aside from God himself, it was Marlinal who gave me this conquest of Mexico. That's it. One woman changed the history of the world. La Malinci, that's her the Spanish knew her, they knew her as La Malinci. Wow, that's amazing. So she's the central character in my novel. And we'd meet her in the fattening pan at the foot of the Great Pyramid, along with another woman who plays a big part in my story, a young witch called Tozi. And this is the motive. This is why Marlinal escapes, but this is why she wants to bring Moktezuma down because she sees him as the head of an empire of terror. And she sees Cortez as the only way to bring Moktezuma to his knees. Well it's fascinating that would regard her as a traitor when you think about what Monizuma had done to his own people. Yeah, yeah. That's amazing. Well again to give balance, we have to say that the Spanish did horrible things. It's horrible, horrible things. Feeding people to dogs, using people as target practice for their weapons. Let's see if the Spanish Toledo steel will cut off this man's arm, you know, things like that. They were horrors. They were true, true horrors. And Cortez was a man of war in every possible way and a Machiavellian player, very cunning, very clever. You can't help admiring him in certain ways, but he was unbelievably cruel. What brought down Cortez? Cortez was brought down by old age. He wanted to become the king of Mexico. After he eventually, there was a apocalyptic final battle when the Spanish took Tanosh Tidalan, which is the old name for Mexico City. And Cortez really, it's clear that his plan was to become the new king of Mexico, but the king of Spain had different ideas and they pulled Cortez down. They gave him a title. He became a Markwhis, but he was never allowed to fulfil his dreams. And I see Karma at work in that as well. If he'd been a better man, perhaps he would have been allowed to fulfil some dreams. Whatever. The guy lived to be old. That's amazing. No antibiotics, no aspirin. No baddades. Massive war wounds. He was clubbed on the head. His skull was broken. They've examined the skull of Cortez, and there's three separate times that his skull was fractured. Wow. In battles. And in each time he recovered and bounced by. They were men of steel, these Spaniards. They were the ultimate warriors. Were they tiny though? No, they were. They were. They were. They were. They were the ultimate warriors. Were they tiny though? They were small. But they were mean. Like how big were they in five feet tall? They were small guys. Was that because of a lack of food? I guess nutrition. I guess so. It's a nutritional issue. There are all, you know, people are told it today. And those times they were small. That is absolutely fascinating, isn't it? How much does the shape of human beings have changed? They would take Japan. The shape of human beings has changed radically. In the last 50 years. There's some enormous jobs. And usually, they would take Japan. The shape of human beings has changed radically. In Japan. In the last 50 years. There's some enormous jobs. Huge tall Japanese now. Yeah. Big giant wrestlers. Exactly. There's been quite a few that have entered into mixed martial arts. It's just enormous, enormous man. And it's to do is to do with nutrition. Definitely. Definitely. Fascinating. So can I say that again? If anybody is interested in actually supporting my work and spending a few dollars on getting hold of a copy of War God, go to my website, buy it through the Amazon link, check out the email address that's there, which is War God Dedications at gmail.com, write to me, and I will at my own expense by aml send you a signed dedicated book plate to go inside your copy of War God. But that offer is only good for about the next 10 days. Well, I guarantee you just sold the gang of books because that was really fascinating. I'm going to buy it tonight. I'm really blown away by that whole idea, the whole story, the woman who was the translator is a whole thing. It's felt so fascinating that when you live in this sweet, cushy society that we live in today, especially here in Los Angeles, where it doesn't even rain. Right. So it's a super market, get some meat. Everything's so soft and easy. It's so hard for us to wrap our heads around the just 500 plus years ago. This was going down in Mexico. Amazing. Graham Hancock, every time you come on, it's better than the time before. You blew me away again, man. You broke whatever record you set in the last one. I see you jitter today. Man, I hope a million people go out and buy your book after that. That's absolutely fascinating. So again, it's war god. You can get it on Amazon and the book that really got me into Graham Hancock in the first place, which is fingerprints of the gods also available everywhere on Amazon. The links for war god are on my website, GrahamHankop.com. Very clearly, mom. Beautiful. Thank you very much, man. That was amazing. Thank you, Jim. Really fascinating stuff. And our sponsors, thanks to our sponsors. Thanks to audible.com. forward slash Joe and get yourself a free audio book. And thanks also to trying to find the link. There it is. Thanks also to carbonite. Go to carbonite.com. Use the offer code JRE and get a free trial. No credit card required. Plus two free month, two free bonus months with your subscription. That's carbonite.com. Offer code JRE. And of course, always on it. You can see the comments. ONNIT. Use the code name, Rogan, and save yourself 10% off any and all supplements. We'll see you guys next week. Lots of great stuff ahead. And that's it for now. Bye bye, big kiss. See you soon. Bye.