Alex Jones, ladies and gentlemen, really  glad to have you back. It's always great to be with you and your wonderful crew  in Florida, but Maine is my favorite. This is truly a little slice of Mayberry.  Mildly demented Mayberry. Um, thank you. [Applause] [Music] [Applause] [Music] So what everyone's been focused on Israel, Gaza,  the huge debate about Israel, United States, um which is great, fine, but we sort of are  ignoring other things that are happening here and abroad as we have that debate. And one of  the things that seems to be happening that fewer Americans are aware of is the situation in Russia  seems to be getting between Russia and Ukraine and the United States and Europe NATO seems to be  degrading quickly. Where is that going? Do you think it's an extreme escalatory phase 3 and a  half plus years in as you know Trump says he's strongly considering giving them long range  Tomahawk cruise missiles and Russia has said that that escalates into direct war and they're  basically calling it World War I. The CIA called the Cold War World War II. So we are really in  with all the ingredients we have with China, the North Korean troops being in Ukraine, all the  different proxy countries involved. This is really is a new world war. The only question is will  it continue to escalate which it is now and in the the next phase. U we know that NATO um has  already been caught with Zilinski with Ukraine two years ago shooting missiles into Poland they  tried to blame on Russia. There's been uh those drones that that they claimed came out of Russia  but Russia says was basically a setup a few months ago. You have operation spiderweb 3 months ago  with smuggled drones as far as 4,000 mi away from Ukraine in Russia on its coast with Japan with  their bear bombers being blown up. Part of their nuclear triad. So imagine if that happened in  America and imagine if uh Russia had given you you know Mexico the drones to do it. So so all of this  is NATO trying to suck the United States directly into full conflict. They've got a quarter million  person army conscription starting up in parts of Europe, a descendant of quote peacekeeping force  uh to Ukraine really calling an invasion force um a peacekeeping force. And then now as I predicted  it was the next move. NATO claims that Russia is going into the zero phase or zero hour and that  uh NATO is now putting out propaganda the last 48 hours that Russia has prepositioned undercover  spec special forces all over Europe preparing terror attacks and mass casualty uh events and  that Russia is preparing to attack Europe proper which of course is completely insane to to to  do that offensively and and and so that fits the pattern of the preparation for false flags uh  that will then be blamed on Russia as the pretext uh to invoke the articles in NATO that brings NATO  directly into war and then if the United States is still part of NATO uh that will drag us directly  into war with Russia that will quickly escalate in a thermonuclear war in every major war game  there is. That's why I agree with Elon Musk and Senator Lee that it's time for us to get out of  NATO immediately. If you take three steps back, so Europe has no reason to fight Russia at all.  Europe has every reason to cooperate with Russia, at least on energy, but on a lot of things  probably. It refuses. Russia's now formed an alliance probably permanent with China. And so  it and Ukraine of course can't win. They don't have the manpower. Um they never could. So if  you're escalating the war at this point, if you're promoting the war at this point, it seems to me  your goal is to destroy Europe. And I think that's kind of always been the goal to destroy Europe  and the United States. Well, as you stated, it was been the policy in the United States since the  50s, right through Nixon, right through Reagan, right through Herbert Walker Bush, right until uh  just the last 5 years or so to split China from Russia, of course, and that is a very good policy.  And you have China that is actually expanding all over the South China Sea, just cut off 95% of  rurals to the world, including the US. serious act of war absolutely vital in everything we do for  folks that don't know nothing works cell phones computers avionics and aircraft everything  satellites is based on those that's another question how is China allowed to position itself  for 95% plus control of rare minerals that's a serious act of war so their expansion is taking  islands of the Philippines taking drilling rigs uh you know off the coast of uh Vietnam all that's  happening they just put a communist government or trying to fully in South Korea so China is on the  move and everything should be focused on them. It is a strategic blunder of biblical proportions uh  to be roped into the Soros NATO war. But NATO and the EU unelected commission has said from years  that Europe's demographics and finances are the worst of any first world nation or sector.  And so they say their business model is a 20 to 30year war conventional with Russia that they  believe will allow them to stay on a war economy and will finally break Russia and then they will  break Russia into five parts. That's official EU Commission policy. It's totally delusional. Russ  Russia's outproducing weapons 3 to1 has three times the troops in the field and only gearing  up. And so in the face of that delusional plan, similar to Napoleons or Hitler's with Operation  Barbar Roza in 42, uh Europe is trying to double down again and sucking us in. Uh but when all the  real strategists and and and even all their think tanks say this this wouldn't work, then the  question is why is the unelected commission and the US neocons and left fully supporting this  commitment to to They want to destroy Christian civilization. That's why it's why they got behind  the first and second world wars. And it's why the lesson that they taught us in school was that it's  dangerous to have a big white Christian country, which is not actually. And they've systematically  tried to destroy those countries. And they've succeeded. And Russia is is a very Christian  nation, very pro- western, and the left hates that. And so now they they Exactly. How do they  turn over the chessboard when the Hollywood satanic globalist black rocka leader failing is  you kamicazi the Russians and America and Europe uh into a giant climactic war while the globalists  sit back and watch us all kill each other? That's totally right. I think that's totally right.  Why are we participating in it? Why would the US government ever send long range missiles? Why  would the basically if we send those munitions to Ukraine, we're at open war. We've been at war with  Russia for three and a half years as you know, but that would be open war. Why would why would  we go along with that? What is going on? It's sleepwalking in Armageddon. Well, Europe's  demographics and financial system means the unelected EU will collapse in the next few years.  It's politically unpopular. So, the political reason is they believe a war will keep them in  power and it's delusional. That's the last refuge of tyrants when they're falling is to is to take  the country to war to try to maintain domestic control. Uh but again at a spiritual level it's  it's it's absolute Satanism. It's it's absolute death cult uh death wish that if the globalists  can't maintain control they'll just drag us into the grave of history with themselves and like so  many tyrannies uh they are going like the elephant graveyard or boneyard to Russia to die. Why would  the US government continue to recognize Zalinski, who's an unelected dictator who's worked for  years to destroy Christianity in Ukraine, which is a Christian country and has always been, why  would he be invited to the White House this week? I don't understand when he's he does not have a  Democratic mandate. He's not an elected leader. He's a murderer. They've sold our weapons to some  of the worst terror groups in the world. And we're treating him like he's a head of state. Like why  are we doing that? And just what a few weeks ago, three weeks ago, he was back at the White House  and Trump then posted truth social and now I love Trump overall, but Trump started doing a 180  from saying we need to get out of this and saying, "Well, we're out of it, but we'll sell whatever  weapons to Europe you want." And I feel like Ukraine's going to win and maybe not just get  back its territory, but get more territory, meaning Russia, uh, which is extremely uh,  provocative and escalatory statement to Russia. And we know that Putin agreed actually to the  framework of what Trump wanted but Silinsky and NATO have refused. And so we have to ask the  calculus of why the president who's, you know, Mr. Peace Price has done a great job helping in  seven other conflicts, which I totally support. Why is he suddenly changing course? Tucker, you  know a lot better than I do. So did you know that before the current generation, chips and fries  were cooked in natural fats like beef tallow? That's how things used to be done. And that's why  people looked a little slimmer at the time and ate better than they do now. Well, Masa Chips is  bringing that all back. They've created a tortilla chip that's not only delicious, it's made with  just three simple ingredients. A, organic corn. B, sea salt. C, 100% grass-fed beef tallow. That's  all that's in it. These are not your average chips. MS chips are crunchier, more flavorful,  even sturdier. They don't break in your guacamole. And because the quality ingredients, they are way  more filling and nourishing. So, you don't have to eat four bags of them. You can eat just a single  bag as I do. It's a totally different experience. It's light, it's clean, it's genuinely satisfying.  I have a garage full and I can tell you they're great. The lime flavor is particularly good. We  have a hard time putting those down. So, if you want to give it a try, go to masa chips, m-asa  chips.com/tucker. Use the code tucker for 25% off your first order. That's masach chips.com/tucker.  Use the code Tucker for 25% off your first order. To shop in person in October, Moss is going to be  available at your local Sprouts supermarket. So stop by and pick up a bag before we eat them all  and we eat a lot. Why the attraction to Zalinski? Why does our foreign policy class or donor class  have this fixation on Zilinski? He's hero. By the way, I've tried to interview him like 20 times.  He he refused to do an interview with me, but he he's, you know, everywhere in the United States,  basically American at this point. Why the what's the appeal there? I think it's the moneyaundering  appeal and the fact that that's where most of the moneyaundering's still able to go on since Trump  and and Doge and Elon shut down a lot of the graft and US A and the EPA and Department of Energy.  uh that clearly that is a place where they can launder money and uh where they can you know  go over there and be like rock stars in Kiev and be you have all the prostitutes the rest of  it reportedly it's Sodom and Gomorrah over there the women you know are just partying all the men  boys and old men go off to die it's a very uh very sick situation and just the height of decadence  you know we we've heard the quote of Marianette which they never proved she said it where they're  about to storm the Bastil the start of the French revolution and And they said, "The peasants are  all starving. You know, they're begging for grain. They're begging for wheat." And she says, "Let  them eat cake." And then you saw what happened. Well, this is literally uh let them eat cake while  our country's infrastructure falls apart while millions die from fentanyl while crimes rampant  in the streets. Uh we have all this money being sent over to Ukraine. And look, I don't like  sending money to Israel. I'm not anti-Israel in general. I don't I'm not against the existence of  Israel, but that sucks all the oxygen out of the room. And all people talk about is the 50,000 dead  gazins in in October 7th where clearly Netanyahu stood down that should be investigated. But what  about the million plus conservatively dead in and around Ukraine and and what about its potential  and now probability on the current trajectory of escalation to lead into full world war and nuclear  war? That to me is why it's absolutely the front and center uh issue. And you know the TV cameras  are all turned on Gaza, which is fine. Uh but the scale of Ukraine and its potential danger is in  a whole another league. It is, isn't it? That's my sense. It is. Why is no one saying that? Well,  I mean, I noticed you get called an anti-semite, which is absolutely preposterous and ridiculous.  That's why the Israel lobby, both Apac and the ADL, are such jokes now and being Well, that's  just that's a campaign run out of Israel, which is a foreign country, to slander me and others. I  just don't want to go to war with Iran. It's that simple. But see, you're consistent. you you you  you you apologize. You bought into the propaganda decades ago. I remember about 15 years ago you  came to see me in Austin. You were kind of doing your tour of your own, you know, your apology  tour that you came up with, which I admire. I've made mistakes, too, and done that. And you said,  "I'm done. I was lied to about WMDs." You said, "Hey, building 7. We first talked about that.  I've really woken up that that that that I was drinking the Kool-Aid and I'm done." And you've  consistently for what, 15 years now or longer have have basically the same policies I'm for. And when  I'm against Israel pulling us into war with Iran, it's not because I hate Jews. It's because we  understand how dangerous it is and how out of control it is and how Netanyahu's wanted  this for 25 years and helped found Hamas or fund Hamas and and you know, all of this and  they just put al-Qaeda in charge of Syria. So, so you're so again and you're also not being anti-  Ukrainian or or or anti, you know, I feel so sorry for the Ukrainians. They got completely screwed  by the West as usual. So So Exactly. So you're consistent that you don't want offensive wars with  the US involved and that China is literally saying prepare for total war and expanding into the  Caribbean and trying to take the Panama Canal. We don't want war with China either. But if  we're tied up in all these wars, we don't have peace through strength. All hands should be on  deck for China. Everything should be mobilized for China. Every real analyst knows that. And  and so you're here with with serious policy, serious research, serious background, saying we  can't be in Netanyahu's sandbox and then blowing up more countries and shipping relevant countries.  9 million people with no resources. Everyone loves Jerusalem and Bethlehem. That's great. But the  country itself means absolutely nothing. It's like Malawi. Why are we spending all of our time  talking about this irrelevant country? It's like bizarre. And then that's why I brought it up is is  because we do talk about it in my view in the real context that that the the ultra rightwing,  you know, that thinks everything's Israel, all roads lead to Israel. I saw you talk about  this a few weeks ago. It's sick. It's it's it's crazy. It's not a defense of Israel. No,  of course. It's it's it's it's a defense of reality. We have to somehow only spend 10% of  our time on Israel. I mean I mean right now and here I am doing it spending but you have to do it  instead of literally I think in talk radio and and liberal blogosphere and everywhere I think it's  like 90% is on Israel right now. And it's sick. I know. And I think Netanyahu likes it. He loves  being the center of attention of course and loves feeling hated and you know we're I'm so persecuted  and all this stuff. It's like I totally agree with you and it's also unhealthy and then you know it  does get to a place where people become hateful and that you know that's not good for anybody.  Well, if you look at it, the Leavon affair and the USS Liberty and some other things. Uh, Israel  is very capable with different leadership it's had to stage false flags and drag us in. And and if  you really study 911 and at the end of the day, it was an alliance of Israeli neocons, US neocons  that bare minimum used an attack to build a larger attack around it for the project for American  century to take us into the past Americana war in the Middle East. And and that's where we,  you know, 10 trillion later, whatever it is, I think it's 11 trillion or more are are in  this. That's not a theory. I was there. I I mean, I shared office space for the project for New  American Century. I worked at the Weekly Standard. So, yes, that is just a fact. That happened. I  don't think I mean, if we're reaching the point where people's memories are so bad that counts  as a conspiracy theory, then I just give up. Does Wikipedia call that a conspiracy theory? No.  But you know they call it neocons are you about neocons that's anti-semitic. Well yeah about half  the neocons were Jewish. But the fact is they're crazy wararmongers that believe the end justifies  the mean. And you want to get further back. Trosky got kicked out by Stalin and he ran to Mexico  and Stalin had him hunted down and killed by an assassin with an iceax. And then all of his  top people came to the US, became the neocons, and said, "We're going to take over the Republican  party, and we're going to go to war with Russia to get back control of what's ours." Because Trosky  was supposed to replace Lenon when he died. But instead, he got kicked out. And so, it is a fact,  historical fact. Even the Wall Street Journal 20 years ago wrote about it, uh, that when you  look at the Weekly Standard and you look at the neocons, uh, they are they are literal Troskyite  communist from the Russian derivation. that set up a neoconism and then you had Cheney and Rumsfeld  and and others that weren't Jewish but were uh large parts of the neocon system and so that's  why Netanyahu plugged into that so nicely because he came out of the neocons in the 1970s and ' 80s.  No, that's that's all just a fact. That's not I mean there's nothing hidden or creepy about it  about saying it. And if the British had come over here with a group of communists had taken over  the Republican party, I'd be against it. I mean, my last name is Jones. It's just it is what it  is and it's out of control. No, I know. And now people are awake to it and that's a good thing and  we need to dismantle undo any foreign influence. I'm just simply saying that's a big problem.  But nothing compared to communist China. But it becomes the biggest problem when the Israel lobby  doesn't want the pivot to Asia that that's taken us 16 years to do and still hasn't happened. And  instead the same lobbies are involved with Soros and the left allied the neocons wanting a war with  Russia that empowers China. It is strategically a total disaster. No one even debates that at  all the top think as you know. I this is this is 101 folks. This is absolute total disaster  why the dollar is getting weak. It's why BRICS is getting stronger. This is what you do if  you want to destroy America. And I agree with Tucker. At the end of the day it's because the  evil forces above this want to destroy the West. Here's something you may not have known. Back in  2015, the Congress of the United States repealed something called the Country of Origin Labeling  Act. Now, why is this relevant to you? Well, it means, among other things, that when you buy  beef at the supermarket that says made in the USA, it may not actually be. In fact, it could be  likely is from a foreign country. It means that repackaging foreign meat can be enough to  get the made in USA designation. It's a lie. It's an absolute lie. Most people don't even know  what's happening. So, how can you be sure that the meat you're eating is from the United States  and has been raised with the highest quality standards and is the tastiest. It's truly made  here. Well, it's simple. You can go to our friends at Merryweather Farms. Merryweather Farms is an  American small business. It's based in Riverton, Wyoming. We know the people who run it and they're  great people. And they have great meat. They ship the highest quality meat raised free from  growth hormones and antibiotics directly to your doorstep. It's delicious. We eat it a lot,  including at this table. These are Americans. These are Americanmade products. They are  the real deal. Again, we eat that meat at this table from Riverton, Wyoming. They're the  best. Merryweatherfarmms.com. Use the discount code Tucker10 and you get an extra 10% off.  Again, that's MarweatherFarmms. Mi we tarms.com. It's worth it. Christian civilization. Of course,  the first second world wars were that that was it. That's not pro- Hitler. I'm anti- Hitler,  just for the record. Very anti-Hitler. Um, but the effect was to destroy like the most  beautiful civilization ever created by far in history, all history. And this is the  final blow. It seems very very obvious, very obvious to me. And we should be aware of  that as we proceed. When gold crosses 4,000, I don't understand why that's not like front page  new like because to me that maybe I mean you're better at this than I, but that means that the  cumulative effect of everything we're discussing has been to destroy the dollar. When you read what  even all Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, the IMF, the World Bank, the XM bank, it's not even debated.  They've decided in the last really 3 four years that they're going to deal with monetary debt  worldwide both corporate governmental individual with inflation and Trump recognizes that and has  said fine we'll have inflation with expansion and expansion of goods and all the economists  agree that that will have some pain but overall uh will be something that could actually be  successful if you have the leftist UN WF great reset postindustrial drill carbon tax plan, you  will have stagflation which is high inflation but a ongoing recession depression which is the  perfect storm of hell on earth. Uh and that is what the UN and the globalist directly want to  create a worldwide surf system of more manageable slaves in their official policies. Break down the  borders with first world and third world not to rise up the third world economically but to lower  everybody down to a level. Then the globalist said they'll have small compact city states and rural  city states like the Hunger Games where they have medicine technology and everything and then just  basically fly above us and we're going to be put into a agrarian situation with a much reduced uh  world population. That's the official great reset postindustrial gender 21, June 2030 uh policy.  And there's nothing more frustrating than than reading all their policy books and the legislation  and the treaties and and then and then seeing it carried out, which is the purposeful planned uh  depopulation of the earth through slow starvation and and and resources being restricted and and  the conflict that comes with when when resources are constricted. And then I see Trump massively  increasing energy production and then going to Saudi Arabia and having them increase energy  production which hurts US oil production but helps the world in general lower inflation and  get real money in the hands of people. That's the biggest benefit. And then no tax on tips,  no tax on overtime, all the things he's doing. 10 trillion committed in in investment, several  trillion already here. All of that is exactly what you do if you want to help the people and build a  middle class and a sustainable thriving uh country and world. building back our morale and in and  nationalism and the family and God. Trump gets an A+ on all of that, but he needs to get more  on message and not say, "Oh, the left are idiots. They don't know how to manage things." No, the  globalists admit that they want a post-industrial world. That's John Kerry said last year, we  got to cut off half the farming or people will starve. That's what causes starvation, obviously.  And they want to cut the resources off so they can manage and control people. That's why in the  Netherlands and in Ireland and and in Sri Lanka, all over, they're cutting off massive amounts of  the farming, taking some of the best farming land ever and saying, "Sorry, your cows pass gas. It's  bad for the earth." That is deliberate sabotage of the of the world economy to cause a collapse than  the banksters can loan us more money, bring in a new cashless society, social credit score. That  is the endgame plan. And they talk about carbon lockdowns for the earth where you'll be told when  you can leave your house during carbon lockdowns. you'll be told when you can leave your 15-minute  city. This is a very totalitarian hellscape uh dystopia sci-fi vision they have. And Trump  is 95% I would say in opposition to it even with his limited understanding. He and by limited I  mean he's smart about the economy but doesn't understand it's deliberate. And he goes, "Oh,  they're really dumb. These are the worst ideas I ever heard. Is that why they're all unified  decades getting them in place? Is that why the big banks and corporations are exempt?" No. It's  feudalism. We don't have resources. We don't have rights. They all have the rights. That is the  purest form of economic control. It's the oldest form of government. It's been the most common form  of government in world history. And the UN and the globalists say we're bringing back feudalism. Neo  feudalistic capitalism is what they call it. But really, it's just slavery. And that's what we're  opposing. And that's what the relaunch of the West is about. That's what Elon Musk understands.  That's why this is a do or die existential threat to everybody. People should just get on board  and get hardcore or uh be absolute feudal slaves if you're lucky. How do you get on board? You  understand? And you researched the great reset and you reset researched Larry Frink, now the  head of the World Economic Forum. You realize three years ago the UN made the World Economic  Forum co-equal to its governing body uh and its councils. And you understand if you actually  read their writings, the future isn't human. People are bad, families are bad. Uh, we're going  to have these AI gods that take over. I mean, it is just the wildest thing that Lex Luthther  in a in a in a comic book couldn't come up with. This is beyond super villain stuff. This is real  super demon stuff. And you have to identify the attack you're under and that it's deliberate. Then  you have to mobilize and get good legislators and governors and others elected. Uh, populists are  getting elected all over the world. People are really waking up to this. And we have uh now these  attorney generals winning court cases in Texas and other places where Black Rockck tried to come in  and say, "We're not going to have any investment in your state uh if you don't get rid of fossil  fuels." And we and and then Texas sued Kim Passion and said, "This is racketeering. This is  illegal." They won the court cases. It is because Larry Frink says this is about control and we're  going to control you. Uh and and they control us by managing our money. Well, now a bunch of states  are pulling their pension funds from Black Rockck. And now Larry [ __ ] is singing a different tune  at least publicly and they've pulled some of their DEI and some of the uh ESG stuff which is the  corporate governance. When you wonder why whether you're in Australia, Germany or the US or Canada,  it's the same policies, the same programs, the same drag queen story times, the same take a knee  during the national anthem, all of this comes out of them literally trying to demoralize us. Because  if we have a free open society, people around the world are going to want that. And you can't have  a control group where there's some free prosperous western nations. Everybody else slaves under black  rockck and the globalists. That's why you got to take down the west so there's nowhere to run. I  think that's I think that's exactly right. You you can't have different systems, radically  different systems in a globalized world, can you? No. And and so exactly. So there's a fight  between do you want the 1984 civilization or do you want the 1776 civilization? 1776 isn't going  back. It's back to the future. It was the flower of the Renaissance and the greatest expression  of hundreds and hundreds of years of the great awakening and of the of the enlightenment. And so  it's a continuation of that. We have to get back to the future, back to the avant guard, back to  what produces the most freedom, the most wealth. Classical liberalism of Thomas Jefferson. Now  modern liberalism is totalitarian, anti-f family, anti- speech, uh- anti-self-defense, anti-private  property. The modern liberalism is a totalitarian death cult transhumanist poison to sabotage human  civilization. It's a depopulation program. 1776 is the is the ultimate most successful push of humans  to produce the very best atmosphere of liberty and freedom and competition and empowerment.  The problem is in the cycle as you know hard times make strong men. Strong men make good times.  Good times make weak men. Weak men make bad times. The problem is is that are we good enough? It  was Benjamin Franklin, right? If they finally uh you know uh years later after the Declaration  of Independence and the Bill Constitution uh you know finally got the Bill of Rights done and  he was walking out the newspaper reporter said, "Mr. Franklin, you know, do we now finally have  our nation?" And he said, "Yes, you have your republic if you can keep it." And he said, and so  did Jefferson. He said, "You got to have informed, involved, educated people." And Jefferson wrote  about this constantly. He said, not just informed about math or Latin, but you got to have people  that are farmers. You got to have uh, you know, people that that actually know how to skin a  buck and run a trot line. He said, if you get ever get people where they're not physically out  there able to run and control their whole lives, the the so-called education doesn't matter  because they're just educated idiots. So, you've got to have that multiacetedness uh  where, you know, people have to really re and people think of that as work. No, it it's it's  it's empowering. uh to really try to be what Thomas Jefferson talked about. And then when you  go through what Jefferson went through, as some of us have gone through similar things now, not to  that extent, but close. Then you read Jefferson, you realize we're back in that same time of change  and revolution again. It's our revolution. We have the ball. We're selling the best system. We have  the proven track record. We're the good guys. And we've got to stand up and make the choices clear,  plant our flag, and say, "This is the hill to die on, and we will win." We've got a new partner.  It's a company called Cowboy Colostrum. It's a brand that is serious about actual health. And  the product is designed to work with your body, not against your body. It is a pure and simple  product, all natural. Unlike other brands, Cowboy Colostrum is never diluted. It always comes  directly from American grass-fed cows. There's no filler. There's no junk. It's all good. It tastes  good, believe it or not. So before you reach for more pills for every problem that pills can't  solve, we recommend you give this product, Cowboy Colostrum, a try. It's got everything your body  needs to heal and thrive. It's like the original superfood loaded with nutrients, antibodies,  proteins, help build a strong immune system, stronger hair, skin, and nails. I threw my wig  away and right back to my natural hair after using this product. You just take a scoop of it every  morning in your beverage, coffee or a smoothie and you will feel the difference every time. For  a limited time, people listen to our show get 25% off the entire order. So go to cowboyclustrom.com.  Use the code Tucker at checkout. 25% off when you use that code Tucker at cowboyclustrom.com.  Remember you mentioned, you heard it here first. The way to derail that kind of response, that kind  of consciousness is by creating like total chaos in your country. And the second that happens,  the second is dangerous to drive on I95 or I5, then people can't think clearly at all  and they just become purely reactive or have CO lockdowns or CO lockown. Put mask on  little kids. Exactly. Um and I think you've described the Trump record, right? like, you  know, moving in the right direction, flaws, but moving in the right direction. The way to  derail all of that is not the midterm elections, it's some kind of civil strife. Do  you do you think that's coming? Well, Russia was right to to lead off with. I didn't  know what we were going to lead off with, but I think that was the most important thing.  We didn't really talk much for this. And the next place I wanted to go was the Podesta plan. What  is the Podesta plan? Well, when I talk about this, I get chills because in August of 2020, Breitbart  wrote about it. The Daily Caller wrote about it, but the New York Times wrote about it first.  And Podesta does this big Democrat party war game. Which Podesta? John John Podesta. Former  White House chief of staff. Yep. Absolutely. And then then and then later the climate zar  for for Biden or giving up the climate money, stealing it. uh he uh he comes out of this  huge report and they publish the whole thing and I'm I'm reading like this like 70 pages or  something and they say if Trump wins in 2020 this is in August months before which they were able to  steal it so he didn't he said we're going to have western states secede we're going to have blue  cities secede but we'll start with the western states California and Washington and we'll call it  over migrants and sanctuary cities and healthcare at first which they're now doing. I'm getting  chills cuz it's all happening like like a you you go to a play and you're reading, oh, the  next act is this and Romeo and Juliet. I mean, it's all right there. And they say, you know,  if he wins, we will say it's illegitimate. We will have blue states first secede and that  they're going to be sanctuary cities for the illegals. Then when uh there's civil unrest,  which they'll furnish, Trump will send the National Guard and then there'll be a massacre  of the migrants. uh and then we will kick off a civil war. Then all the blue cities across the  country will secede. Then New York, Massachusetts, and others will secede and we'll form what we call  the Western Alliance and we will then the the US military will be with us because they they control  the generals. People that think that don't think otherwise you're that was Trump's big mistake. He  found out most of them are global. It's the top, not your enlisted. They're great people. and that  they would then form a military alliance if Trump didn't stand down and they would march on DC and  then they made a movie produced two years ago they released last year called Civil War that is the  last act of the Podesta plan that's that's in a two plus year Civil War racebased at the end they  go and you know the black female sergeant kills the Trumpian figure in the White House uh and  that's cuz evil white people are not massacring brown people across the country so the US military  reconvenes under a Gavin Newsome's command type And then then then they come in and then they  take over the country and then they re-educate all the evil right-wingers and evil white people.  Uh and then I saw Gavin Newsome on Cobar about 3 weeks ago and he said, "Oh, we're forming  and they hold a map up the Western Alliance and it's for migrants and healthcare and we're  getting ready to go on offense." And Cobar goes, he does that demon face goes and and and the whole  crowd goes because they're all read in on this. We have countless videos at rallies in Austin and  Denver and New York where the left goes soon Trump and Homeman will kill a bunch of us and when they  do that's when the uprising begins. So they're all red in on this. They all know it is the Podesta  plan. They all know it's the Western Alliance. They all know it's the Western offense. And so you  had the Soros NGO funded no Kings events like they had on the 14th of June when the guy that worked  for Tampon Tim went around reportedly, you know, killing senators and state reps there at the  state level. He later told the FBI and wrote a letter saying, "No, I I did this for the Democrats  as a false flag." Uh so so that Tim Walls could, you know, play victim. He supposedly had a  bunch of accompllices, but they didn't help him. They caught his wife and a bunch of people  with passports, guns, and money, you know, fleeing the area. Uh, but within two hours of  the attack, they had his roommate on TV saying, "Oh, I he loved Trump and Alex Jones. Isn't  that interesting?" It's all very scripted. Uh, but but but my point is now you have the No Kings  this weekend. Uh, and and and we now have Schumer um on Monday went on MSNBC and said, "We  need to have a forceful uprising. We need to have a forceful uprising. Uh what's the  exact quote? My producer over there. So So this is this is chilling. And he said  he wants to keep the the shutdown going at least until next Saturday the 18th to get  the maximum uh amount of anger that they can get. You have Jeff saying similar things. So  they're not even hiding any of this anymore. So the idea is to whip their supporters into a  frenzy. Basically do BLM 5 years later. Yes. But on a on a much wider scale. And so when you have  here I'll put the actual quote. When you actually have because I have it posted on my actual log  Jones. When you have these guys openly saying this, I mean this is a big a deal as it gets.  I mean this is just when Chuck Schumer, Senator Chuck Schumer forceful uprising. I want to get it  exactly right. forceful uprising. Chuck Schumer called for a forceful uprising. Forceful uprising  because of the ar the indictment of Leticia James on mortgage fraud. But I mean it sounds like  Leticia James committed mortgage fraud. Well, they're only gone after in Virginia so far. New  York, as you know, is even worse. And what's crazy is we have all the public documents. Total fraud.  Like four residences as primary residents. Uh residences that she says are single family homes  and there's five people, five apartments in it. I This is serious fraud. So everything she accused  Trump of doing baselessly, she's now doing. And she's the chief. Well, that's always the way,  Alex, isn't it? Exactly. The total inversion. So everything they've accused Trump of is what  they're actually doing. And and then she's been caught and now they're whining. CNN the other day  said, "Well, everybody engages in mortgage fraud." Well, I don't. No, I I don't engage in mortgages  in much less fraud. No, but it is always just like when Bill Crystal accused me of backing an  ethnostate, I was like, "No, I'm not the one who backs the ethnostate." Um, so Chuck Schumer saying  a forceful uprising is called, he wants a forceful uprising. He called this weekend for a forceful  uprising, close quote, on MSNBC. He he goes, "We need to have a forceful uprising to this," similar  to his, you know, you've reaped the whirlwind thing and you're going to get it. So they they're  obviously agitating for more violence. Uh you see the governor candidate in Virginia uh after the  AG candidate who's been in the lead, you know, said, "I want to kill these state reps. I want to  kill their children. I I want to kill cops." And then they uh the other gumatorial candidate asked  the lady, "Will you decry him calling for killing members of the legislature and their children by  name?" And she said, "Nope." Abigail Spanberger. Yeah. I think it was a CIA officer at one point.  it it's totally insane. And and she sits there with this bizarre look on her face. I mean, these  people are doing this on purpose. And it's called the Podesta Plan. And so, I'm sure the Pentagon  knows about this. The problem is most those top generals are globalists. People that don't know,  they've been put through all the schools. They don't get promoted unless they're globalists. Most  our generals have been bad since the '90s. Uh they teach them at the Army War College. I've I've read  these reports that literally America needs to end. We need to be part of a world government. Uh that  communism is good. So, let's just narrow it down. If you really believe that widespread civil unrest  preparatory to civil war is coming, if Chuck Schumer, you know, one of the senior senators,  um, is calling for it, then you really need to make sure the military is under control, that it's  not politicized, that it's not, you know, that it reports to the president as it's constitutionally  mandated to do. Like, the military is the key. Correct. Yes. And I loved excess speech and that's  the right direction, but we need more of that. And a lot of the generals were rolling their eyes,  giggling, putting their heads in their hands. And I guarantee you, you just go, "Okay, who's  that guy? Look at his record. He's going to be a commie, a leftist." But wouldn't you I mean, it  would be almost an emergency situation. You would need to make certain that the general officers  in your military were loyal to the Constitution. Exactly. And and and the left and the corporate  media act like if Trump wants prosecutions, he's not supposed to do that. No, he's a chief law  enforcement officer. We elected him for that. We elect one man in the in the general election. You  know, all of us vote have an ability to vote for, you know, for only one position. And so, it's  not Trump's right. It's his duty. It's only the president that makes a special oath not to just  protect, preserve, and defend you, but protect and defend like the rest of the military do, but to  protect and preserve and defend. He's supposed to preserve the republic. So 400 troops to Chicago,  200 to Portland. This is nothing. They're openly waiting to gear up the violence. Then they're  going to false flag, I believe, some of the illegal aliens or traditional black college,  which I predicted this before they evacuated the traditional black colleges a month ago. Uh and  said, I didn't even know that. And said Charlie Kirk supporters are coming to kill you. Then it  turned out it was a false flag. They admitted fake calls. That's the left. because they Carville  and Podesta and all of them John Podesta have said on TV now that they've gone live with the Podesta  plan when when Trump was president-elect and then once you know he got in there's hundreds of videos  of them all on there saying Carl now listen it's 1776 part two I can't really do his voice can't  do a Louisiana voice sorry he said black people got to be ready Trump's coming to kill you with  Tom Hman you got to have your guns and be ready the view we got to be ready to fight and die  they're coming to kill us on CNN, you know, they'll be uh you sitting there debating, yeah,  Trump's coming with the military to kill black people and Hispanics. Then I think, well, where  could there be a group of Hispanics, an illegal alien demonstration or something, then somebody  from a parking garage ms a bunch of them down, blames it on some Trump supporter, or where's  where is a bunch of black folks by themselves, traditional black college. So, I've been saying  that for 8, nine months, seeing their programming, how they're saying Trump's going to kill masses  of Hispanics and blacks. Well, where can they do a false flag? Those two places and a few  others. Then a month ago, they evacuated most of the black colleges for a week saying Charlie  Kirk supporters are coming to kill you. Trying to piggyback on that and create this illusion that  Trump supporters blamed black people for this. No, we we blamed if you believe the official story,  some, you know, trans supporter cult member. So, so absolutely going back to your point, there  needs to be Pentagon mobilization. Trump needs to address the nation on this. talk about the Bodesta  plan. Any of his crew, I can send it to him. Can put a reel together like he did when they said no  South African farmers are being killed. He just showed a five-minute video, devastated them. I can  send them a 10-minute clip clip clip of hundreds of clips of top Democrats saying Trump's coming to  kill the migrants. He's coming to kill the blacks. We got to rise up. We got to have a civil war. And  then I can show the quotes from the Podesta plan laying this out. This is the official Democrat  party battle plan with production movies, $350 million budgets, Civil War, promoting it. Now,  the new movie, Battle After Battle with DiCaprio, where it it's it's set in a fictional fantasy land  in the US where they have this hot sex and it's so awesome and they go around with plastic explosives  and dynamite machine guns, killing ICE officers all over the US and freeing Hispanics from  concentration camps. So Hollywood's not, you know, making its constant Holocaust movies about World  War II. They've moved on to the new Holocaust that isn't happening. Um, the first one did of uh, you  know, just Tom Hman just machine gunning Hispanic women and then raping them in dungeons. I mean,  you it's like Machete Kills where there's Don Johnson shooting pregnant Hispanic women in  the stomach with deer rifles. Didn't happen, folks. But Hollywood is providing this background  right on time for these uprisings. is planning because the globalists are losing. This is  their last big move. And I'll say it again, the Podesta plan, the the Podesta plan. We've got  to get the Podesta plan that we're now living in the launch of in front. So Trump's declared  Antifa, domestic terrorist, international terrorist. He said they're going for Soros, which  I know the DOJ is. That's great. But this this is the Democratic party running it. That's why they  say Antifa doesn't exist because we got documents 10 years ago through friends of democracy and  Alexander Soros where they command them in each city, give them orders where to attack, what to  do. It is all 100 specifically roadmapped out open and shut racketeering, domestic terrorism,  send them to prison with the documents we have. I mean, since it's all happening out in the  open, how do you So, so once that starts, it's pretty hard to pull back from it. You know,  violence has its own logic and and it makes people totally unreasonable and it does so generationally  and it's just like the worst thing ever. How do you stop that? You have all these entitled illegal  aliens. You see the videos every day where ICE has to wait outside the state courouses or jails  when they're releasing some guy with, you know, huge rap sheet. Uh been deported before and his  wife and baby will be in the car. And then the the ICE comes over, like two or three of them,  and says, "Hey, get out of the car. We know who you are." They go, "No, no, no." Then a mob comes  over and starts attacking ICE. We've seen these countless videos. The underdog is ICE. They've  got less than 10,000 agents with 20 plus million illegals just under Biden here. And and to answer  your question, the left is so entitled that these illegal aliens aren't illegal alien MS-13 people  from El Salvador. No, they're Maryland man. And so Trump has to address it and explain to people that  these illegal aliens, the Islamicist, the left, the Black Lives Matter, the Trantifa, the [ __ ]  Antifa, they are all in one big coalition. They all communicate with their rhetoric and their  attack plans and they're all saying that as soon as they have the catalyzing event where a bunch of  their people get massacred. It's in movies. It's in the Podesta plan. I've got countless videos.  You see them all the time where out at the rally they go, "You just wait till Trump kills a bunch  of us." And then once we have that pretext, even MSNBC said our constituents want blood. They want  a triggering event. I mean, they're just like, "Once the triggering event comes, you're all  dead. We're burning everything down and we're coming to your houses and Antifa and these other  groups have targeted lists that have come out of whose houses are going to governors, talk show  host, everybody. Tucker is on the list. I'm on the list. We've caught them outside my house,  folks. Okay, I'm just going to leave it at that. I haven't stayed at my house in months. It's It's  gotten that bad. I mean, I stay there. You stayed at your house? I don't stay at my house anymore.  My my my I stay there as much as my children don't uh because I mean, they're there. It's targeted.  And as soon as they kick this off, there are people that are first on the list that they're  planning to come get. Cuz I'm not trying to, you know, you're smart. When they really launch  this, and it's not going to be them knocking your door down in DC. It it's going to be a, you know,  group of methheads rolling up with Moff cocktails and and and they've got these undercover videos  in Austin and Portland and everywhere, hours of them. and and it shows inside these warehouses  where they give them drugs and money and food and the NOS's and they're just all in there ramped  up and ready with guns and weapons and then just as soon as they give them the green light they  are going to just pile in their vans and come to kill. Think of Helter Skelter times 10,000.  Think of the the the Manson family times 10,000. They've got Manson family groups in every major  city and in most small towns literally that would make the cast of Chainsaw Massacre look like Choir  Boys ready to go, right? Yeah, of course. I mean, these these are the shock troops of whatever  the the nihilists, the atheists, of course. Um, that's always the way it works. I just I don't  see that anything's been done about any of this. Well, I think Trump is smart, but he's  so insulated his whole life, you know, in golf courses and the presidency and all  that. He's gone through a lot of hell, but he he's insulated seeing law and order around him and  has no idea what it's like for, you know, for me personally. I mean, Austin, where I've lived since  high school, used to be a beautiful, safe city, it everybody's houses get invaded. Everybody's  cars get broken into. Our reporter in March, uh, just got executed in the parking lot of his  apartments. Uh, and I've said 98% chance it'll be a Hispanic gangbanger, black gangbanger. Not  cuz I'm being mean to Hispanics or blacks. Well, it turned out I was right on both. Mainstream  media said or legacy media. Jones puts out racist announcement predicts Jamie White would has been  killed by some race-based gang of Hispanics. So, this guy got murdered, but the real problem is  that you're a racist. Yes. And then they and the real problem is he got murdered. Absolutely. And  and a mile from my office. And who was it? Well, it turned out I was right on both counts. So, uh,  two of them were charged with murder. One, they participated. One is Hispanic and literally on  his Facebook had Mexican flags and Larisa and take over America down with America. The other guy cut  a rap song, black guy, about how he killed that Jamie White, that white guy. F him. So, they were  able to find them off their cell phone data and they were driving a stolen car when they killed  him in the parking lot. And but the point was my reporter was killed and both the individuals  charged with murder one. The police said it's also racially motivated because they both talked about  how they love killing that white guy. So So you we're told there's not these crime waves. We're  told this isn't going on. There's a lot of that. There's a lot of like I love to kill white people  going on and it's tolerated and celebrated. Well, remember what happened when with uh Charlie Kirk?  I mean, tens of thousands of leftists just saying, "Kill his family, kill his wife, kill all the  Republicans." And then, and then, you know, take this attorney general candidate that's been in the  lead, Jones in Virginia. He said the same thing they keep saying, the same thing people said about  Charlie Kirk's wife. Kill her and her kids and her parents cuz they're all racist. Cuz they they So,  so he's in the kill the whites, as he said. And well, he said he said, "Kill these legislators."  And he said their names and kill their kids. All white legislators. Yeah. All white. He said,  "Yeah, kill these white people and kill their kids and then to teach their wife a lesson." So he  says, "We're literally going to leave your white women." This guy's running for attorney general.  Yes. And I think he's still getting, you know, 45% of Democrats supporting him. And they won't decry  him. And the reason I go back to that, folks, is we've been so taught, it's totally a lie, that  only whites can be tribal. All humans are tribal. And because whites don't whites don't seem tribal  at all. I was about to say since whites have had it bred out of us to not be tribal. We're like  a dodo bird. True story dodo birds. You know, they pull up at Gopicus Island. There's  this giant bird twice the size of a turkey, huge amounts of meat on it. Never had a natural  predator. It just walks right up to sellers. They just whack it on the head with an within a few  years there were no more dodo birds. Anybody's ever been around a sanctuary that has big  fences around deer that have ever been hunted, they just walk right up to you. Oh yeah. It's  the same thing. So that's how white westerners are. It's literally like deer being dumped out in  northern Canada with wolfpacks. Yeah. I'm not I'm white. I don't feel tribal really at all. I never  have thought that way. I mean, in fact, I've sort of tried not to think that way cuz I think it's  I don't know bad. It it leads to division and war. But yeah, no, they're the only ones who  are that way. Everyone else is totally tribal, openly tribal. They're encouraged to be tribal.  Well, that's because in the West, the Renaissance, it was about Christianity and technical skills and  what you brought at the table and a meritocracy. Yeah. And so we were and so Christians are like,  "Hey, we can bring in other groups if it's a meritocracy, which you can do." Charlie Kirk, you  the fake quotes of black women can't fly planes, they're dumb. Said nothing even close to that. No,  he said we don't have a big enough pool of black women trying to be pilots. If we had a big enough  pool and enough training, they're they're great, but you can't lower standards. That's not black  women are dumb and can't fly planes. But that's what they do is they they they misrepresent this  and then they create this existential envy the globalist trillionaire class so that while we're  all fighting with each other divide and conquer, they can rule over us. It's that simple. Their  big fear is the classic American system of meritocracy. But if you get rid of the meritocracy  and just say, you know, we're going to put this guy in who's an illegal alien in uh you know, Iowa  over a huge school district. Uh and yeah, he he doesn't have a degree of any type. And then when  he got busted with guns running from the police, the left came out and rioted and protested and  said, "We don't care if he doesn't have a degree. We don't care if he's a liar. We don't care if  he's an illegal alien. We want an illegal alien with a criminal record who doesn't have a high  school degree being our superintendent of schools, one of the biggest school districts in the  country. I mean that they're at war with meritocracy. They're at war with but oh there's  not a me there's meritocracy in the NFL and the NBA and in golf because in sports is the final  frontier they want to get rid of because people can see it's about the whole world really is a  meritocracy. And so there are people of every color and group that can excel, but you've got  to actually excel. You get rid of meritocracy, civilization collapses. The modern west has  been about meritocracy. And and that that is the unifier. You can have anything you want.  You can be anybody you want, but you've got to be able to execute and perform it. Once you get  rid of that, then you just revert to tribalism. Absolutely. Then it's just I'm promoting my  cousin. Yes. or let's have all my friends from, you know, Delhi come here and I Exactly. And I've  got a bigger gang than you and so we're going to be in charge and then and then and then the gangs  squat in the ruins of the once great civilization just like when the Visigoths and Ostrogoth sacked  Rome in 410 and then it all just collapsed and grew into wilderness in a few years and it  was everybody left it cuz it was just a big empty tomb. Yeah. It's the Bombay train station  with trees growing out of the windows. Yeah. No, I I've seen it a lot around the world and um  that can't happen here, but it it feels like we're moving toward that very very quickly. So,  how do you stop that? You have to recognize that the Larry Fanks and others think they're above  the law. They think they're invincible. They've got their big It's more than that. I'm sorry. They  hate They hate us actually. There is hatred. It's not just neglect. It's not just I'm in it for the  money. Larry Frink could probably have made more money without ESG, actually. Oh, I agree. Oh,  no. I was going to say so it's not it but the point of ESG is to destroy the civilization and  what's the point there? It's not just so they can like leave in their escape pod. It's because  they hate the civilization. Exactly. In fact, they're suicide bombers. They're economic cultural  suicide bombers. I was about to say Larry Frink. One time I was flying in a private jet somebody  was flying with over Connecticut. They go look there's Larry Frink's giant compound. You can  see the big fences and the thousands of acres and you know security guard stations. The point  is he thinks that he can wage war against us and then he's going to be insulated. He's got to be  exposed. He's got to be spotlighted, of course. And we got to let him know that we're going to  blame you. So you think you can replace Claus Schwab because he's so unpopular? Well, you're  going to be more unpopular than him. So I totally agree. We have to admit that they're waging war on  us and we have to moize. They're doing it for re It's not just to make money. I mean, I think the  Sacklers are smart. They probably could have made money doing a lot of things, but instead it was  selling poison to Appalachia. And at some point, you got to think, well, they knew that. Of course,  they knew what they were doing, and there they had to have taken a certain joy in in killing all  those people. At the end of the day, in 1917, British intelligence working with a lot of Russian  immigrants to New York put a 100,000 men into Russia and sent Stalin's train of gold in. And  they took them years to control the whole country, but they got control of the capital city. And then  they just sent out the commazars to the peasants. Thought they were being liberated from from the  Zars and feudalism. And instead they said it was, you know, 20 times worse and they just raped and  killed and murdered tens of millions of them. And so at the end of the day, whatever the deal is  with the left, they want to kill Christian farmers and they want to kill Christian white farmers.  But you saw you saw the UN and that that is tr you know, I spent a long time not wanting to admit  to myself that that's true. But then you just look globally. What is this? Like what connects  everything? It's a hostility to that group. I don't know where that hostility comes from.  A pretty It's a flawed group. All people are flawed. Every group is flawed. But that's a, you  know, on par pretty peaceable group actually kind of nice people. Like why the hatred? And I think  it's Christianity. I really believe that. And and it's not just kill white uh Christians. That's  the main target. Look at the Rwanda massacre which the UN actually ran if you study it and  the Clintons you were there. And it was a tiny it was a minority of blacks were Christian.  Because they were Christian. They had all the prosperity were successful. You know, they all got  exterminated, wiped out, a couple million of them. and and and and and now all over the world they're  pressuring. Is that true? I didn't know that. That there was a religious component to the to the  Christians got killed. I didn't know that. And the animist did it. Yeah. And the UN oversaw  it. They they put them in the refugee centers. What? Oh yeah. The UN helped murder them all. So  the tootsies were disproportionately Christian. Yes. Yes. The minority group that was killed  was disproportionately Christian. Yeah. By the Hoous. Yeah. And the Hoous were animist. Why  have I never heard that before? That that was that was what I had guessed on at the time it was  going down and and covered it. Yeah. That was 31 years ago. I didn't know that. And and then they  acted like the Clintons were helping though the UN this actually came out in reports even from the  UN. They'd stick them in the refugee emergency center. They'd pull back at night and send in the  animist to kill them and and and then if some got out the UN would machine gun them. So, I knew that  there were a lot of tootsies killed in churches, but I didn't realize that they were killed by  non-Christians. Oh, yeah. And and the larger thing was Wow. Wow. The larger thing was these  big global corporations. Blew my mind, Alex Jones. They wanted I wish it wasn't true. They they  wanted the rarest minerals. So, they just used obviously the animist never got any of that stuff.  They stole course and then the infrastructure all fell apart. Just like, you know, getting  rid of the white rule, the part time, not saying a partidite's good, but now it's 10  times worse. Or Rhdesia, super wealthy, you know, and then they get rid of all the white farmers.  Where is it now? You know, Zimbabwe inflation. Yeah. Poorest country in the world. Wow. That  is absolutely wild. Why does no one ever I first understood this during the or began to understand  during the Iraq war where you know it's had this massive Christian population including in the  Ba'ist government in Saddam's government. there are tons of Christians there and then you know  after 20 years of war our war all the Christians are gone they're dead or they've moved or whatever  they same thing now in Syria it's absolutely right so when I figured that out I started to think you  know Assad I've never met Assad I don't know him but I know he's better than al-Qaeda and I know  that he's protecting the Christians and boy if you say that they go completely bonkers I said that  at Fox and they were like I mean I've never been so attacked I don't know why it would offensive to  people to say, "Hey, I think we should watch out for the Christians." It's only offensive because  their whole goal is to kill the Christians. That's why it's offensive. Here's the bottom line,  and you know this better than I. For viewers, you don't understand this. This isn't rhetoric.  The Western model promotes freedom and justice and property and diversity of ideas and mobility.  Yes, the globalists want a technocracy, scientific world dictatorship. In their own  words, you all know Harrari, all of them. Go read the writings. Ray Kerswell. And so having  this model, as I said earlier, having something that's successful and free, no one's going to want  what they're selling. So they have to get rid of it. And that's why we have to understand that. And  we have to understand that just like South Africa, no, we're not for apartheid. But it was predicted  back when they got rid of it when you had the communists and the Soros left literally coming  in. source was involved as you know setting up communism and halves and have nots and you  know nationalizing you know everything and doing this that it's now literal literal road  warrior hell on earth everything collapsing. There's only like 40,000 farming families left.  They're they're about to make them hand over the land in the middle of nowhere where they where  their great great-grandfathers hand dug wells 400 years ago. Great great great great great great  great great great great. And then the population exploded because the whites came in and literally  built infrastructure. Then Africans from all over Africa and Asia. Indians all flooded there because  the evil white people were there. And then South Africa becomes this huge thing buoying all  of Africa. And then now you blow that up, it collapses. And now the globalists get the rare  earth minerals and stuff. The population gets no infrastructure. They get nothing. It's just a  colony of China at this point. It's a Chinese colony at this point. Exactly. And then the  west and Hillary blows up Gaddafi who as you know invested everything with the west came and  apologized. Yeah. NATO the defensive alliance called NATO defensive alliance went and just  murdered Gaddafi for no reason. And and for those that don't know I mean Gaddafi the more you  research him a statesman. He literally lived in a tent. 98% of the state money coming in the oil  went to not just his people Africa. And he was building real infrastructure and had a whole plan  to link up and they and they came and killed him. And now all of Africa is collapsing because they  blew up the South Point and the North Point. One's Gaddafi, you know, the crazy colonel. The point  was he was for the people and and down here was this. And now the globalists deliberately blow  that up for destabilization. Yeah. And the population will be moved here and to Europe as  it already is being in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, of course. I know. I I see it  so so clearly. Um, and the funny thing is, you know, they've been preemptively preparing us  for this by doing this whole white, you're a white supremacist, and you know, you're a racist. And  when I first heard that, I was con I never met a white supremacist in my life. I still don't  know any actually. And I don't There are so few racists in this country, at least in my time, 50  years. They're labeling you. What they're doing is they're taking your defenses down. Exactly. So you  can't fight back. And I didn't I didn't get that. My first thought was why do you see everything  in racial terms? I didn't grow up thinking of things in racial terms at all. Like at all. And  they do. And they do because they're targeting a group. I mean, of course. And even now. And when  you're targeting a group, the first thing you do is teach the group they can't defend themselves. I  mean, it's so I mean, look at Europe. The cardinal sin are here. Defending yourself if you're white.  Yeah, I know. Yeah, I know. I wonder what that is. Nick Sorder gets beat up by Antifa and then  he gets arrested in Portland. Yeah. So, but but but I was interrupting you. That's a  really important point that they label you and demonize you to their constituents so you can be  attacked and everything taken away from you. first you're dehumanized and then if and then anything  they want to do teach your kids transgenderism open the borders up you're automatically if  you stand up for yourself a white supremacist but then it causes what you talked about 6 months  ago when we were in Florida and spoke right after your dad had passed God bless him and that was  you're really worried about a false flag against Jewish groups or something that'll then be used  or a real attack to really pass draconian speech restrictions and and now because everybody's  been called white supremacist because everybody, you know, who stands up for traditional values  has been called bad. A lot of them go, "Well, you know what? I do like Hitler then." And they  don't have enough history or context. Well, that's that's right. So, they don't understand  like look, well, that can you just pause and that that is such a smart point. I just want to  say Hitler was a total piece of [ __ ] actually and destroyed Europe and why why would you ever be  for Hitler? I don't really get it. But that by the way, we should not have armed Stalin. We were  not. That was totally evil. If you had to say Stalin for total kills of people was worse than  Hitler, of obviously. But bottom line, let's just start here. You don't arm Stalin. Okay? Period.  I mean, I don't care what the calculation is. I'm not sending money or weapons to Joseph Stalin  who's genociding. And that's what Patton said. He wasn't pro Hitler. He just said, "You should never  have armed Stalin." But just because you shouldn't have ever sent a single dollar to Stalin doesn't  mean that Hitler's good. Hitler was a total piece of [ __ ] actually in my opinion and whatever  you know whatever he did he he destroyed Europe. We had a lot of help but he did that. So um I  don't know why you can't there's no like space in between. Why do you have to why do you have to  go right from we shouldn't have armed Stalin which we should not have done and it's shameful that we  did that. Anyone who calls it the good war a war where you're arming Stalin is not a good war. It's  a shameful war that you should repent of. But you don't have to go right to I love Hitler, right?  Well, that's the thing is you have competing totalitarian systems. You have the fascists, you  have the communists. Yeah. How about neither one? Like why do I what the [ __ ] Well, that's the  thing. I mean, if you really read what Hitler himself wrote, it was all about a struggle. And he  said, "If all the Germans die doing this and fail, they deserve to die." And so, I just hate that  right there. I hate sacrificing your own people, sending boys to go die in the defense of Berlin.  You're losing. Why are you sending boys to go die? [ __ ] you. That's Sorry. Sorry. No, no, it's  No, but was you actually learn it though. So, and I don't mean the pop anti- Hitler stuff, but  the real things. And And so, that's my issue is people are all black or white. You They're all  very monochrome. And here's an example. Do you want a black widow or a brown recluse to be put in  your bed at night? Neither. Yes. But we don't have to. So, that's the part that freaks me out. What?  Why would we ever put ourselves in a position where it's arm Stalin be close allies with Joseph  Stalin who murdered tens of millions of Christian called Uncle Joe? Yeah. Or be for Hitler. No.  How about no one know? Like what? What? That's the that's the worst and fakest choice in world  history. Like you don't have to participate in that. Absolutely. So that's the issue is so who's  telling me I have to participate in that 80 years later? Oh, and then it gets worse. You have  the ADL that keeps World War II going in our minds and now says a white America is Hitler.  Yeah. Well, I mean the people who liberated the camp in in our little town, really little  town where we're sitting right now, there's a war memorial and a bunch of guys from this little  town died. Yeah. Fighting Hitler, which you know, I'm against Hitler. Okay. But like to then call  that country responsible for what Hitler did, I mean it's too much. I can't deal with it. Oh,  I mean, I've had like the ADL and stuff calling me a Nazi years ago and I just sit there and not  look at it. They know exactly what they're doing and it's so cheap and now they see what it's  done. It's blown back on them where now you've lied so much and demonized so many good people.  Now a lot of people think, well then Hitler must be great because if you're calling me Hitler and  and I'm not, well then Hitler must be good because they're not educated. And I I mean I can tell  you it's a long story but my dad's dad was in North Africa and flew his uh 22 missions and  then once they took Italy he volunteered for another 22 missions B7 and then uh they attacked  their base they got strafed and stuff and uh he got a purple heart so luckily couldn't captain and  then his group went up the next week and all got killed and then finally he stopped volunteering  so only made you do 22 missions but he then is officer got put in charge of food food trains  and you know food supply and he described to my dad never really told me the stories about all the  starving Italians he saw and the death and how it really freaked him out and then later going into  Germany and and just just dead bodies just from disease starvation dead bodies as far as you could  see blackbirds eating people's eyes out just stuff out of total hell and uh that was the reality he  saw about World War II then my other grandfather um was also the Army Airore and uh but he long  story short he didn't see a lot of action cuz had a technical thing the plane crashed he almost died  so he luckily lived cuz he you know had problems early on you didn't see a lot of action how was  World War I a win for anybody the British did start that one oh of course of course the one  group that doesn't get the credit they deserve for making the world worse are the Brits oh they  well even even I'd like to see more anti-British conspiracy theories on Twitter personally I  I can I listen they're really their system of manipulation is really the model but the reason  I was going on that long story was my just real fast cuz I told Kanye this a few years ago he who  cares about your grandfather but my my mom's dad was on one side of family German you know still  spoke German the other side his mom was like old Texas family up in Dallas they were wealthy so  they lived next to the inventor of refrigeration and he worked for him as an apprentice when he was  like a teenager and later he went on to play UT football and you know went and joined the army air  for World War II but he knew about the Germans. He wasn't in the boond in in the 30s but went to some  boon meetings. You know the German American boon. Yeah. Hitler was on the radio. Time magazine  a good guy. They were German. They went and you know saw some of it. But towards the end of  the war the the uh the inventor of refrigeration who's like a trillionaire today billion dollar  today committed suicide and he was German and they had his family in Germany and it sucked all  the money out of him during the war and still killed his family at the end of it. So that was  the kind of stories I got about Hitler from like my my grandfather was inside baseball about how  the German community in Dallas, the really rich ones that had German family in Germany, Hitler was  literally holding them hostage and sucking all the money out of German Americans and and then still  killing them. You like so so those are firsthand, you know, from family experiences what Hitler  did. And these people that love Hitler have no idea what a monster he was. Yeah. And I feel  like we really missed our our chance to exercise genuine American exceptionalism. You can say,  you know, in 1941 and say, we're just not for totalitarian systems. We're not going to support  well, it would have been in 1939, we're not going to do lend lease. We're not going to support your  totalitarian system, Joseph Stalin. Sorry. We're not for Hitler. We're not for Stalin. We're  America. We're for us. Like I that didn't seem to occur to anybody other than Charles Lindberg.  and the majority of the American population that supported that plan and they've been slandered  ever since they they you know ever since and they kidnapped Lindberg's baby and all of it to  teach him and and and so imagine the Russians and the Germans would have just spent each other out.  They would have exhausted each other. The Soviet Union probably would have fallen. The Nazis would  have fallen. I would imagine we could have gone in there with just an expeditionary force at the  end of it and cleaned it all up as liberators. But instead, we got right in the middle of it. Yeah.  Or how about you tell like the family, you know, the moms in this town, what their son, their son  died fighting alongside Stalin's forces. I mean, really, it's so hateful. What happened to  Kanye? Do you still talk to him? No. Um, he um I don't think he's a bad person, but I  think he's disturbed. Yeah. And I think he got screwed over in business. I think a lot  of what he said was true. But he'd be like, "I'm flying to Austin to come on the show."  And then halfway through he'd call up and say, "I think they're going to kill me. I'm turning  back." And then next time, a couple times he said that, I didn't believe he'd be there. So he  flies in one night, I take him to a nice hotel. He doesn't like it. Leaves middle of the night.  I didn't babysit him. I dropped him off, left, and he went to some downtown hotel. Next day, my  show's starting 11:00 a.m. Central. And I'm like, "Okay, Von, that's fine. Start my show." He pulls  up wearing a, you know, [ __ ] mask and I said, "Look, you can wear it for a while, but you  need to take it off." Do you have a lot of guests with [ __ ] masks on? No, I don't. And  and and and so he just goes on and says he loves Hitler over and over again, which I guess it like  presses on the nerve of edge lording. Yeah. No, it's like I'm being bad. I'm being bad. That only  goes so far. And uh then I think I understood why he was wearing the mask. Why? Uh well after the  show he goes back there and pulls the mask off to eat salad and and the pupils were just pure black.  Oh, what's that from just being high? Someone comes I mean six, seven hits ecstasy I think might  do it. Um I don't know. I didn't I mean I was like he was I mean I've never seen anybody with pure  black pupils really. He was Yeah, he he pulled it off. It was like glowing. He was just and I  was like he sit there eating a salad going and I went oh now I now understand what's going on.  I mean I don't know maybe u I'm maybe a bunch of methamphetamine mixed with acid they say could  do it. I I don't know. I I looked it up. It's it's hardcore drugs can do that. Wow. I'm trying  to be mean to him. I felt like I was actually No, you're you're not being mean to me. I felt like  I was being abusive even letting him on air, you know, when it was because he was obviously out  of his mind. And that was kind of the la that was the last anyone really really heard from him. That  was it kind of that was the end of Kanye. I think he's like I'm going to take the mask off now. and  he just pulls it off and I was just like because it's like a boardroom thing table harsh light and  I'm standing right there and he's sitting there and I'm watching him just like going and I was  like wow. So there was no one around him who cared enough to keep him off the air in that state it  sounds like. Yeah. Well, he comes in wearing the mask. I'm like, "Hey, I don't think I'm going to  do this. I'm fine. I'll take it off in a minute." And then he go it goes in there and I go, "Take  it off." No, I'm not taking it off. And it was just Hitler, Hitler, Hitler. Like hit the button.  Hitler, Hitler, Hitler, Hitler, Hitler. You know, it's like you can you can rig up I guess cocaine  for like a pigeon or a or a rooster or whatever. They'll just hit the button, you know? Oh, yeah.  Meeting it forever. And I I was just like and like that's the problem with getting those guys  on the air cuz I'll have them on for a debate, but it's literally they just go any of now. They  go Hitler, Hitler, Hitler, Hitler. It's like it's like it's like they just think it's like doing  something. You're just sitting there going this is really boring. Yeah. There's it's not that I  totally agree with you and dumb and also you want to be on the side of like decency and kindness and  life and you know babies like you don't want to be on Hitler's side. You want to be on a good side.  I mean Hitler people studied him. I mean he was a war hero World War I got cast a bunch won the Iron  Cross first class Iron Cross second class. That's a congressional medal honor. He was a war hero.  It's, you know, and then he has a hallucination that he's going to rule Germany and have the gut  damarong battle of the gods the next time he gets gassed and has this vision and and then and and  then he decides it's total war and all the rest of this stuff and you know and if the Germans don't  succeed, all all of them deserve to die. I mean, he wrote all this stuff. I mean, this is lunatic  stuff. So, I'm sorry. I don't think black tanks and black uniforms and skull caps and total war is  cool. It's like 14-year-old kids listen to Slayer. It's okay when you're 14, but this is not like  something we really want to do. But it's also a a kind of occult tinged also. Oh, it's beyond. It's  very satanic. Okay, so I'm against that. We should be against that. Plus, all these people that are  attracted to that. I mean, okay, the Germans were like followed orders and were ready for it and  they got their asses killed. Like the the people trying to act like that today couldn't hold a  candle to the farmer Germans to the sixth army. Yeah. Yeah. I mean like you like which were like  the best. So I mean you guys are literally I like it if you go to the British Roman Museum and they  got William the Conqueror's helmet and you put the helmet on. You're not William the Conqueror cuz  you put the helmet on. No. So I'm just saying I see all these wimps attracted to the power and the  evil of it. Like yeah the Germans really wore it and they really did it. They really stepped into  the office of the of it and they got destroyed. So I'm just saying you guys all flirting with  it have no idea. I'm just It's not good. No, it's not good. So, what So Kanye never called  you after that? Oh, I think he called me some. I But I just, you know, Kanye's a great guy, but I  can't have hourlong conversations, right? I mean, we talk sometimes like two minutes. What's  it about? You know, okay, great. I mean, you know, just long, well, what, Alex, what do you  think about them Jews? And I'm just like, yeah, okay. It's like jacking off talking about Jews.  It's the fetish of Hitler and the Jews all day. If Jews are doing something bad, I'll oppose it and  try to block it. But I I oppose what the Chinese are. I I don't like obsess over Chinese people  because JC Ping's evil, right? You know, I don't obsess over Jews just because Netanyahu is evil.  And I don't give it that power. I just oppose the policy. I think that's to you don't give it that  power. That's exactly right. And I'm not trying to be mean. You're asking the questions about Kanye.  No, no, no. I I cuz I think there is a a smart guy underneath a lot of that. And I think um you  know, drugs are really bad though. He's on drugs. Yeah. I mean, I'm on nicotine right now, so I'm  Yeah, but that's not I mean, that's a life that's a life-enhancing drug. Um, I've used it before.  So, but do you know what happened to him? Like, he just kind of disappeared. Um, I just know  he trout trots around that super hot super hot wife of his half negative. Yeah. That's not good.  No, it's the basing of her. Yeah, exactly. Well, and of him. It's his wife. Yeah. So, I I know you  hate talking about this, but I'm just I want to I want you to explain what's happening with what I  think is Let me do this first because I got the great Tucker Carlson here. I'm always a little  Star Trek cuz I love you so much. How much time do we got? Cuz I want to hit the real building 7.  I also want to hit some transhumanism AI stuff. How much time we got? I know you're busy. I'm not  that busy. You got super huge important meetings tonight. We got like an hour. Okay, good. Can  I take a five minute uh break? Got to. and then I'm gonna answer every question you got. Good.  I I want to answer them all. Perfect. Thank you. We've got a new website we hope you will visit.  It's called newcommissionnow.com and it refers to a new 9/11 commission. So, we spent months  putting together our 9/11 documentary series and if there's one thing we learned, it's that  in fact there was fornowledge of the attacks. people knew. The American public deserves to  know. We're shocked actually to learn that, to have that confirmed, but it's true. The  evidence is overwhelming. The CIA, for example, knew the hijackers were here in the United States.  They knew they were planning an act of terror. In his passport is a visa to go to United States of  America. A foreign national was caught celebrating as the World Trade Center fell and later said he  was in New York, quote, to document the event. How do you know there would be an event to document  in the first place? Because he had fornowledge. And maybe most amazingly, somebody, an unknown  investor, shorted American Airlines and United Airlines, the companies whose planes the attackers  used on 911, as well as the banks that were inside the Twin Towers just before the attacks. They  made money on the 9/11 attacks because they knew they were coming. Who did that? You have to  look at the evidence. The US government learned the name of that investor, but never released it.  Maybe there's an instant explanation for all this, but there isn't actually. And by the way, it  doesn't matter whether there is or not. The public deserves to know what the hell that was.  How did people know ahead of time? And why was no one ever punished for it? 9/11 Commission,  the original one, was a fraud. It was fake. Its conclusions were written before the investigation.  That's true, and it's outrageous. This country needs a new 9/11 commission. one that actually  tells the truth that tries to get to the bottom of the story. We can't just move on like nothing  happened. 911 commission to cover. Something did happen. We need to force a new investigation  into 9/11 almost 25 years later. Sorry, justice demands it. And if you want that, go to new  commissionow.com to add your name to our petition. We're not getting paid for this. We're doing  this cuz we really mean it. new commissionow.com. So Trump got the vax, the co vax. That's right. uh  last week he bragged when he got his medical exam that he got the new experimental flu shot and the  uh Fizer booster which his own HHS had basically said don't give to pregnant women and women and  and and and adults and that they've proven erases your immune system is absolutely horrible but  after he had Albert Borla a few weeks ago at the White House praising Fizer uh he's now gone on  and gotten it as a PR stunt so that really pissed off Trump's constituents and we you know we hope  he didn't really take it because we need the big Well, yeah. And I think there's, unless I'm  misreading it, there's seems like a legitimate and very large study out of South Korea that  shows a connection between the COVID vaccine cancer because of the effects on the human immune  system and turns it off. Well, some cancers are opportunistic and a low immune system invites  cancer. I mean, that's why AIDS patients used to get capos saroma. So, I I don't understand that.  Do you think it was real? If I had to speculate, not on a conspiracy theory, pure speculation,  Borla was there a few weeks ago. He did that $75 million deal to lower drug costs, which is a  good thing Trump got. And they said, "Hey, we got some bad PR. Why don't you say you took the shot?"  But I I'd have to purely speculate. You talked to Trump a lot more than anybody else pretty much. So  maybe you can ask him uh why the hell he did that. Do you know anyone who has taken I mean, who would  take that? I mean, it's poison. Obviously poison. I think there's 2% uptake on the boosters now  and it's no longer recommended by HHS which means it has no longer has liability protection. Uh so  again that is Trump who would say at the rallies, oh take your shot, they would boo him so he quit  doing it. And so it's things he does like that and then some Trump supporters think we're in a  cult. They go you don't criticize anything Trump does. No all the time we do. Like when Bondi said,  "Let's pass hate speech laws." That's what the ADL wants. Southern Private Law Center. people got  pissed. She reversed herself that day. Uh so no, it's good for the constituents. When we see  something wrong, we put Trump in there to carry out our operations to restore the public uh not  to take experimental uh G. It's not an attack. I mean, I'm sure you've had times in your life where  you've been off on some lunatic tangent and people you love, members of your family are like, "Hey,  we love you. Don't certainly me a million times. People I love are like, I don't think it's a  good idea whatever you're doing." And you're grateful for that, right? Well, that's absolutely  so. But but if I smoke a cigar, a few, you know, here and there isn't bad for you, but you smoke  a lot of them, you'll you might get lip cancer or something. I'm not up I don't believe that. I'm  not here saying kids, you should smoke cigars. Uh, you know, the difference is Trump is up there  doing it. So, it it's just another one of those things he does like I think I'll give cruise  missiles to Ukraine. It's makes you wonder what's going on sometimes. I'm glad we don't have Camala  Harris. Let's get that straight. But I am a little concerned. What is going on? Well, everybody  knows Trump's really weird in in a good way, in a lovable way. Uh, but he does so much good and  then he does so many just really bizarre zigs and zags uh that sometimes you just have to ask what's  happening. But, you know, that video over a year ago of him and Kennedy, Ralph Kennedy endorsed him  a year and a half ago that somebody shot of him on speaker phone Kenny with Trump and Trump's like,  "Well, maybe it is too big a shot and maybe the kids shouldn't take it. Maybe you're right, Mob  Bobby. That's the Trump we need. Not the Trump, oh look, I took my shot. It's so great. Plus the  flu shot, they admit, look this up. They've never in 50 years of the flu shot predicted the right  mutation for that year's flu and it lowers your immune system to the next year's flu. The flu shot  paralyzed a relative of mine um a close relative of mine briefly. Paralyzed waist down paralyzed.  Period. That a flu shot did that fact. terrorized Kennedy's larynx. Yeah. So, I don't know what.  And is there any evidence the flu shot, you know, reduces overall mortality? You can look this  up. It has they it has never worked. It is an absolute total fraud. They've never picked  the right mutation for it. And so, if it's not the exact mutation, it doesn't work. So over but  over the population there's no evidence that the flu shot which you could get at your grocery  store, the nurs's office or wherever at work that it has reduced the number overall of dead  people in the United States in a given year. No. And to show us fraud statistics are so who knows  remember the first uh year and a half of CO zero flu deaths basically which is around about 30,000.  They took that number said that wasn't there was no flu death but it all became CO death. So given  how obviously discredited science has been in the last 5 years where normal people are like I don't  know what this is but I'm against it. Wouldn't now be the time to mandate a total halt to any franken  science underway where we're trying to create life or clone people or change the human genome gain  of function. Gain of function which is now like universal. Gain of function didn't go away. gain  of function became much more popular after the creation of the co virus. That's right. Instead  of being illegal, they're just in mass doing it even though it's still illegal. And now they've  got self-replicating DNA vaccines. Uh they've got stuff far worse according to all the experts. And  and Kennedy did ban all the mercury and shots. He did point out that that Tylenol lowers blood brain  barrier that when you take a vaccine with it, it's it's even more dangerous, especially in boys  who have weaker blood brain barriers. Uh he he did recommend fluoride be taken out of the water. Pam  Bondi had DOJ block that not trying to demonize Pam Bondi. She just keeps popping up and he's  doing a lot of really really great things. Not making the CO shot recommended uh so that that  they'll stop pushing it. And then you've just got Trump working kind of at loggerheads against  Kennedy uh who who I would say has gotten more done than I thought he could. I think Kennedy is  a shining light. So is Tulsi Gabbard uh with the resources they had. Tom Hman and the Border Patrol  and ICE. They they've really done a great job uh because their system had been dismantled  as you know. Uh but I would say ending a lot of conflicts, A+ on that. Uh but expanding the  Russia operation, terrible um getting jobs back to America, I'd say great job. But Trump needs  to know uh that the American people have rejected big pharma and they're tired of it and they hate  Albert Borla. They hate Anthony Fouchy. We don't need to be seeing uh Albert Borla who's just as  hated as Fouchy at the White House. We need to see Fouchy and Albert Borla indicted for the things  they've done. Why not just strip immunity from the vaccine makers? Wouldn't that We have a system in  place. It's been in place for my whole life where if you're making a consumer product that hurts  people, you can be sued. And so people who make consumer products try to make them safe because  there are consequences to selling poison. That's exactly what should be done. And that's the 86.  But that's like simple. That's super simple. Like why not? It's only been 19 I mean I remember 1986  was 39 years ago. It's not that hard. This is not like in the constitution that vaccine makers have  you know blanket shield immunity. And now they're calling gene therapies vaccines. You know they've  changed the definition. So now anything they want to inject into you they claim is a vaccine with  liability protection. Well that's why Kennedy removing the recommended status by HHS and and and  FDA. When you do that, it technically removes the uh protection of of of of the uh liability  protection. But then that's why suddenly now the Fizer mRNA shots warns you that it can kill you.  Remember at first it was a blank piece of paper for the first time ever. Yeah. The first year of  the of the roll out that they just said the name of the shot. The company wouldn't tell you that  piece of paper that comes with the shot container, you know, the ampule uh blank. But now it says a  bunch of stuff can kill you. Watch out. It's up to you. So instead of them pulling it from the market  when liability protection actually was taken, if you read the fine print, they just put in  the fine print, it can kill you now, which also protects them. I knew that. I know someone who was  killed by it. Uh and his family couldn't sue. Um do you feel a rise in do you feel like people are  talking about God and spiritual matters more than they did 10 years ago? I mean, clearly they are.  Where's that going? I saw you with a guest a few weeks ago talk about this is well known. I've  talked to everybody that's done it. I haven't done it. Almost everyone that takes DMT either  from the toad or the Iaska plant. These creatures show up that look like court gestures or you space  aliens different things and say there are too many humans. You need to wipe out the population then  you'll become gods. It's this the same message and they've had groups of people they've done studies.  You need to wipe out. You need to kill people so you can become God. Yes. You need to depopulate  and you need to transcend. Do you know people who've heard that message? Oh, absolutely. They've  had whole groups and studies that have had group hallucinations of this. Can I I mean I don't know.  I'm not the most spiritually sensitive person. I'm hardly a theologian. But if some demon is  telling you to kill people so you can become God, like we can say that's bad, right? Absolutely.  And the people that then you're talking about techheads who you know micro do and are big in  hallucinations and big into hallucinogenics when they get more advanced and deep into it and  then most of them have talked about this then the things start giving them more ideas and and  explaining the system they're going to build the AI the takeover and this new species and how again  you're going to transcend death and so we we we've all got to have a a larger question there. So they  say the devil's greatest trick was convincing the world he didn't exist. I think that's the second  biggest trick. I think convincing the world that good doesn't exist is the devil's biggest trick.  Yes. Yes. I can you can you fl I think that I'm not exactly sure what you're saying, but I know  that you're telling the truth right now. Can you can you Well, convincing us that there isn't  anybody good and that you don't have power and that it's all over and we are the Borg, you will  be assimilated. The biggest trick is hopelessness when we're promoting truth and justice and honor.  And we can't just dial into demons and fallen angels. We can also dial into God and get that  message. But you first have to recognize that good and evil exist. Yes. And once you recognize that  we are ethereal beings that we are just, you know, manifesting ourselves in the third dimension that  that all these people that are even atheists have these near-death experiences that come back with  the same message. I mean, I personally in my life, you know, have had so many times where I'm  literally told something and it comes true and it just comes from God. And so, I know this. I know  this is real. We are a lot more complex than just what our eyes and ears, you know, taste and touch  pick up. And when you really actually study the globalist, none of them are atheists. They're into  the occult. And they believe they're interfacing. Even at Skull and Bones at Yale, they get in these  coins for days. They try to get these spirits to come into them. They try to channel these spirits.  You've got the heads of skeletons there in the last few days seeing who's able to interface  with this. These are real rituals that are part of activating parts of the mind so that people  can see past the veil. And again, they've now been able with robots and computers and wires in  the brain, as Elon has talked about decades ago, this was already done. Your eyes narrow the light  spectrum because there's so much going on that if you saw the infrared and everything else would be  too too confusing. But but now with hallucinogens and other things, they have been able to prove  that people can actually see past the veil into basically other dimensions. And so that's really  what this is. And we have to admit to ourselves that that that that what we see and taste and you  know touch and everything is a very small piece of actually what's going on. And that's that wider  world. And people have to once they understand that that there is this wider battle going on  then you realize, oh my god, God's real. I better choose God or I better choose the devil. And but  if people are kind of embedded into this and just grow up in it and just with the corporate media  and life, they get trained into the evil side, never knowing they really had a choice. But almost  everybody if they're given a choice early enough will choose God that right way. The problem is  the the system on earth knows that. So the priest class in Christianity or Islam or Judaism, any  of it, most of it's bad priests, bad churches, who know the power is there, know people are  looking for God, know they're seeking. So they're there basically to get the power from you instead  of you basically transcending spiritually. And so that's why Christ talked about the relationship  with God is personal. Yes. And and and the kingdom of God is within us. The newers go, "Oh, you are  God." No. Kingdom of God is within us. We're made in God's image. We have the potential to know  God, to interface with God. That's worship God. And then through that begin to transcend to  a higher consciousness, interfacing with God, not God, but with God and then part of God. So the  the gift is to see good like and that I do think that's the trick cuz e no one needs a tutorial on  evil. It's all around us. It's super obvious. It no longer disguises itself. abortion for the sake  of abortion. Like what is that? Well, it's it's human sacrifice. Just canite and the DNC doing  abortions inside of completely for the sake of abortion. Not to improve the life of the girl or  she's a 14-y old rape victim. It's just like no, abortion is inherently good because it's killing  a person. That is all out in the open now. Nobody is confused about his existence. What you don't  get a lot of is the recognition that good is an is a more than equal. It's a larger and opposing  force. God is bigger than Satan. And you don't get that sense like nobody talks about that. You don't  see it. How how do you find that? So many people purposely get turned off of the system by going  to a church whether it's Catholic, Protestant, any of it. And I'm a very empathic person. And so  growing up I would feel at churches and you get invited here or there really creeped out not by  the parishioners but by the people in the system that are trained because h that is for sure. Gosh  where I feel the strongest demonic energy is is is is in a lot of these big churches and a lot of  these big things because that's where the devil's sitting as forces and it's energetic and and and  so but Christ criticized the Pharisees Sadducees constantly. He said, "You go pray up on the  hill in front everybody. You talk about how perfect you are all day, but really you're of your  father, the devil, in the synagogue of Satan." Uh, or you call a black you Sabbath or whatever. Uh,  and it it happens in Christian churches Judaism. It happens everywhere. And if you look at later  Judaism, it's not just the Old Testament. The Torah others over 30 other books uh that they  say, you know, the rabbitical teachings are just as important. And it runs the gamut from  some sects that you could call very pious and close to God to others that are outright Satanism.  And you see that in the Christian denominations, all the things that call themselves Christian, you  know, that really aren't. Christ said, "Beware of things, you know, you know, you know, you you  know, call themselves of God but are not or the synagogue of Satan." Well, there weren't Christian  churches then. The churches were synagogues, but it goes for synagogues, churches, anything. Uh  that you you got to be really close to God and the Holy Spirit lest you be deceived. And so that's  really where it all is. And it comes down to your spiritual inclination. But I just recommend  with people personal relationship with God, praying to God, saying, "I want to be good. I want  to recognize truth. I want to know what truth is. I want to open myself up to you. I'm an imperfect.  I repent for what I've done. I want you to cleanse me. And then show me the truth. And then show me  how to be a better person." And then show me after that what what the mission is you have for me.  And literally, if you do that through a process, it may take days, may take months, may  take years, then the adventure begins. And then all of a sudden you're being given like  intel and stuff like and like literally just you you have to learn to go with it. It's never wrong.  And it it's it's God and and it's there and it's your personal relationship. And then obviously  people get this relationship. They go I want to teach other people it. And God says get together  in groups. That's great. But Christ didn't try to go get the Sadducees and the Pharisees and  the priest class to join him. He said their minds were closed. He went to the prostitutes  and the tax collectors and the robbers and the thieves because they were already outcast. But  that's where he found people that were already under evil's control but weren't arrogant about  it who were looking for a way out. And and so I mean I think that's really what it comes down to  is a spiritual relationship with God. And there are some real churches and things. But don't you  find that I know I have found that you see sparks of this in the most unlikely people. If you put a  list on paper of the people in your life, I won't ask you to say it out loud, but who you really  trust or you talk to and you groove with them and they like know exactly what you're saying. You  know, they they are on the same wavelength in some deep way. It's not the people you would expect.  Do have you ever noticed that? Absolutely. I mean, most people most people get into media because  they want to be movie stars. Most people become a preacher because they want to, you know,  because they want to be famous and have power. And then you'll find like just the most just  normal unassuming person that has all this great knowledge. Yes. Because they already  have all the power. They don't need power. And so it it's just connected to God's power.  Is that what you mean? Absolutely. And and I mean it's it's it's quite the quite the quest  because so many people are lost and really it's an inside job. They've got to somehow open up  the channel to God and then and then they'll see everything that's happening and then God will give  them a message and a and a mission of what they should do. And I I don't want to say all churches  are bad because there's a lot of good people in the churches regardless. It's just that the  last 120 years, the Rockefeller Foundation, the ecumenical movement and and all of that has really  moved into the churches and we see that with all the rainbow flags and all, you know, the famous  cathedrals in England now foned with all the leftists, you know, graffiti and garbage. I mean,  it it's been captured is my point. But people can't get turned off by that and say, "Well, God's  dead." No. No. Satan has occupied these so-called temples, but but but God isn't in the temple. God  is inside us. Do the temples get torn down? Like, do the last vestigages of the old civilization  get erased and and Christians start a new? Like, what is this? How does this unfold? I think I  mean I think that's up to how God influences everybody. I think we could over time retake  those things. But the Satanist and the leftist, the power hungry, they think if they can take over  the skin of something and occupy it. Yes. That that that they can fool people that are looking  for God. But that's actually triggering the great awakening. So I think some of the buildings get  torn down, some of the buildings get retaken. Uh but at the end of the day, King, you know,  God's temple is is with us. It doesn't matter, does it? So it doesn't matter. Right. So  Westminster Abbey is not where God lives. No. No. That's so important to remember. Do you  get discouraged? Do you ever think it's hopeless? No. Because it's all in God's plan. But I do get  discouraged for individuals uh who kind of fall to evil. You see good people that fight evil for  a while, but they get put under pressure. They get attacked. They turn to the dark side. Boy, have I  seen that. Because it gets them ahead for a little while and then you later see them destroyed. Yeah.  Always. And their family's destroyed, too. Yeah. So, and I get tempted by evil. Um, you know,  sometimes like a devil jumps into me and I mean by that I'm just busy. I'm tired. I'm whatever.  And I catch myself and I'm like, whoa, whoa. I, you know, for a minute I was like, you know,  turning into everything I'm trying to fight. So, I'm not up here on some high horse like, you know,  like I've got all the answers and I'm perfect. Uh, because anybody empathic can, you know, tune  into different frequencies and things that are happening. Uh, but at the end of the day, your  heart's what matters. You know, King David did a lot of bad things and sent his best buddy off and  got killed. who's lusting after his wife, but he really repented and God said, "You're a man of my  own heart." So, at the end of the day, it's where you point your soul. And so many Christians, some  people that love God have guilt. You know, the devil's the accuser. And so, oh, I made a mistake.  I wasn't perfect. I'm not really a Christian. I'm not really good. No. As long as you mean well, are  doing the best you can. You're going to stumble. You're going to have problems and you're going to  have issues. But it doesn't matter because that's why God's there to help you. And you just got to  reach out to God and and and say, "I can't do this alone. I need you." And I think people just need  to say, "I need God. I give it to God." Not, "Oh, I'm going to lay down and just trust in God."  Some of the churches, "Thank God they're coming out with microchips and mark of the beast. That  means Jesus is coming back soon." Well, you know, I was talking to a police officer today we saw out  here and he's like, "Well, just thank God Jesus is coming back soon." Well, if you actually read  Revelation, it doesn't actually read like that. We have to go through this whole project and then  this happens. And so, And it's also like explicit throughout the New Testament. You're not going  to know. Well, you're not God. You don't get to predict when this happens. It comes like a thief  in the night. And so, Exactly. And I'm not putting him down for being like, "Praise God." No. Jesus  coming back soon. My point is is that it says s the antichrist will wage war against the saints  and overcome them. Right. So, there's a big And then we lose in the third quarter. We win in  the fourth quarter because God's going to test us. Yeah. So, everybody's like, "Oh, thank God we  won't be here." That's only been around Skullfield Bible and all like 150 years. Nobody ever taught  that. Not in Catholicism, Protestantism. It's absurd. Nobody ever taught. I mean, the Antichrist  has got guillotines cutting Christians heads off, right? So, how are they all raptured if  they're getting their heads cut off? So, see, and and so, well, the whole thing, I mean,  it's obviously a heresy, but be more than that, it's just it's such a clear usurpation of God's  power. It's like I've figured out exactly how when this is going to happen and how it's going to go.  It's like no, you're Well, what happened to all the the disciples? Almost all of them got killed.  Yeah, I know. Did they get m raptured out? No. I know. The whole thing is It's sad. And by the way,  really good people fall for it. Really good. Some of my favorite and most decent people fall for  it. It's not I'm not attacking anyone at all, but it's clearly not true. And it it leads them  in direct it leads them to defend like murder and stuff. It leads while we're on theology. exactly  why we're on theology. What do you think of Peter Thiel's whole Antichrist lecture? Um, you know,  I'm not I haven't seen it. I have talked to him about it at great length. Um, I didn't I think  it's really interesting. I'm not I didn't really get to the punchline on that. Uh, I don't So,  the question everyone, you know, has is okay, who's the antichrist? I think it's maybe there's  more than one. I don't know. System, right? Um, so I so I would just say I'm not taking a pass  on the question. I I would but I don't this is so far out of my depth. I mean, I'm just sort  of at the I'm for Jesus stage of things, but uh I'm glad that there's a conversation about it.  You know, I welcome all conversations about the transcendent because I think it's what matters.  Well, exactly. Cuz I mean, I love the a comedian Tim Del. He's like, "This guy's got all this  cashless control grid or this and then he wants to know about the Antichrist." Well, he grew  up really Christian. people don't know be Peter till and then and then now he's wanting to have  a debate about it. I don't think the antichrist wants you to have a debate about the antichrist. I  think that's probably right. And just in general, it's worth talking about and reminding ourselves  and others that this is just like a small piece of what's real. We're just seeing a tiny  fraction of reality. Like the spiritual world, that realm is as real as, you know, the table  we're sitting at. And people lose sight of that. I lose sight of that. We, you know, Exactly.  So we should be having not just Peter Thiel, everybody, Donald Trump, you and I, we should  be discussing Revelation, which describes really happening now. Yeah. So we we should be having,  "Oh, God, he's the Peter Till's the Antichrist. He's talking about the Antichrist." What? Cuz some  people like, "Well, what's he doing talking about the Antichrist?" Well, I think we should all be  talking about it. Well, cuz I think I think the temptation is to just ignore the whole topic. I  mean, that's the world that I grew up in where it was just never discussed. Devil doesn't exist.  It was just 100%. People's sex lives were a frequent topic of conversation. Everyone was super  liberal about that. Like no one was embarrassed of anything except any question that transcended  the material was just considered like death was considered totally off limits because it pointed  to these obvious questions like what happens then? And um so I really welcome that. I think all  healthy societies face death. Exactly. People go, "Oh, you're a Peter Teal dick writer." No, you  should be having a discussion about Antichrist. Why aren't you? And and so what I got I haven't  seen the the presentation. Oh so people I'm sorry I miss a lot because I I do think the internet's  demonic. Sorry I know I work on the internet but the whole thing makes me uncomfortable. Uh  so I haven't seen any of this but people are attacking Teal for this. Oh I mean it's it's like  oh yeah but it's like they haven't even found out what he's saying. I've read some of the articles.  Haven't I tried to get tickets but it was already sold out. But I want to see his view on it. Uh  but all I know is is that we should be having a discussion about the Antichrist. I mean,  we're we're having one already here. And and so what is the Antichrist? I think you need to  know the enemy. I think you need to know Well, one obvious hallmark from my uh you know, frequent  but very untoured reading of of those books in the New Testament is that the Antichrist reserves  the powers of God for himself. He pretends to be God. You know, I'm all powerful. I can,  you know, worship me any in and by the way, that's most leaders in the world through all  time. But that those are signs of evil. You are not God. No one can no one can worship you.  And the shitty things you do on earth do not make you powerful. They destroy you actually. And so  that it's all described in in Jesus's 40 days in the wilderness where Satan offers him these  deals and he declines all of them. But that's like the whether you're a Christian or not, that  is the template for life. Oh, if I just do this, I'll win this election. You know, I break some  eggs to make the omelet. No, dude. You're going to be destroyed for that in probably in this life,  certainly in the next. And that's just real. That's just a fact. I agree. And it's nothing but  healthy to have a discussion about that. 100%. So, I guess the one thing I don't like about the  Antichrist conversation is it makes it sound like, you know, Anton Ley is going to show up and  like start murdering people. And I think it's much more present than that. I mean, I think  literally Antichrist means against Christ. Well, who would that include? Most leaders in the world,  they hate Jesus. They did. Well, look what Elon is starting to come around. They hate you. You  want to make people upset. Started talking about Jesus. I just did this at Charlie Kirks memorial.  I did like some six-inute talk about Jesus. Only Jesus. That's it. I was like I said to my wife  in the shower morning that morning. I was like, I'm not getting political at all. I'm not going to  attack anybody. I just want to be as like unifying as I can and consistent with what Charlie really  cared about as I can. And what he really cared about anti-Semitic. It was insane. It it which was  of course absurd. But leaving aside the absurdity, like the emotion was real. It was totally real.  Like, oh my gosh, that's outrageous that you said that. It's like great speech. I watch it. Oh, I  It was just short, but all I did was recount the gospel. But that's that's the most controversial  thing you can do. And everyone's happy to talk about God all the time. God, spiritual,  Jesus, man, that's a no-go zone. Why is that? Absolutely. Because it's real. That's why.  And it just triggers the [ __ ] out of people. I I shouldn't even mean no no but I agree with you  that that that we need to have an open discussion about this because it it's it's here and and  notice the left they're all about total control of language where there's almost nothing discussed  and so that's why they get so upset when these discussions start to happen and I just look at  civilization society we should be having a major front and center discussion about AI and that's  what Elon Musk talks about who's gone from not believing in God saying we need God he's starting  to come to saying, "Listen, we're going to have AI." Obviously, the genie's out of the bottle, but  we don't want to centralize them. We want a whole bunch of them. We want a diversity of them. And  I and I think what is the answer to AI if because it's people say, "Oh, why are you for AI?" I'm  not. It's not going away. What is the answer uh to to AI if if if it's being rolled out? And I  know the globalists want to basically have one AI. Elon's answers have distributed AI, non-entralized  AI, but no matter what it is, it just turns bad. I don't I mean, I have no idea. I know that a lot of  the people developing AI are really, really bad. Really, really bad. Like the worst. And what do I  mean by bad specifically? They think they're God. And that that's the core lie. It's not like how  many people have you killed. If you think you're God, you will kill people. And the more power you  have, the more you will kill. It's just by its nature bad. And there's so it means no restraint,  no perspective, no humility. Man, that's a recipe for genocide always. Right. I know we want to hit  my own personal issues and a few other things and I appreciate the time, Tucker, but big picture,  let's just be completely honest about Trump. It's a blessing to have him in office. We're 9 months  in. The Democrats are destroying themselves. Lowest approval rating ever, lowest fundraising  ever. It's really up to us to lose this. But we are starting to see some indictments of Comey  and Lisa James. A lot more coming. The Democrats are now pledging, you know, resistance and and  and violence and what's the quote uh energetic uprisings or uh forceful uprisings. Sorry,  forceful uprisings. Chuck Schumer, how do you see this unfolding? And what can the general public  do to try to save the country in a nonviolent way? Because I mean, I just think Trump rhetorically  needs to be out front explain to people how dangerous things are and the crossroads instead of  just saying, "Oh, liberals are dumb." They don't know what they're doing. No, the the the leftist  globalists have a plan all over the world. They know what they're deliberately doing. I think  um I mean a lot of things are important. Prayer is the most important. Keeping the people you love  close, keeping your personal relationships strong, keeping your personal life virtuous. I do think  that's really important. I think you become I having led a very nonverirtuous life myself. I'm  not judging anybody. I just know from experience that the less virtuous your personal life, the  weaker you are. It makes you weak. that's the why I quit drinking. It made me weak. Um, etc. So,  you know, those are all super important. But from a governance perspective, the government, the  people who were elected to run the government, need to make sure that the instruments of  government are loyal to the constitution and under control. And that's the concern that I  have is that conser especially older conservatives whatever that is Republicans whatever that is  but you know non-leftists are living withoutdated understandings of like the military and the police  and you know there are a lot of great people in the military. I know a lot of them and there are  a lot of great cops. We were just with one of them a second ago. But there are also a lot of people  with guns in official capacities who are really, really dangerous. And you need to make sure those  people are under control. And by under control, I don't mean loyal to Donald Trump, the man. I  mean loyal to the Constitution. Absolutely. Well, there was a whole bunch of people including  Sheriff's Ch earlier today. And you're like, "Well, of course the leadership of the Pentagon  are the worst globalists." And they're like, "What? Really? Our military is not the best?"  Like Trump admit 8 years ago. He was lied to. The leadership's been groomed, put through these  globalist schools, brainwashed to be globalist awful. They're awful. They're the worst. And  Trump finally knows that. So going into this attempt civil war, we're the enlisted are great  people on average the best. But people really have this vision of military that's delusional. A  lot of them are sociology professors with nuclear weapons. I mean, they're they're scary. And I know  that just from living in DC. I wouldn't know that if I hadn't spent my life in Washington. The  Pentagon's right there. The neighborhood I grew up in in Georgetown was, you know, the chairman  of the Joint Chiefs lived like one house over from me. There was always circulating through cuz  they all circulate through DC. So I would have, you know, go to dinners or duck hunts or whatever.  you're with these people and you're like, "Wait, you're like stupid, totally incapable of  like creative or independent thought and you're a lefty big time." And like self-hating  white guys and like cryptogay and like all like they're sociology professors. A lot of them. I've  met a lot of them. A lot. Why do you think DEI swept through the military? Cuz the flag officers  wanted it. And why did they want it? Because they hate themselves. because they all got, you know,  master's degrees at Fletcher or whatever at some, you know, they all got indoctrinated by higher  education as you explained at the outset. So, like, man, you have to make sure those people  are loyal to the Constitution and you need to go through systematically. By the way, you think  Trump finally knows that he thought the brass were these badass John Wayne guys are literally the  enemy. Well, apparently everyone says that the the chairman of the Joint Chiefs is like a really good  a good solid Raisin Kane American. That's correct. Dan Kaine is a is a great guy. So I mean I think  there are a lot of great people. Caveat still a few left that yeah there may be many left but  there are many bad men forever. Many bad many bad. And the left used the COVID vaccine to weed out  the men guys with testosterone and self-respect who were like I'm not doing that. I'm not going  to poison myself. And so they left. And that was the point of the co vac was to get purge decent to  purge the men. So, it's all like betas and women who can be controlled and are sort of eager to  worship false gods and you have those people with guns. I don't know. It's really scary what just  happened under Biden. And has it been corrected? I you know, I don't I noticed the alpha males  back when Obama wanted to attack Syria and the Russians, the chairman of the joint chief then he  goes, "That's World War II, full war. They had to back off." So, even that was the tail end. Now you  have like weird guys that say they're women with bald heads stealing women's gowns at the airport  totally over the nuclear stockpile and and they're all and like Sean Pins on TV saying why not have  a nuclear war? What's wrong with that? It's like they have the real warriors know you can't do  that. But now you've got a collection like you said of sociology and anthropology professors  that are completely bonkers and like aren't making the connection. Like this is real. Like  the Russians aren't playing around. Oh, and it's self-hating men and bloodthirsty women. And oh, I  love the liberal thing. Once women are in charge, there'll be no more wars. That's not what the  studies show. Well, it's not what reality shows us. Female leadership leads to violence. Why  is that? It's true. I I don't know. And I as a great lover of women and the father of a number  of women and and I I'm not anti-women. I I like I mean I like them more than men. And anyone I  love women, but it's true. But I remember reading studies. Female leadership leads to violence. And  you see it and you who was it was Governor Walls's wife who opened the windows to smell the burning  drink in Yeah. the redland odor of riot. Um yeah it's it's Winnie Mandela. Man, it's really really  the Bullshik's wives were more bloodthirsty than they were. I don't know exactly what that is.  I think weak male leadership incites something in women that's really dark. That's not their  fault. That's men's fault. Men's job is to lead. You can't sherk that duty because it's not created  by man. It's pre-existent. Well, well, they found in studies in in Total War like women commit way  more war crimes than men. You know, it you were turned over to the squads to be tortured to death  over the period of 3 weeks. You know, they slow roast you. So, yeah, all of that it's it's all  true. And I also think it's, you know, having lost two fist fights in my life badly, um I would  I'm hesitant to get into a fist into a fist fight. I mean, there's something about, you know, being  forced to box as a kid as I was or and learning that like I'm not as tough as I thought I was or  whatever. But the experience of physical violence is much more a male thing. And no, you know,  people haven't been in a fist fight shouldn't be commanding an army or a country for that matter or  a country. They should Well, the tougher you know, the more you learn there's always somebody  tougher. 100%. And it hurts to get hit in the face. It hurts a lot. Actually, it hurts so  much. That's why I was never good at boxing. My brother was good, but I was not because I hit  the face and I'd be like, "Oh, I think we should negotiate this." Like, there's got to be a smarter  way to do this. That was my And then I was like, I'm not suited for that. And um but it was only  through the experience that I learned. Anyway, you know all this cuz you're a man. But yes, there's  something about female leadership that gets you very quickly to violence. And you see it in the  support for the Ukraine war, which is like the the murder of an entire country's male population.  And now though, a bunch of European countries are doing female conscription. I wonder if combat is  going to get the women to not be for war. I wonder why you would even bother with a civilization if  you're sending your women to fight wars. I don't I don't just give up at that point. The whole It's  like Ursula Vanderlay. You only have a military to protect your women. That's the point. There's the  only one reason and that's to protect my wife and my daughters. And if it weren't for that, why  would we need a military? And so if I'm sending my wife and my daughters to go fight a war on  my behalf, I mean, that is the most grotesque thing I could imagine. That is so shameful. That  is so disgusting. I don't know how we can Well, it is. You got Ursula Vanderlen, the unelected  unelected EU head, literally talking about there's too many humans. We need depopulation. You pull  it up. And we're going to beat Russia. No problem. And I I'm sorry. Like I have no respect for her  cuz I guarantee she's never been in a fist fight, much less she's not been in the military. I mean,  it's like it's crazy. But there's a cruelty there. And I don't understand it. You the women in my  life are the kindest people. They bring me back to decency under their influence. I am more decent.  But you see in modern female leadership, not all, but a lot of it. Tulsi Gabbard is an incredible  exception to this rule. Is like a truly humane, decent person, but man, you see a lot of counterex  examples where these women just they can't wait to kill. And I cuz the system is selecting twisted  women. It's probably right. And it has something to do with men vacating their role. I agree.  Could you believe that uh Leticia James bitched and complained and said Trump has weaponized  things against me. It's kind of Yeah. But that's the system hiding. The entitlement level in this  country has gotten very high, I will say. Well, that's not just hiding behind a woman, behind  a black woman. That's all they're doing. It's it's totally, you know, transparent. Well, the  most powerful people in our society consider themselves its greatest victims. You always notice  that. like I'm a victim. I need security at my house. It's like, okay, no, you're not a victim.  You're the perpetrator. Um, so let me speaking of victims and perpetrators, you are the victim of  the greatest crime against free speech in the last 10 years. You um were accused of saying things.  You you say your remarks were misconstrued or misrepresented intentionally. From my perspective,  it doesn't matter what you said. You didn't hurt anybody. You didn't cheat anybody. You didn't  issue a fake stable coin. You didn't carjack. You gave an opinion. And for that opinion, the  US government through an FBI agent has basically tried to destroy your life and are on the cusp of  like taking your entire life away. And so here's my question. One, you know, how close are you  to having everything taken from you? And two, what where's the Trump Justice Department in  this? I don't understand. This is such a huge subject. It is a huge subject and and I I want  to answer this because this affects everybody, not just me. And what just happened to Mike  Lindell two days ago ties directly into this. So, I'm going to do my best, but I want viewers to  understand this isn't about me. This is about you and the end of judicial process in this  country and the final phase of the weaponized judiciary cuz the Democrats haven't given up.  First question, how close are they? And by they, I mean this constellation of law firms, NOS's,  and federal law enforcement employees to taking everything from you and shutting you down, taking  you off the air. I know that's been in progress for a while. You've outrun them, but I feel like  you're getting toward the end. And two, or B, where's the Trump Justice Department, and why  is this being allowed? Well, to quote the song, I got one more silver dollar. So, they they sued  me seven years ago. They spent $300 million. They had been court filings doing it. Paul Weiss,  Democrat law firms, all of it. Had the judges find me guilty. Here's a microcosm. We're a current  example. Two days ago, Mike Lindell, smartmatic, the judge finds him guilty, claims he didn't give  the discovery. That's it's the new thing they do. So, I was found guilty in Texas and in Connecticut  by Democrat judges, literal Andy Vasauros judges, of not giving discovery, which wasn't true.  So, then I'm found guilty that they have a show trial. So then they have the show trial,  they get a billion half dollar judgment, they do all this and then then they don't want  to settle. I said, "Here, have all the money I'll make in the next 10 years," which was more than I  ever made in 10 years. $75 million. They said, "We don't want that. We want you off the air in press  conferences, on national TV, in court filings. We're not supposed to just take some money off the  air. You're supposed to get your judgment. Plus, it's all an appeal." So last Tuesday, they  had the state receiver in my offices looking at everything, saying, "We'll probably shut you  down in about a month." They're waiting for the state court that we have it on appeal to lift the  state. And this is because all because you gave an opinion. I just want to be clear. You didn't do  anything. You had an opinion which you say they mischaracterized. But again, I would say even if  they didn't mischaracterize it, you're entitled by birth as an American to have any freaking opinion  you want. Well, to be clear, the internet years after Sandy Hook had viral videos and professors  saying they didn't think it happened. They put debit as 22 minutes in the show. Charles, of  me questioning and having debates with people. You're allowed to question anything you want.  You're allowed to have any opinion you want. This United States of America. Well, it's like  the Charlie Kirk thing. I believe Charlie Kirk's dead. I I think the official story is probably  true. There's questions, but people are saying he didn't die. There's people saying this and  that. I don't think it's true. But the point is is they have a right to do that as Americans. You  have a right to any opinion you want. Period. So, so they have the shows. They do it. They want me  off the air. Then I go into bankruptcy because I don't have any money three years ago. They use the  bankruptcy. They assign the Justice Department, which they can do. They have a special office to  my bankruptcy. They use Infowars's money in the account to do four investigations to find fraud.  They find no fraud. They sue my parents. They do it all. They use your money to sue your parents.  Yes. Then the judge Lopez in in in Houston, you know, federal judge, he says, "I want this  to be sold at auction a year and a half ago. cash auction upfront. Here's the rules. They do  an auction, say it's a cash auction, cancel it, and then sell it to the Onion basically for no  money, funded by Michael Bloomberg. The judge last November says it's a fraud. Has hearings, shuts  it down. They also sent armed security and without court orders, tried to shut us down in May of last  year. So, all this goes on, all this happens. We learned the Justice Department from documents was  under Biden was funding the lawsuits, running all of it. We get those documents, the the new Justice  Department learns about it, Ed Martin, and says, "Our job is weaponization. We know we have the  documents. The Justice Department previously did this, that the FBI admitted in court that they  ran this, created the lawsuits, William Aldenberg, the Chief Council of Connecticut at the time,  and we're going to send a letter and ask them to preserve their documents. We want to talk to  them." That was about a month ago. And I showed you the letter and other letters that aren't  out there. So Ed Martin is a great guy. He's been in this in this room. Ed Martin is in charge  of undoing the weapon weaponization of government, which is to say the agencies being used as for  for political ends to destroy people who get in the way of the Democratic party and his job is to  undo some of the and I'm one of the more famous cases. The White House right when they got in 8  months ago gave me classified documents that Obama targeted me for national security 2013 with Comey.  We had other documents come out. They didn't find anything in a 10-year investigation. So, they  moved on to do the Sandy Hook thing as a big production with the FBI. The Justice Department  legally funded it. We have all those documents. And so, just like Mike Lindell two days ago  in the Smartmatic suit, the judge finds him guilty and is now going to seize his company and  shut him down without a jury trial. So, it's the same thing again. This is their model. And what  did Mike Lindell do wrong? He questioned the 2020 election and he's been vindicated. So they  get to take his company away for that including the including firing all his employees because  they don't want money. So So then and this is happening right now. It's happening right to Yeah.  Right now. And so the bigger question is so here's what happened. Um so so Martin says no this is  weaponization. You have all the documents. We have more documents. We want to investigate this. So I  go a month and a half ago meet in DC do all this. They get the letter and and other communicators.  It's this Koskov Koskoff Democrat Senator Blumenthal law firm, basically a Bloom Bloomberg  law firm in Connecticut. They flip out and say, "Oh, the Jones is harassing a hero FBI agent.  Never said his name, never criticized him. He won $130 million defamation suit against me  in the Sandy Hook defamation that he created, though no one ever said his name. He had been on  the stand." No, no one in your office. You never said I didn't know who he was till he sued me.  So he goes and creates the suit, organizes the families with the NOS's, does all this and then I  and then I talk to the DOJ. They send a letter say preserve preserve your records. I show you the ABC  news headline. And then Todd Blanch, the deputy AG calls up in the news, choose out Ed Martin says  in this investigation and pull this. And so wait, wait, why? I mean, will Todd Blanch let them shut  down My Pillow? Will Todd Blanch let them do all this? because they go, "Oh, Alex Jones was mean to  dead kids families." There was never any evidence of that. Well, but even again, just to restate,  the Constitution of the United States, the country we live in, you're allowed to have any opinion you  want. Okay? You were making a political point and the job of the government is to defend that right.  That's the point of the Department of Justice. Defend that right. So, I I'm totally confused  here. So, you're saying that one of the top guys at DOJ, Todd Blanch, whom I've talked to before.  I don't know much about Todd Blanch, but you're saying that he stopped Ed Martin. He he bragged  about it all over the news of 3 weeks ago. Why would he do that? Here's what they do. They say  people peed on kids' graves. People harassed their houses. And in court, when did it happen? I don't  know. Somebody told me who. I don't know. Did you pee on someone's grave? No one. I never been to  Connecticut until they brought me there for trial. No, none of that happened. But the point is, I'm  this guy. People don't know that Adam Lanza killed the kids. His mom bought a Bushmaster. I know.  Uh and and and but just to get it doesn't even it doesn't even matter. Like it's such a sad  horrible story. And well, they just put me in the place of But you've got nothing to do with it.  You shared an opinion about a tragedy. People can disagree with your opinion. They can dislike your  opinion. They can't destroy you for your opinion because it's America and the Department of Justice  exists to protect that right. So, I don't really get this. So, Todd Blanch, I'm taking your word on  this. I haven't heard this before. You're saying, is is he a career guy? Todd Blanch? Well, he was  a Democrat until Trump won the election. Is he an appointee? Um, yeah, he's he's the he's the  deputy AG. And so, you're confident that he shut down any attempts? Oh, he he he bragged. Just  type in Todd Blanch, Alex Jones, Ed Martin. He went on the news and said, "This is terrible. I'm  killing this investigation." Why was it terrible? He He just It's a hero FBI agent. Cuz you're  bad. You offended some FBI agent. Therefore, you should be destroyed. I never even knew  who he was. So, he sued me. I never You're allowed to not like FBI agents. You're allowed  to have any opinion you want. This is like the craziest thing. Well, William Aldenberg said  on the stand, he went and created the lawsuits, which which violates a whole bunch of laws. That's  what Ed Martin put in his letter was that that that you can as a sitting agent go and create a  case for yourself. It's an imolment issue. So, so, so, so here's where we are. They say the new model  is sue you for defamation, have a Democrat judge find you guilty by default, then do this, then  they don't accept a settlement, then they shut you down. So, so the answer is how long will we  be there? They want the name Infowars. The Onion and this former MSNBC censorship ZAR, he had the  same job as as Brian Stilter at CNN. He has said recently an interview with Wire magazine. If  I was God, I want Infowars. And so they think now they're going to seize the asses of the state.  They're going to hand it to them. He says they're going to use our logos. He says he's going to pose  as Charlie Kirk as well. Put out fake quotes of Charlie. Look this up. And their new thing is to  have my website and use it to attack Charlie Kirk. Can I Okay, so this is just totally grotesque and  this is not the free market at work. This is NOS's plus law firms plus the US government destroying a  private citizen for opposing the political agenda of the people in charge. So this is like exactly  what you can't have in your country. And they brag they're doing it because of that. Of course.  Well, there's no other there's no other and they say we want you off the air. Could simple  question to you. Could the current Department of Justice shut this down? Yes. The DOJ's Office  of Bankruptcy already had one US trustee fired, the next, caught in a fake auction. My lawyers  have filed lawsuits. It's cut and dry illegal bankruptcy fraud. So, and those that information  went out as well. So, they know that. And Todd Blanch is protecting the FBI and DOJ under orders  from Obama, then Biden to get me off the air. And we have all the documents where they funded  illegally. We have all the proof. We sued them. We deposed them. I spent millions deposing them  all, getting all their emails. Top law firms. And then we and then and the Justice Department gets  the information. And Ed Martin goes after them and says, "Preserve your records. I want to talk  to you." And then Todd Blanch comes in and says, "I'll fire you, Ed Martin. Shut the son of a  [ __ ] down right now. Ed Martin needs to be the deputy attorney general." And he didn't say  that. Okay, I have other DOJ sources that tell me what's goes on. But this is the reality. And could  they do that? I mean, because like in the end, I don't think you should use government to make  your friends rich or give them special favors. But if you can't deliver justice to people who are  on your side, you know, you're not doing it right. And it's really dispiriting and a little weird to  be Well, here's what's going to happen. They just defaulted Lindell two days ago and they're going  to shut down his factory and his thousands of employees. Are you serious? Yeah. He doesn't get  a trial. The judge in Minnesota found him guilty and they said it's the Alex Jones model. So now  the new thing, I'll bring you in this because it happened when they default to me four years ago  before the show trial. They said next is Tucker Carlson. So what they do is they pick a judge,  they pick a fake story, they run headlines, you said something you didn't do, like Trump, I  love the KKK. They're very fine people. He said they're not fine people. And then and then they s  and then a judge finds you guilty. Then the judge controls limited information, has a jury trial for  the press, but only on the issues they allow of your already guilty. They instruct the jury that  imagine I'm in Connecticut, Texas, two trials, and it was both the same produced by HBO's, their  cameras. The judge goes, "Mr. Jones is already guilty of everything they say he did. He cannot  put on defense. You will decide how much money he stole from these people, and you will give it to  them." And they instruct them he is guilty. And you're sitting there, the opposite of the American  system, watching it. And now they just hit Mike Lindell. And so will will Trump sit there because  Todd Blanch kisses his ass, this little Democrat snake, and crucify Mike Lindell, and crucify his  thousands of employees in Minnesota. Probably. I'm not mad at Trump. I know you're busy, Trump. It's  okay. But if you think, oh, this law firm, Paul Weiss, that's been running the bankruptcy attacks  on us, agreed to pay 40 million in restitution, agreed to illegal lawfare against Trump and his  family and his supporters, and they promised when um Boris Epste got the deal for him 6 months  ago to never target any of his supporters again, they wrote off part of their $40 million community  service bill and suing me. And so they're still attacking all his supporters, everybody else.  You know, you really have to clean up the justice system or else you can't have a country. I mean,  this is just like absolutely crazy. That I would think that is why people voted for Trump. It's why  I campaigned for him. You you have to have justice in your country. Tucker, I agree. More than an  economy, more than stopping war. My listeners want indictments. And finally, Comey, Leticia James,  uh, indictments of the guilty, not indictments of people you don't like, not indictments of  people who pissed you off or who cut and dry. They did everything. who committed crimes and who  have escaped justice because of their political connections. That can't continue. Well, they  started it, Tucker. Oh, I know. And and and and and so all I'm saying is is that I'm a tough guy.  I can handle all this. We'll continue on. People can follow me on next real shows. We've got the  AGN network set up with sponsors. The point is is that they said this is a model for everybody  else. Then two days ago, Mike Lindell, oh, sorry, Mike. You don't get a jury trial. you're guilty.  Now, we're going to instruct a jury how you're guilty. So, this is their model. Defaults are only  like if you're sued and then you run and leave the country. They still got to have a trial. But, they  are literally declaring me guilty and then you've got Todd Blanch who from all of my sources,  I mean, he's a hardcore Democrat, Southern District of New York operative. He was Trump's  criminal lawyer. Lost those cases for Trump. And this is that weird Trump blind spot. So, hey  Trump, I get it. If you think cutting me loose and Mike Lindell, that's fine. I'm a big boy. I've  defended you like nothing else. That's fine. If you think Todd Blanch, you know, he got meeting  with Gizlane Maxwell and all this other weirdness. If you think that snake is the answer for you,  then you you bet everything on that on that. But as for me, I just know the truth. And the  Democrats literally are caught red-handed their persecution in Infowars and Mike Lindell. And  so it's up to you to make the right move here. I mean, Mike Lindell blew his life up on Trump's  behalf. I mean, that's why we're here is because Mike Lindell loved Trump. And whatever you  think of Mike Lindell, he's a very nice man, I think. But even if you hate Mike Lindell, just  objectively, Mike Lindell was pretty successful pillow salesman and got his life together.  got off drugs, you know, became a Christian and then he decided he really loved Trump and he  thought Trump was being wronged and they stole the election from Trump. He really believed that and  now they're destroying him. And I just feel like if there's ever someone you need to defend, it's  Mike Lindell. Are you kidding? Yeah, cuz they've got the fake story about me like, oh, the guy  that peed on kids graves didn't do it. You know, Trump loves and they can arrest you for public  urination. That is not relevant. This is the justice. It doesn't matter. You didn't do it. You  You're not accused of doing it. Someone else did it. And we can't allow that. We can't We can't  allow If someone does something crazy and invokes your name, you don't get arrested for the No, I  agree. Trump stood up for J Sixers and others. I agree. So why Okay. So you're going to let them  shut down My pillow. You're going to let them shut down Info Wars. It's not me. I understand  Trump's got bigger fish, but my listeners are enraged by this. They are like, "Why are you still  supporting Trump?" because it's not Camala Harris. We're getting any more done. But if Trump doesn't  understand, if he can't support his supporters, I don't know what he can do. And I'll go back to  to Todd Blanch. Todd Blanch's been a die in the wool top Democrat. Um he lost all the cases for  Trump criminally. And from what I've heard, Bondi is not bad. She's just lazy. Bonino's emotional  and the big baby. Uh you know, uh Patel is compromised. And it's just so sad. He should have  Ken Paxton in there. They brought in the Missouri AG as the new deputy FBI to get, you know, as soon  as Bonino leaves. And Bonino should stop worrying about his PR and his how he looks and worry  more about the future of the country here. Uh, and put it all on the line actually instead of  being a hotthead. Bonino thinks he's a good guy, but Patel uh, and you know, you know, you know,  Bonnie, these are just TV heads. These are just people that are here to be celebrities in my view.  And I'm just saying and Todd Blanch is a Democrat party operative who I think I think he's Bill  Bar 2.0. You know, they got another Veraritoss investigation um where they have Bill Bar, former  CIA deputy AG twice literally with Fanny Willis setting up the indictments in Virginia. I mean in  Georgia. I mean like so is is Todd Blanch Bill Bar 2.0? That's the question Trump should be asking.  It's bigger than me. It's bigger than me. When the Justice Department reached out and said,  "Hey, this is cutting dry with you." I said, "Don't you have a bigger fish?" They said,  "No, this they were sloppy with you. You know, we you know, we've got them." And they do it.  We have all of it. Total proof of record. Can I disagree with you on one point? I don't think  it's bigger than you. I I don't think anything is bigger than the individual. I think that is the  Christian message. What matters is the individual, the human soul, the person, each one made in God's  image. And whenever you hear people say, "Well, it's bigger than just one person." That's [ __ ]  Actually, nothing is bigger than just one person. No, Tucker, I agree with you. I'm saying injustice  done to you is a total outrage to the entire world. And by the way, you're not the only victim.  If that's what you're saying, I'm hardly the only victim of That's what I meant though. That's for  sure. But I think it's so important to make sure to the extent you can with the power that you have  in this life to make sure that justice is done for the individual. Like I really think that's that  is western civilization. By the way, the eastern view which is now very common in our country deals  only with groups and populations and the herd or the tribe. That's why they believe in collective  punishment. But the Christian view is no, it's the individual and each person matters. The hair on  your head is numbered by God. So I just feel like we can't we can't allow a single injustice to pass  by if we can fix it. No, I totally to be clear, I totally agree with you. My point was I know Trump  has bigger fish to fight. I get it. Well, that's true. But it doesn't because everything they're  doing is about, oh, this this media paid a thing that said they're wrong. They're laughing at him.  They still have their power structure in place. Oh, ABC paid a fine. They paid a fine. Paul Weiss  paid a fine. And they're still attacking your most ardent supporters to to to to shut you down.  And and so that's all I'm trying to say is is that is that will Trump let Mike Lindell get shut  down? Will he allow this? All because the deputy AG that really runs everything is really a big  leftist and thinks and thinks he's smarter than all of us. And it's just so disgusting because  we have them cut and dry. They're like, "Well, sir, he peed on graves. No one peed on graves. No  one did any of this stuff." They say Trump never said the KKK are fine people. That was all a lie.  And and and so if you give it to their propaganda, they they win. Support your supporters. Stand up  for them. You know, I saw Baron put out a whole list of vaccine bad reactions to the co shot  after his dad took the shot. That's going to be the real rebellion here is people around Trump  cuz he's 79 years old. He's not a bad guy, great guy. Telling the truth. We all of us can't be in a  cult. When Trump is wrong, we got to call it out. But but yeah, I mean I'm here and you know I've  seen this injustice and I I was literally going to say when I came here or a week ago I couldn't  come a week ago because they were had a receiver there at the office that day. I was supposed to  come literally looking at everything about to shut down and I just had to say to people that if they  do this to me they'll do it to you and then Mike Lindell defaulted. No jury trial found guilty by  a judge. All of you are in danger folks. This is so real. And if Trump doesn't defend Lindell or  me, whatever. I mean, I just hope Trump when he's out in three years remembers that Todd Blanch is  Bill Bar 2.0. And if you think that little sneaky lawyer is your friend, you're a fool. So, I think  Todd Blanch should be removed, not because of me, but because everybody I talked to, he is literally  there working against the president. He's the one telling the US attorneys, "Don't do these  prosecutions." And then Trump gets pissed and says, "Do it." They do it. So Trump, you did  it with Sessions. You did it with Bill Barr. Why are you doing it with Blanch right now? It's  just Please, I don't understand this blind spot of Trump. I've never heard any of this before,  but that's why I'm a fan of yours cuz I always learn a lot. Godspeed, Alex Jones. Truly. Thank  you, Tucker. Love you, brother. Great to see you, man. Thank you. [Music] So, it turns out that  YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But  on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all  the change taking place in our economy and our politics, with the wars we're on the cusp of  fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that  is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could whine about it. That's a  waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it. a way that you  could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on  YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe, hit the little bell icon to be notified  when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual  news and information. So, we hope that you'll do