Joe Roman find it. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night, all day. So your subject matter is so fascinating to me. So first, please explain what this idea of assembly theory. Yeah. Assembly theory is born out of an interest in solving the origin of life and finding aliens. So that's sort of the motivation, I think, is really important to be clear about that to start because it introduces some kind of radical preconceptions of the way we think about fundamental physics, at least I think so. But the key idea, the theory, is that the universe cannot generate complexity outside of living processes. And so we have a way of formalizing what seems intuitively obvious that the universe doesn't generate complex objects for free. And we do this with this idea of assembly theory, of thinking about the assembly space, which is like the space of all constructible objects. And you can talk about the complexity in that space as a minimal number of steps for making an object. And if you see objects that require a lot of steps to make them and their in high abundance, life is the only thing that can make them. Wow. So this includes plant life, this includes the tech technology. Everything on your table requires billions of years of evolution, evolution of intelligence, and technology to generate. When you say life to generate, what about crystals? And what about, have you ever seen that enormous cave in Mexico where they have these insane crystal structures? Is that the one that's like hot inside and like? Yes. Yes, I have seen that as gorgeous. And amazing. That's amazing. Yeah, totally. But it kind of looks like somebody made it, but it's just natural process. Yes. So I'm actually really interested in understanding to what degree we can consider minerals on our planet alive or artifacts of life. But we haven't formalized the theory entirely for minerals yet. So I think that one of the key results we have so far is actually quantifying and molecules, a complexity boundary above which of molecule is so complex that we can say. It's definitively of life. And we've experimentally verified measuring this property of assembly of molecules to say these are derived from life. These are, you know, and that there's a clear boundary. For minerals, we haven't done that yet because we're still formalizing the theory and the kind of measurements we need to take. But I expect there to be a boundary that planets can make some kinds of crystal complexity, but not all of it that we see on this planet. So what's the conventional definition of life? Yeah. So there's a lot of debate about what definitions of life should hold. But the one that is usually cited by astrobiologists is life is a self-sustaining chemical system and capable of Darwinian evolution. And I've memorized it because I find it so annoying. So I'm like, I got to do it. And I got to know what I'm annoyed with. What annoys you by? Everything. It was very funny writing the book because I wanted to get into the new ideas. And my editor was like, you got to explain how people think about life now. And I was like, OK, well, this definition is the most annoying one. I'll just pick it apart. And it's actually like all the words in it are annoying in some sense. So the first one is that life is chemical. I've never really thought about chemistry being the defining feature of life. I think you have to separate out that life emerges, at least as we understand it, from a chemical soup on a planet. So it emerges in chemistry, but it doesn't mean it's a chemical phenomena. And those sort of analogy from the physicist conception of nature I could draw there is we don't think that gravity is a phenomenon of rock. Gravity represents some universal physics in our universe. And so when we're thinking about planets and things, we don't think that they obey the laws of gravity because they're made of rocks. We understand that there's some property called mass. That's much more abstract and applies to everything. I think life's kind of the same in emerges in chemistry, but there are some informational properties. These things about how life generates complex structures and how it does that so uniquely that is universal physics that happens to emerging chemistry. So chemistry has to go out. It's not just a chemical phenomena. And I think you need to recognize that if you're going to talk about technology and artificial intelligence and like are they alive or not? Because they're very different than what's happening inside a cell. Right, non-biological. But still seemingly alive. Yes, maybe. Maybe. Perhaps. Yeah, open it debate. Open it debate. I've said that about technology. That technology does seem to be a life form that requires us to give birth to it. Yes. Didn't that marshal McLean? I like that way of thinking about it. Yeah. Yeah. Marshall McLean had a great quote. And I believe this is the 1960s. He said that we are the sex organs of the machine world. Incredible. Yeah, I like that a lot, actually. I don't disagree with that. Especially if it does become some sort of digital life. That's essentially what we are. We're just by proxy moms. We are. So the way that I think about it is to think about life, not in terms of individuals, but lineages. So there's a lineage of how information has been structuring the material world, what we talk about in assembly theory, in terms of all of the configurations of objects created on our planet over four billion years. And that's a process of that's continuous with objects making other objects. And there's no reason that that should stop with biological forms of life. And it just moves into technology. So I like this idea that we're the reproductive organs, though, because I always think about like societies and global integrated systems as being living things and we're just like component parts of them. Well, they certainly look like it when you look at traffic from overhead and you compare it to blood moving to arteries. It's really kind of extraordinary. Yeah. Because if you see the ebb and flow of the white lights and the red taillights back and forth, and then you see blood cells moving through a person's body, it's kind of similar. Yeah. In a very weird way. And if you think that these cars are all carrying people that are assembling this society, both from the inside in terms of like paperwork and research and all the different things that people are doing. Then the outside in terms of constructing new buildings and putting glass structures and all these different things, like we really are, yes. Like some sort of weird, like a form of like the city itself is like a living thing that we're making. Yeah. And I think it's really important for us to recognize that. Actually, it's interesting that you use cars as your analogy because Carl Sagan actually had the same analogy. He would have liked that a lot. Thinking about aliens coming to life would have thought cars are the dominant life forms. But which I think is great. Great. Right. Yeah. Exactly. You're describing it. It looks like the lifeblood of our planet. And I always think about cities at night as kind of the key signature of life on this planet if you look at it remotely. Sure. You can see all this structure on the planet. Right. It is hard for us because we're so, you know, like so much wanting to think about ourselves as individuals and like the apex of all of the evolutionary processes not to think about ourselves as part of systems that are much larger than us. And I think it's critically important that we kind of change our reference frame on that because we're also seeing right now with like social networks and the influence of like having all these societal level dialogues like brought to every individual and like we don't know how to process that information. Yes. But we are part of these collective systems that are much larger than us and they are constructing a lot of the world around us without individuals having, you know, as much agency in that process as we think we do, yet that process is also what gives us our agency. So it's kind of paradoxical. Right. Right. I've often said that if an alien race that was completely outside of our understanding of life and our understanding of biology, if they observed us and they'd say, well, what is this dominant species doing? Well, it makes better things. That's all it does. Yes. We do a lot of things, but ultimately those things, even war, which is essentially about acquiring money and resources, we use those resources and that money to make better things. And in engaging in war, you're constantly advancing technology to have an advantage over the end or so you're baking better things. Yes. Like everything is making better things, which when you scale it up, ultimately we'll leave to another life form. It will lead to some new things. I'm so. Well, if we don't kill ourselves, or if we don't get super volcano, asteroid, a lot of different things. Yeah, I'm not a pessimist. I think we'll be around for a while. You think so? Yeah, but I have a pathology that I'm like really optimistic as a person. So I have a hard time. That's good. That's a pathology. Why do you think that's a pathology? I think because I think being overly optimistic can leave blind spots, but part of the reason that I am views so much optimism in my work is like, I think we need more optimistic narratives about the future because so many people are really bleak. I agree. I don't think that helps anybody. And I think ultimately most of the things that you're really terrified about do not come to pass. Yes, I think us being terrified of them is like an immune response. So usually I'm not afraid of the things that people are really scared of and talking about because it means society's dealing with it. Right. Which I, you know, maybe that's just sort of a scapegoat. I don't have to worry about those things because someone else is. But I think actually there's something rather deep there that like the things that we're trying to work through at this moment in history are being worked through. My fear about those kind of thoughts is when I worry about things and I say, well, I don't have to worry because society's working through it. I also say, yeah, but someone's probably not. And they're enhancing the actual threat so they could profit off of it. Which is that's another, I mean, that's the military. Industrial complex, that's a lot of different things. I think that there's a lot of that. Unfortunately, that's attached to green energy. I think, you know, the idea of having green energy is wonderful. Everybody should agree to that. But the idea that you're going to give massive corporations this completely philanthropic view of the world on the sudden, that's not. That's not real. I know. They're trying to make money. They're going to want to be. I'm going to try to make money and get power. And I think once you realize that, it's a lot easier to see motives. Yeah, it's tricky. But that also leads to the acquisition of resources which leads to making better things. I mean, I am, I'm all Google is reading articles all day today on the iPhone 16. Why? Why do I care about the iPhone 16? Why iPhone 15 is perfect. It works great. What's wrong with me? I don't know. But I think that's also built into materialism. I think materialism sort of facilitates the creation of newer and better things consistently and constantly. Because everybody's like, what do you got? An iPhone 14? What do you pour, Sarah? You know, like people get crazy. I'm slamming it. But you know what I'm saying? You know how people get weird? I know. I wish you're current. You have a 2018 car. Yeah. Don't you want a new one? Yeah. Look, they got the new one. The new one has this and that is a better gas mount. Faster is zero to 60. And it never ends. And it never ends until we create sentient life, I think. Yeah. So part of your argument is the sort of our materialistic culture is about building newer and better things. And eventually this is like sort of just more fundamental to the process. I think this pathology of materialism, this thing that has possessed so many people, where they live their entire lives to acquire things to impress other people, which is a huge number of people that are involved specifically in finance, like all the infatamine people. All the people that like do Coke and fuck it. Look at my boat. Ha, that's what they're doing. They're just constantly getting better and better things. It does have a point to you because you're brilliant woman. But it's not necessarily more boring than their normal life. Right? Yeah. There's some sort of reward to showing up with a half a million dollar watch on with a, you know, diamonds and this is some crazy thing where people go, ooh, he's got that thing. Yeah. Oh, look at those shoes. He's got, oh, look at that purse. Oh, look at his car. Look at the house they live in. Oh, yeah. It's weird. It's weird. I know. I know. I'm so excited to do a spy good fashion aesthetic. I mean, who is it? Yeah. Well, a lot of men aren't. But a lot of women are. I love it. I think it's great. Yeah. Sure. It's beautiful. It's an expression of art. Yeah. And that's what it is. Exactly. It makes things look cooler. And, you know, like the way my wife looks at dresses and stuff, it's like she's looking at the way I look at other forms of art. Things like that. That's right. It's just a different aesthetic, a different mindset. But it's art. It is art. And we are attracted to that too. Yeah. And we're attracted to creation. I love when people make things. Yeah. And I think you're right to point that this is like maybe hinting at something deeper. So, you know, with this assembly theory stuff, my original motivation was really to get, you know, what fundamentally explains life in the universe. And, you know, to me, the thing that life does that no other physical system does is creativity. And life is a mechanism for the universe generating things that couldn't generate otherwise. And so, you know, one way I think about that is like, there's like this huge possibility space of things that could exist. And there's just not enough resource or time for all of them to exist. So, by a planet constructing things like us over time, it actually sort of maximizes the number weird things. That can be made. And I really like this. I like this idea that we're actually really literally the universe's mechanism of expressing creativity and making things possible that would not be possible without things like us. Do you know who Terrence Howard is, the actor? I am familiar with him. Fascinating person. Yes. A brilliant guy who has some crazy ideas. But one of the craziest ideas he has is that whenever a planet gets far enough away from the sun, it will generate life. And then that life will give birth to people. People will eventually live. And he calls it like peopleing. Like a planet is peopleing. Interesting. And that as these as these civilizations become more advanced, they're going to have to deal with the fact that the planet is further and further away from the sun. Yeah. Like over the course of hundreds of millions of years. Right. But the climate will change. Things will become cooler. They're going to have to figure out a way to develop some sort of an artificial atmosphere or some way of sustaining. Yeah. Along with, of course, biological things that will change with the animal as it adapts. Yeah. I don't really think that humans are like ourselves as currently constructed or universal phenomena. I think we're pretty special to this planet. But I think there are certain attributes of humans. Like, you know, the theory of computation and its universality that like we invented in the last century, that might be universal to any intelligent species that emerges on any planet. So I think it's really hard to say like what here is universal to other places versus yeah. But certainly a big leap. Right. Yeah. No evidence. Yeah. There's no evidence of people anywhere else. Yeah. Or any other life form. Yeah. No real evidence. There's a lot of shenanigans. There's a lot of weirdness. But there's no real evidence. Yeah. There's no evidence for life on any other planet. And so the mechanism of how life even not on this planet is not known. I spent my entire career working on this fucking hard problem. But like, I think it's like the appropriate descriptor of it is really hard. So I think it's easy to speculate on like what we think life on other worlds will be like. And we tend to do it from a very anthropocentric lens. What we'll say it will be like us. And you know, even professional astrobiologists will do the same kind of thought experiments. And they'll say, oh, well, the geochemistry on a planet should give rise to things like DNA and proteins. And so we should look for those in the universe. And I think that's really underestimating how large the space of possibilities actually is. So when you're thinking about the emergence of life is the only way to do it. I mean, it can't be the only way it has to emerge with certain temperatures the way ours has in water. It seems like there could be a wide variety of possibilities that things could adapt to whatever, particularly unique environment that this planet provides, given a sustainable temperature and given enough resources that it can survive that we could have look like we have jellyfish. Yes, we have lots of weird stuff on this planet. They've been around as long as us. Yeah, right. Like occupy. Octopier really weird. Crazy crazy crazy crazy crazy crazy. Like what? When my friend, my friend Remy Warren, he used to host a show called Apex Predator. And when essentially the show was about was like examining Apex predators in their particular adaptation, they have for their environment and seeing like what a human can imitate. Like what are these things that they do? And he said octopus by far was the most bizarre thing to dive into. Yeah. She said they're aliens. They are. I mean, not literally, but like, yeah, but yeah, no, no, I totally agree. I mean, they independently evolved a nervous system. So and like, you know, like they're crazy. Yeah. I think they're the most alien thing on this planet from us, as far as like trying to look at comparable intelligence and really understanding a different evolutionary trajectory. Also, like what, how they can take their body and completely morphing. Look at core. Instantaneous. I know the color changes are shocking. Incredible. And the texture, it's everything. They just, how does it even know what it's doing? How does it know what it looks like on the outside? It doesn't have a mirror. What? How did it adapt that? I don't know. They're making a lot of progress. So it was like the first Cephalone neuro conference this year, which I said one of my students too. I didn't go to it. But I know, right? Like, I know the neuroscience of Cephalopods. But yeah, I don't think we know a lot about how they work or how they think. And their lifespan is incredibly short. It's only like a year or two. It's just crazy. Yeah. I have a friend who is building this office building. And I talked him out of putting a jellyfish tank in it. He's like, because he wanted to have this big cylindrical jellyfish tank in the center. Like when you want to go do it, trust me. That is a, that's going to be such a headache. They die all the time. They don't live. I'm sure. Oh, it's like a kind of seat. Oh, gorgeous. Yeah. But there's one of those tanks in the Mandalay Bay shark exhibit. Have you ever been in that? No, I haven't. Incredible. Yeah. Mandalay Bay has this enormous aquarium. So I always wanted to go. I want to take my kids. It's so cool. I've been taking my kids. Is there a little? It's it's one of the dopest places. Because you go in there and there's sharks swimming around and all these incredible fish and people are diving in there with them. And it's enormous. So we, we went on a tour of it. And one of the things that they showed us was their jellyfish habitat. That's it right there. So that thing is a damn nightmare. And they have all these pipes and filtration systems. And yet the fish, the dead jellyfish out. That's a good question. I'm not sure. I'm not sure if they get sucked into the vents. I wonder. They have like a thing that they just like filter them every day to make sure there's no dead ones hanging out. I don't know. But the interior of it, look how beautiful. Yeah, they're amazing. They're so incredible. I mean, just imagine if we found that on another planet, how excited we would be. We would be trying to talk to it. We would be blown away. We would be sending it sound and various codes to try to see if we can communicate with it. We try to understand its nervous system. Where's its brain? It doesn't have a brain. Like where is it? Where's the brain? Like where's the blood? Where's the blood? Does it have blood? Like what is that? We would be freaking out. We would be. But it's in the ocean. Well, like, oh, don't get stung. Yeah. But I mean, there's a certain level of excitement seeing it here. I think, oh, yeah. Yeah. I think how diverse life on Earth is is rather shocking. I guess probably we're decent. We're like, you know, we used to it as you're saying. So we don't find it as shocking as we should. Do you think that this is that human life? I mean, I'm sure you've thought about this. Do you think that this is a very unusual circumstance that it creates this? Or do you think there's versions of this is just rare? I, you know, I don't know. We'll be my honest scientific professional answer. I think. Yeah, no, of course, how could you? But I think it's really important to be like honest about the fact that we don't know and just like put it out there. Because it's very tempting to speculate. But I think, you know, the more I think about how large the universe really is. And I don't even mean physically large. Like, you know, like you can look at the Hubble Deep Field and you can see, you know, 10,000 galaxies at the size of your like pen tip on the night sky. And you're like, oh my god, the universe is a huge place. But if you, you know, like if you go into a chemistry lab and you ask a come in for a magician, how many molecules there are, they can't even estimate how many molecules there are. Like chemical space is so big. It's, it's really crazy. Like there's one molecule I usually use an example called taxol, which is an anti-cancer drug. And if you wanted to make every permutation of that molecular structure and every like sort of three dimensional shape you could with those atoms, it would fill 1.5 universes in volume. 1.5 universes, one molecular formula. This is how big chemistry is. And then if you want to get to technological artifacts or biological forms, like the space that we live in is so exponentially large, it's unimaginable. And to think that other life out there would traverse the same path through the space of things that could exist that we have is to me like a major sort of, a major leap I'm not ready to take because I just, I think the universe is far larger in the kind of living things that could exist than we can even imagine. Wow. The, the molecule thing is hardly absorbed. Yeah, it's totally crazy. Like I mean, if you, if you want to think about like, you know, you've got this like crazy stuff on your desk and you took the atoms and those things and you thought about all the ways that you could arrange them, it would fill universes of interesting artifacts. Right. You know, the universe is. And like why is this one sitting on your desk? Like why does this, this is a static human's chair. I mean, it's really cool. But, you know, like it's crazy to think about how much stuff could exist, but doesn't exist because it wasn't selected and evolution didn't build it over time. Wow. That's such a fascinating way to think about it. The, the overwhelming possibilities, the overwhelming number of different variations. Yes. And so on your question about like humans and like our specialness, I think what is special about us is we're actually capable of imagining some of that space and not just imagining it, but constructing it with our technology. That was your point about yeah, society's and things. So there is something special about quote unquote human level intelligence or whatever is going on in the human brain. I don't know if it, whatever that thing is, I think is pretty universal and pretty deep about the structure of reality. I don't know if it would be in something that's like a human on another planet, but I think our ability to abstract, imagine and create is probably universal. Yeah, there's another thing about us that I think is bizarre. And it speaks to this concept. There's a theory about the creation of human beings, right? That human beings, the wackiest one of all is that human beings are the product of accelerated evolution. Yeah. Something has manipulated our genome. Something has manipulated the lower primates. That's why the human brain size doubled over a period of 2 million years. Yeah. And that this thing. Well, but when I think about it, one of the things that one of the things in tricks me is I'm a lover of nature. And I'm completely fascinated by how animals interact with each other. I mean, I can watch nature documentaries all day long. Yeah. Invasive species are weird, right? Because when something happens and someone brings a turtle to an island where it doesn't belong or when someone brings a goat to a place that doesn't belong or Australia, which is a fantastic example, there's like so many animals that are non native invasive species, these asiatic buff loaves, there's millions of them. They have to fly overhead and shoot them down with helicopters because there's so many of them. Humans are kind of like that. Aren't we kind of like that? I mean, if there's an animal that doesn't live in sync with its environment in nature and overwhelms the boundaries and seems to exist in some different sort of space than everything else, everything else, there's sort of a balance between predator and prey resources and birth rates. There's all this sort of symbiotic interaction with nature, with a natural world, but we're wild. Like we're just dumping shit into the ocean and killing all the fish and polluting the sky, driving in our cars and flying in our planes and still talking about climate change and you know, injecting people with chemicals and trying to make more babies and let's good for the planet again, optimist, but sure, sort of, but there's so many of us. Where we are on every dam rock that you could find it's habitable. We are essentially like rats. We go everywhere we can go, which is like an invasive species thing. Yeah, I think you could talk about it that way. And I think people do. I don't really think that's a useful narrative. I love us. Don't get me wrong. Yeah. I'm not an anti person, but I'm just objectively analyzing our behavior and our impact or environment. And it's very similar to like wild pigs getting introduced into an area where they don't have that to predators. Yeah. I think part of the challenge is actually thinking about like the levels of organization that biology has. So what I mean is like, you know, individuals are not actually the problem. What you're describing it would be like human societies are the problem. And humans have because we have societies and, you know, organization that enable us to do these things like we're able to, you know, take over all these environments and things. But I like the way I think about life is much more at the planetary scale. So for me, you know, going all the way back to the origin of life, you know, life doesn't happen just in one environment. It happens in all environments. And it's really like a planetary scale transition. Like something happened on our planet with enough geochemical environments mixing to mediate this global transition. And when you look at the evolution of life, you get these kind of hierarchies where like cells evolved and then multi-cellular organisms like cephalopods and plants and fungi and us. And then we get things that build societies like ant colonies or human societies. And it just seems to me it's like it's a natural progression of the evolutionary process to build more complex systems at larger collective scales that are doing having more impact on the planet and restructuring more of it. And you know, if life wants to get off this planet, it has to go through something like us. So I don't think, you know, I think we can look at it from the, you know, couple hundred year timescale and say these things are terribly negative and predator prey this that and the other thing. But if you look at it over the billions years timescale, there's a really different picture that emerges about what we are and what we're doing. Isn't it a fascinating thought though that you immediately and we all do go to if life gets off this planet? Yes. So that seems to be something that we have baked into us. We have this idea of exploring an universe. So wouldn't something else have that too? And if something else had that and it was a hundred million years more advanced than us and it found us still throwing shit at each other and beat each other to death with sticks. Wouldn't it come in and go, man, man, what would you do? Yes. You would. Yeah. What would you fuck with it? Like what would you do? A hundred percent. Yeah. I would do exactly what they did. I think I think that's what curious things do. A fair amount of them. Yes. One hundred percent. Yeah. We do. We do. We do with animals all the time. Yeah. We make different kinds. How you learn. Yeah. We also, we don't seem to have a problem with sort of manipulating things that we consider lower than us. Yeah. On the evolutionary scale. Yeah. I think that's a problem, but I don't know that that's one that can be solved. So this issue of, you know, trying to treat every living entity, you know, in sort of a quality, like, I don't actually think it's possible to treat. What you can't because they won't do that to you. No, but you can't even, like, you have to eat something, right? So like, if you value plants more than animals and you want, you want to eat plants, then you're, you're valuing, you know, like you're, you're making value statements, but like, you know, plants are, you know, like they're still alive when you eat them. So it's like kind of weird. There's, there's evidences or sentient. Yeah. Plant, plant, six change resources. Yeah. They communicate through mycelium. There's, there's a lot of more. There's all kinds of very complicated information processing going on in plants. Yeah. Yeah. It's, we are very sort of egocentric to think that our version of consciousness is the only version of consciousness. And I always say that when I, when I talk about dolphins and, and orcas, like, to me, it's one of the biggest crimes of modern civilization that we keep those things in fish tanks. Yeah. I totally agree with that. I totally agree. I think they're just like us. I just think they can't manipulate their environment. Yes. So we essentially have these slave pools where people celebrate, where children have stayed out of the slaves. Yeah. I think they're an insanely intelligent species that just doesn't manipulate its environment. And we're so egocentric in our concept of like, what means, what does intelligent mean? Can you control your environment? Can me, do you have a house? Did you make a house? Do you have a car? Like, how do you get around? Do you communicate with each other through cell phones? Well, then you must be stupid. You know, like, we come to this idea. And you have to have the iPhone 16. Yeah. You can get a 14 because then you're really stupid. Yeah. Well, yeah. If you're going to make things, you got to make better things all the time. And you got to keep up with the Joneses. Yeah. But there's this weirdness that we have attached intelligence to ability to manipulate the environment. And when you've ignored language, the fact that they have a cerebral cortex, 40% larger than ours, the fact that they have different dial. ability to manipulate the environment. And when you've ignored language, the fact that they have a cerebral cortex, 40% larger than ours, the fact that they have different dialects that they speak in different areas, different accents, different ways they, we don't even know what they're saying. We're trying to use AI to recognize this program. I love this stuff about digital biocoustics and like decoding languages. Yeah, it might be our only way. Yeah, it's an amazing field. I think it's gonna take a while before we really, you know, realize the potential of it, but it's super exciting what people are trying to do. Well, they've been doing interspecies communication research forever and nowhere. We've got nowhere. Like the leery stuff, or I'm not leery. The guy who made the sensory deprivation tank, God damn it. I don't know who that is. I think. Oh, it's locked in my head. I always know this guy's name. And what is it? Oh, John Lilly, thank you. Why does that happen? Like that's a problem with the mind. Yeah, because you can remember everything. You forget things. So you have more information. I have too much shit in there. Yeah. I need a clean house. It's hard. It's really hard. But Lilly, he invented sensory deprivation tank. And one of the things that he would do with the sensory deprivation tank, he was trying to create an environment where your body in the physical senses of the body don't influence the mind at all. So there's more resources for them. Yeah. And he was setting up these tanks, and that just dolphin tanks and taking LSD and trying to communicate with dolphins. I have heard about these things. He did a lot of really wild things with dolphins. But none of it really. There was a whole generation that had a lot of wild things with dolphins. But yeah, I think there's a lot of progress in animal communication. But I think we're very far from understanding whether animals are communicating at all like us and in what ways. It might be very limited in thinking that this is the only way. Well, so your point about anthropocentricizing, we just, you know, like we have our bubble, we think about the world this way and like the human way is the only way and the right way. And we put our notions of intelligence on other species. And if they don't match, we think they're not intelligent. And that's just not right. Also, we're thinking about this animal like an orca or a dolphin with a 40% larger cerebral cortex. And why are we discounting the possibility of some sort of telepathic communication? Like it sounds and frequencies are attached to feelings and that there's something going on that's not like, I love you, like in words, but some sort of expression that's different than our concept of language. Yeah, I would say it's certainly possible that they're communicating things that are emotional or much more intelligent than we give them credit for just like with their patterns of speech because they're pretty complex. Yeah, yeah. So and then if you think about alien life, you always think about alien life like us. You think about an alien life that, well, we kind of physically needed to do that in order to conquer the surrounding predators. If we wanted to evolve and we wanted to stay alive and gather resources, we had to figure out a way to keep the animals from eating us. Yeah, that, and then just like survive in our environment. Yeah, right. Animals are one danger, but there's plenty of other ones. Like you don't want to eat the wrong berries. You want to like make sure that you have warm clothes and winter. Right. I mean, it's hell out there. Yeah, it's a lot. Survival is hard. Whereas dolphins are in warm water. Before we came along, there was a abundance of fish. Right. Seems like you don't have to do too much more. You guys got it nailed. Yeah. Yeah, they probably live in a paradise. We came along. Yeah. And now they live in these noisy oceans. Are they in a pool? Yep. Yeah, both things, right? Yeah. That's for sure. I think this is one of the things that really motivated me to really, I mean, obviously I love theoretical physics and thinking deeply about the nature of reality, but like why pick the problem of life? And I think life is so complicated. Like all the examples you're giving, we don't really understand what it's like to be another species or even to be another human, quite honestly. And I think without like, if we had a deep understanding of the nature of life, these kind of questions would be much easier. I mean, when you want to talk about a psychedelic experience, imagine if VR could put you. I mean, if there was some sort of an integrated VR that gets to like a real like matrix sort of state where it allows you to have the thought processes of a being for a short amount of time, like if they could record off to put thought process. And put it in your brain. Yes. And give you the feeling of what it means. For a little while. Yeah. But you imagine the feeling of what it is to be an octopus. Not just like, wow, I can see the ocean in my language, but instead think like an octopus for a brief period of time. Yeah. I think that would be amazing. Amazing. I've thought about it. What must it be like to be a plant? I mean, like, most places have like a plant in every room. And it's like the plant experiencing the room right now. Like what is it doing? It's like just weird if you actually try to think about it. Right. What does it feel like to be a plant? It grows better if you play classical music. Yeah. I mean, they're way of expressing their personality, so to speak, or their morphology is like, their shape is like their expression of their behavior. Like, animals can move around in an environment, but a plant just grows. Right. So it's shape is its behavior, which is kind of crazy. It is kind of crazy. Just the whole interaction that they have with each other, the fact that we've only figured that out over the last few days. Yeah. And if you ever seen like time-lapsed photos of plants and they interact with each other. I know. Yeah, that's been amazing. Yeah. And wrap around each other and hug each other. Yeah. It's crazy. But we have a hard time even with plants now. I anthropocentriizing with the kind of experiments we want to do to learn how they're intelligent. Because they're using a lot of animal-based experimental programs to try to test plant intelligence, and they probably don't fit plant intelligence. Because they're intelligence is so different. So it's really hard to say what kinds of properties they actually have. And so if we think about the wide potential for variability in terms of planets out there in the known universe, you would imagine that there'd probably a lot of intelligent animals that would find some sort of goldie locks thing like dolphins had, where they don't really need to manipulate their environment. They're kind of dominant oversharks. They're not really worried about getting eaten by other things. These are the aliens will never meet because they had no reason to go out exploring conquerors. So the Navi and Avatar, because they're aliens, but they're kind of like synced up, which is really fascinating, too, because that movie caused people to get depressed, that they don't live like the Navi. Do you know that that was like a real, like, diagnosis? I know, that was a real thing. That's crazy. Yeah, it's crazy. Yeah, and people would go to see that movie, and those people lived in such spiritual harmony with their mother planet. And they just they rode around on these flying dragons, and they were honest and noble. And we were like, god, I want to be them. And so people would go back to their apartment, and people beep in their horns, and pollution, and garbage on the street, and crazy on those people. They'd be like, fuck, I want to live in Navi and land. I want to live in Pandora. I want to live like them. So people got depressed. Weird. Yeah, Avatar Depression was like a real thing. That's so crazy. So I call just for dealing with it. They had to see people in the couch. But the idea of utopia is like so oversold. I mean, I think there's something like, I don't know. I don't think such things exist. I don't think utopia exists, but I think harmony exists. Harmony for sure. Yeah. But you have to work hard for it. Yes. And that's the thing. Like I think there's some conception that there's some easy path to harmony. And Harmony requires work, and it requires constant work. Constant work. Yeah, there's no days off. And I also think that we are we have created a world in which harmony is very difficult to acquire. Yes. Because our world and the structure of doing a thing that you probably do not want to do for most of your day to pay off debt for something that you really didn't need to education that you turned off, you don't use. And all this different stuff that keeps it's very difficult for people in this environment, and this especially urban environments that we've fasted to create harmony. Whereas people that live like in hunter-gatherer tribes and people that live subsistence lifestyles in particular, they report much higher levels of satisfaction and happiness less depression. I think debt's really hard because you're constantly aspiring to things. And you're right. It's just totally baked in. You know, you know, I still have student loan debt from like, you know, it's just like, it's like you want to do it. You want to be, yeah, you just, you take on debt, you try to do something with, yeah, it's pretty bad. There was a vice series a long time ago back when vice like was really first starting out. And it was a vice guy to travel. And they went to visit this guy who lives in the Arctic Circle. And he's been there since like the 1970s. And I think you went out there initially as a logger. He's one of the last few people to have a, up, he has a permit for a cabin out there. So he lives in this small cabin with no windows. Sort of like while they were filming, he had a shoot at Grizzly Bear that was trying to kill his dog. Oh, you're good. And steal his food. He's had dogs. It's nice for like six hours. It is very hard. I can't even imagine. It's the point is that this guy does live in harmony though. And he's very healthy and very happy. And the way he talks about, he's a very intelligent person. He's not like some weird caveman who's out there in the woods. No, I think most of the people that do, like it's a choice, right? To actually decide to live that way. So. Well, for him, it certainly is. But it's also he has an ability to communicate that's unique for a guy who does that because it's not like he's talking to a lot of intelligence people every time. And he's essentially out there by himself. Yeah, that's super hard. Does he read a lot? It's a little life. I don't know. But he seems to have like, he's synced up with nature. And he's catching fish and he's hunting animals. And that's all he's eating. He lives off of that. And this guy wakes up every morning and says, what do I need to do to stay alive another day? And he just goes out and does that. Which seems like for us, we're like, oh my God, that sounds terrible. But does it really sound more terrible than going to a job at some corporation that doesn't give a shit about you that will cut you if the stock is down. And you've dedicated 25 years of your life to this company and also in your gone. And now you don't know what to do. And you're on unemployment. And you're like, what did I do with my life? I'm 46. What the fuck happened? And that's a lot of people. Whereas this guy, he knows what he's going to do tomorrow. He knows what he's going to do the next day. And also he knows his life matters every day. Like I think this is a thing we forget, is like our life is a choice. And you're fighting for whatever way you want to live your life. But we're kind of just in the daily grind. We lose our connection to that existential reality that our lives are finite. And I think it really changes your perception of things when you really think about the fact that you have a finite amount of time. Yes. And food's not guaranteed. Yes. That's another thing. Well, survival's not guaranteed, right? So we take for granted survival. And therefore we take for granted that we're alive at all in some sense. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So when you start studying all these things and thinking about life and thinking about the various possibilities of life, what is the lowest single-celled organism how long ago do we think that that emerged? I think current estimates are that life, like the oldest fossils that we can identify and tracing back, genomically, about 3.8 billion years ago. So essentially somewhere around a billion or so years that we can find from the time that was formed? Yeah. So Earth, we think formed between 4.5 and 4 billion years ago. So like four billion years ago, we had Earth as we understand it. Mostly now we don't know if there were oceans. But the moon forming impact had happened. That's Earth 1 and Earth 2. The impact was some other place. Yeah. See, I think it was called this smacked in Earth and then made our moon. Must have been really traumatic. So I think most people think life didn't happen before that because if it would have been obliterated, but we really don't know. So yeah, current estimates are around like four to 3.7 and 3.8 billion years ago. So somewhere a billion or less than a billion years later, something emerges. Yes. And how do we think that happened? There is no consensus. Ooh. None. Yeah, I know. It's not fun. It's fun. Yeah, that's kind of crazy. It's totally crazy. That's why I like this problem because nobody knows what happened. Wow. And there's a lot of primary theories. There's a lot of speculation. The canonical ones that you'll hear about are usually like the RNA world that life started with an RNA molecule, which like RNA is still in our bodies today. So DNA, most people are probably familiar with, gets translated, transcribed into RNA, and then the RNA is what's used to make proteins. RNA kind of does a dual role. So people think, oh, maybe it happened early on and it was the first life. And then there's other hypotheses, like hydrothermal vents and sort of energy first approaches to origins of life that we had some metabolism that was organizing. But all of these are really speculative. And I think the issue is that we're trying to take molecules that are in modern living systems and trying to understand how they can emerge in a prebiotic environment on the early Earth and not really thinking about how the Earth and the geochemistry on the Earth had to evolve into a living system. So it had like selection had to happen, evolution had to happen before life. And this is sort of the critical gap that we're really missing is like what is that mechanism? And that's where assembly theory is supposed to be coming in is trying to give us a mechanism for how chemical systems can evolve before we even have a living cell, for example. And like, and trying to iterate what those missing stages are because we just don't know what they look like right now. Well, also like what would the evolutionary advantage of becoming a cell be? I think, well, so that's so that's a great question. But one of the problems at this area is like we don't know what questions to ask. So I actually don't know that that's the right question. I think when you think about it much more deeply about like the physics of life and the way that we've been describing it already, if you think physics, like what life is doing as a mechanism in the universe is maximizing the amount of stuff that gets to exist, for example. Like there's this whole world of complex objects that cannot exist unless there's a living architecture that can select and constrain the space to make something like this instead of like the universes of other things, those atoms could be arranged in. So if you think that there's something that deep in that fundamental about the nature of life, the original life transition has something to do with the emergence of systems that basically can persist, they can survive against this sort of random chemical noise, like the chemical soup is just a mess of things being created in the destroy, created in destroyed. And you get something that basically can reinforce its own existence enough to keep existing and then building more complex stuff. And that's really the original life transition is pretty simple to say like that, but trying to build an experiment and understand the sort of chemical architecture that mediates that transition is quite hard. And that's where we're at right now. And so experiments are being done to try. Yes. How do they conduct these? So that's my collaborator, Lee Cronin, is a chemist. And he's totally brilliant. And actually, him and I are probably, I don't know, like what we're trying to do is a little bit crazy to solve the original life. But he's doing the experimental stuff. But the sort of idea we had in mind is like, all right, a book, try to get the ideas out there, get people excited about thinking about this space. And he'll start a company that will digitize chemistry and try to raise the funds to actually do the experiments. So he's trying to build the technology and experiments. It's built on this platform he has for building robots that basically do the chemistry for you. And the idea being if we could build a large enough experiment, we could search that huge space of chemistry, a little bit like a search algorithm for chemistry. And then be able to look in chemical space and try to discover aliens. Whoa. And an original life experiment on Earth. And so that's what we're trying to do. I'm really excited. I hope it happens. I imagine if you guys, if someone does something like this, maybe it's you, maybe someone else, someone does something like this and creates an artificial life form. And then starts manipulating that life form and evolving that life form through some of the extraneous processes. Yeah. So I mean, there are benefits to that. So at least company canifies a digital chemistry company. And their stated aim is to be able to 3D print any molecule on demand. So this has huge impact for the pharmaceutical industry. But like the real goal is to make an artificial life form in the lab. But that also has huge impact for humanity. Because you imagine that now you have the ability to study in this other system, all of these other kinds of chemistries, like what can you do for antibiotic discovery or pharmaceutical drug discovery or even psychedelic drug discovery, people like that. But there's a crazy amount of new technology and new insights fundamentally to come out of that. But I also don't think that we're really going to understand these other kind of technologies that we're building. Like when we're thinking about artificial intelligence, and like, is that alive or not, unless we solve this chemical problem of what life is. Because I think the chemical problem is much harder, but much more direct as far as understanding the fundamental nature of life when you solve it in an experimental program. Biological life. Biological life. Chemical life. Because it won't be biology as we know it, right? That's the whole point. It'll be alien biology that we evolve in the lab. Right. And I actually think this is how we're going to make first contact with alien life because I think we won't recognize it unless we understand what it is. Wow. No. What ethical concerns would arise when you take a thing? Like, let's say, let's advance this whole process a few hundred years from now. And you've created artificial life. You've created this thing that doesn't exist anywhere else. And then instead of it being subject to natural selection as a vehicle for it, it's advancement, instead, we just start fucking with it. And then it gets to a point where there's an ethical concern. Like, hey, this thing's about to get smarter than us. What do we do? I think there's ethical concerns right along the way. And I don't know that I know immediate answers to those. So it's kind of, like, this is the part where it's a little existentially traumatic to work on these kind of problems. So I have a friend that's a philosopher Ben Bratton. And he says the best kind of ideas are the ones that are like equally like really exciting and horrifying. And like, you want to work on those ideas because you don't know what its future is going to be. And I tend to be on the optimistic side. I think we need to solve this problem because I think we have this sort of existential crisis in some sense that humanity is facing. Because we don't understand what we are. We don't understand what our technologies are doing. We don't understand what our long-term future holds. We don't even understand all the life around us on this planet. So we solve that problem. I think that the lens through which we will look at the kind of ethical things that you're talking about will be radically different. Because the knowledge itself will have transformed us. So I can't even anticipate what those kind of dialogues are going to be like. Imagine if, like, instead of just wondering about several pods and plants and stuff on this conversation, we actually had a fundamental understanding of what it is to be other life forms. And life as part of the fundamental structure of reality and participatory in actually what the universe builds. And you have that kind of understanding. I think it radically changes the way that we conceptualize who we are and what we're doing. And I don't know what that looks like. And we would assume that if we continue, especially down the path of AI and quantum computing, they're probably going to solve a lot of these problems. Yeah. I think we're flying blind in those areas, though, really. Especially AI. I mean, I think that's pretty obvious that there's a huge amount of debate about the nature of intelligence in these artificial algorithms. I certainly think that they're life. But I think they're life in the sense that the lineage of information necessary to train a large language model, for example, requires a planet to evolve something like us and evolve language. And then enough data about that language to train the model. So it's a direct descendant, like you were saying, like our technology is our babies. But so there's that part of it. But I think I don't know. I told you last my train of thought. This is very funny. It went two ways. And I don't know which way I want to go. That's very funny. Yeah. What was your question again? I'm so sorry. That's a good question. I don't remember what my question was. So we're both in the same boat. The idea was that artificial intelligence would enhance our understanding of what it means to be bi-autistic. Oh, I was going to go on. Yeah. And you were asking about quantum information. Yeah. And that when computing power is massively increased, and you have a sentient artificial intelligence that essentially is all the information that we have of every human being, all over the database, everything, all over the world. But yet far more capable processing this in advance. Yeah. So maybe it'll have a more complex understanding of what life is. Yeah. So I think there's a subtlety here when you're talking about artificial intelligence and whether it could compete with natural intelligence. So this is the canonical debate about the nature of artificial intelligence. But I think we really underestimate what chemistry can do. And I think some of the most powerful computers on this planet are still chemical. And if we actually understand chemistry better with these kind of new digital chemistry technologies, the kind of compute we can get out of chemistry might actually out compete silicon in a long run. Well, then there's also the concept of hybrids, right? Yes. When we come to high-boom. I like that concept. But this gets into the blurry area of, are you human anymore? Like if you have a chip in your brain and you're being a saffable pot and then you morph into being on your own desktop, are you still human? Well, that's what I always say about like, if you go back to Australia, Patheticists and explain to him airplanes and cell phones, but you can't be Australia, Patheticists anymore. I'd be like, whoa, I don't want to stop being me. Yeah. Wouldn't that be the same reaction that they have? I think probably. Probably terrified. I don't really come a person. I don't want to become an alien. No. There'd be some great dude with a giant head and big black eyes, but maybe that's what we become. Yeah, I think also intergenerationally, we're already doing that. So like this sort of, you know, people will always talk about how kids are more comfortable with technology than their parents, our grandparents. Right. And why are they more comfortable because they grow up in a totally different environment? Right. Like the world has literally changed in the last few decades. So like the world that kids are growing up today is not the world that it was when kids are growing up like 50 years ago. Right. And so they are, quote, quote, alien, not really alien, but like they're really fundamentally different in a lot of ways. And I think it's okay to recognize that. But that's part of the progression of understanding and the fact that the world is changing. And if we're looking at it from generation to generation, let's scale that up a thousand years or a hundred thousand years or a million years. Those are fun thought experiments. Yeah. It's really is because the amount of change that's happened in terms of technology and our ability to access it over the past hundred years is enormous. Yeah. But yet we're still the same biological creature. Like how long does that stay? Like when does that, when do we start integrating? When even if we didn't integrate, how much would change us? Yeah. I mean, I think we're already seeing signs of that, right? Like people's fear of leaving their cell phone behind. You know, it's like extensible brains. Like we're all pretty much attached to our cell phone already. So when you just, you know, you can imagine in a generation or two, it's more comfortable just to have that inside your body. So then you don't lose it. Yes. Right. I'm choosing to have it on the wrist. Yeah. Yeah. Like we're in the very bizarre doorway period where we're sort of like about to go through this doorway of transhumanism. Where are we going to go? Like the phone thing. Like we don't want to let it go. They're car that you have to have it. I don't know how to get anywhere without my navigation system. You know, all that stuff. Look, we're completely connected in some new strange way that we've just sort of accepted as normal now and accepted. I mean, for you and I, it's over the course of our lifetime. I mean, when I was a child, there was no internet. I remember very distinctly when it emerged. Yeah. It was, I was like 27 years old. It was the first time I got a computer and I got online. I'm like, this is crazy. And that was the, you've got mail there. Yeah. I was like, mind blowing to me. Mind blowing. I know. Instantly. Mind blowing. You had chat with people back and forth. Yeah. And computer. This is crazy. And then you could research things and find out things and then when bandwidth started increasing and then you started to be able to watch videos. YouTube comes along. How many people have, there's obviously a lot of nonsense on things like YouTube, but how many people have become educated on so many different things because of YouTube? Yeah. It's incredible. Yeah. There's so much to know and you can like on any subject, quantum physics, on carpentry, whatever it is, there's millions of videos. It is, and all of a sudden you're instantaneously watching some professor discuss what it means to be alive. Yeah. That's crazy. I love the time we're living in. I think a lot of people want to complain about it, but I think it's fabulous. It's the best. You wouldn't want to live in the 80s. All of the music sucked. People were on Coke. The hair was great. The hair was interesting. But it was like, that was a dumb time. This is a better time. It's a better time. Now it's perfect. For us. Yeah. The people in the future are going to be like, imagine living in a country or. Right. Yeah. Imagine that presidential election they had to go through. Imagine this and that and Israel and God. And God's a, and whoa. Yeah. I mean, they're going to look back at us. How did we do it the way we look back at cave people? Right. But I think the things that they're going to ask about are not the things that we think that they're going to ask about. What do you think they're going to ask about? I don't know. I set myself up for that. I don't know how easy answer that's so bad. I totally did that. Well, I think I don't know. You don't know what historical moments are right now. We cite things that we think are historical and I don't think that they are. And often times it's really interesting because people imagine the future, you know, being radically different than the present. But Ken Liu is a science fiction author. He's got this great take that like if you want to actually predict the future, look at the things that haven't changed in centuries or haven't changed in decades. And those things are likely still to persist and be the same. And so like when he was talking about this, he had a picture of like, you know, some futuristic thing from like the 1930s and there was like a maid and like the black outfit with the white thing. And they're like, which of these things is still around? Like she's vacuuming and it's like just, you know, on the side of the photo and there's all these like robots and things, you know, like outside and like nothing looks the same except for like we still have the same maid outfits and vacuums and we recognize those. Interesting. And that was like predicted 100 years ago, right? So it's like it's weird our conception of things and like how much change there is. And of course, we, you know, we're, we're, our brains are tuned to look out for the things that are dangerous and changing in our environment. And so we're always hypersensitive to things that are not changing or are changing without like recognizing how much is still the same. Hmm. Interesting. And I also think we, we, we were aware of how much of an impact technology in particular the internet has had on us, but probably not as much as someone who's studying history will be aware of it. Yeah. To them it'll almost be like a bump went off. Yeah. Yeah. And I love talking with historians, especially like the ideas I work on right. So like one of those sort of fundamental ideas and assembly theory, which is really radical in some sense from a perspective of physics, but just generally is that history is actually embedded in objects. So I actually think like any evolved structure has a physical size like it might be sitting on the desk, but also has a size and time. Hmm. And this is actually like a fundamental feature of the physics of life that, that living objects, the things that life creates are large and time. And this kind of idea has been sitting around humanity for millennia that like contingency history might still be alive in the present, but we don't really think about that in a fundamental way. So, you know, like, I was talking with Thomas Moynihan who's a historian, he was just saying that there's so many threads through history that kind of point to this idea being like, you know, super interesting and very relevant. And so when you think about like the future history, are they going to be like, oh, they finally realize these kind of things were true. And I think about this with the history of physics, it's kind of crazy at what generation we started realizing certain things. Like when did humanity first start abstracting and building mathematics or when did we build mechanical clocks and start recognizing that we could track things at the level of seconds? Like we had an event seconds and now we take them for granted. Right. When did China invent the mechanical clock? What year was that? I don't know. Let's see if Jamie could find that out. That's a fascinating thought, right? I know. Before that, they required sundials. Right. I don't know how much of an effect. How much of an effect is like the... Well, all our clocks before that were made by the phone. 725 AD. I mean, that's just incredible. Look at that. The world's first mechanical clock. Water driven spherical birds was invented by Yeezyng Abutas-Monkey 1725 AD. Is that what? Oh, no. That looks like... Oh. Let's see what it looks like. I want to see like a real one. Imagine you would go visit that thing. I can even find out what time it is. Well, I'm asking, but I mean, this is a good thought experiment, right? Let's see what it looks like. I want to see like a real one. Imagine you would go visit that thing. I need to find out what time it is. Well, I'm asking it, but I mean this is a good thought experiment. Imagine being one of the first people to see a mechanical clock. How big was the first mechanical clock? It looks fucking huge. Yeah, now we have them whenever. Is that the first one? Just imagine that calculations involved in figuring out how to make all these gears things. So, click and sync. Or even having a concept that you could keep time with that kind of regularity. Yeah. Because like you're saying, our clocks before were based on like sand or shadows or water. Like they were very elemental, right? And they were not incredibly precise. Right. And then the sort of subsequent human knowledge that comes out of like time keeping precision is things like the laws of gravitation, which we wouldn't understand. Like, you know, Newton and Galileo couldn't have done what they did in their generation. And they were just mechanical clocks existed before they did. Right. And the tolerances are so tight that they've created things like turbine movements so that they're not, did not affect it by gravity. Yeah. Like these constant force gears of air-shing turbine watches. No. I feel like I should build a watch now. This is kind of like, I'm going to get like this weird hobby where I'm going to become like a watchmaker. Oh, watches are amazing. Mechanical watches are so damn cool. They're so fascinating. There's a company called Grand Sago and Grand Sago is like the advanced version of Sago. Sago makes like a bunch of different kinds of levels of watches in terms of price points. But then Grand Sago's their luxury line. And Grand Sago has created watches that are mechanical, but also have quartz involved in the movement. So their accuracy is insane to within a half a second a day. Oh, a lot. And all these gears standing around in springs. Amazing. And half a second a day. And they have a 72 hour power reserve. Some of them even more than that. It's bananas. Yeah, no it is. It really is bananas that they've figured out a way to do this with these tiny, and this is one right here. So look how thin it is. It's awesome. Is it heavy? No, not that heavy. But I have some of them. That's a Grand Sago right there. It's called the spring drive. It's not that heavy. But that's all there's that is also a Grand Sago. Wow. There's all mechanical gears and stuff. So much color knowing what's going on in this one is different too, because this one actually has a battery as well. And so this one is super duper accurate. Oh, very cool. They just tried to figure out a way to make these things over time more and more accurate, more and more precise. And what they've gotten it down to now is extraordinary. But show it the tour beyond movement. Because it's bananas when you see what those look like. And some of these tour beyond watches, they go for hundreds of thousands of dollars for a watch just because the complexity of the gears. And then they also have clear windows over the movement. So you could stare at it while it's like doing its thing. Yeah. Like this is a tour beyond watch. Look at all that jazz. That's amazing. Bananas. Who are these gears? I know. I'm trying to figure out how many gears are actually in it. And it's pretty insane. These sync up. I mean, I don't know what the accuracy of this is grand say this is another grand say, go this is their constant force tour beyond movement. But look at the what that's a that watches several hundred thousand dollars. Wow. Because it was just so insanely complex. It's gorgeous. To create. Yeah. I love the see through that. See at final how accurate that thing is today because the dive watch of the spring drive is accurate within a half a second a day. So how accurate is that damn thing? Yeah. But you could do physics with it. So the fact that you're doing this with seconds and I mean the precision involved in making sure that every gear and every spring represents a second so perfectly with no deviation that it's a half a second over 24 hours. That's bananas. Okay. Plus or minus 12 seconds a day. Is that a different tour beyond that's a different tour beyond that's a seagull tour beyond. It's a kind of fun answer for one of them. Yeah. That's a different one. This was saying it's a tour beyond doesn't it doesn't improve accuracy. Okay. So the idea is that it's not affected by gravity but it doesn't improve accuracy. The same gravity fighting effect as turbine mechanism effects been proven that turbine is offer no more accuracy than a traditional escapement on a over swatch in some cases even less. But it's it's it's kind of a nerd thing. Yeah. I love that. Yeah. That's good. So that can nerd out on that. Oh for sure. And you can go deep and deep and deep and deep and there are also some of them are like wafer thin, wafer thin and they have this automatic movement inside of them. So the movement of your your hand. Like every time you move your arm it's winding the watch. Yeah. So as you move. Oh really? Yes. Yes. Like a roll-ups. Yeah. Yes. If you have like an automatic watch like a Rolex Submariner you don't wind it. You move it around. Yeah. And as you move it around that's what causes it to have the power to keep going. So as you're wearing it throughout the day it's and then there's something you do wind something you wind. Yeah. But I just said I'm worried thought that you could tell how long someone was dead for by like how many seconds. I thought the watches because it wasn't wound up anymore. Sort of. But you don't tell within you know 12 hours. Yeah. Yeah. I know. Yeah. It is funny. Yeah. Because you will you have to find out what kind of a movement it is. Is this a 48 hour movement or 72 hour movement? Yeah. How long does it last for? Yeah. That's incredible. Like I was broken already. Yeah. Time a Rolex watch helps solve a murder mystery. Oh, okay. There you go. Oh, I was totally off. Wow. Is that I had solved it? I don't know. I just mean that I'm too. Interesting. What makes sense? So that's the oyster perpetual. Right. That's that's one of those watches that also has an automatic movement. I just love the idea of recovering information and like figuring out puzzles. All right. The Rolex is known to be 48 hours the power reserve. Police favor determine the date of death with a reasonable margin of air by subtracting the watches power reserve from the date that was displayed on the watch when it was found. Yep. According to his Rolex watch Ronald Platt was murdered on July 20th 1996. But the problem with that is a lot of people don't set their date. Yeah. So that wouldn't hold up in court. It seems like like how do you know the guy was accurate with his date? Oh, how do you know? I had if he had shitty vision like you can even see I can't read that. I'm saying good lighting. Yeah. I can't read that. You know, so I'm not. Mine probably isn't hold on. So let me tell you right now. Referety if it's not. Oh, this one doesn't even have a date. Oh, there you go. That's not going to hold up in court. Duh. This one doesn't have a date. But some. Why do I think it does? That's funny. But some of them do. And that's a different. There's like a different mechanism inside of there. It's called complicated. They're they're called complications. But these different ones like they'll have one. I have one that I gave to Lex. That's an Omega. And it has a moon on it. And so it has a moon faced. Thing where there's a high resolution photograph of the moon. And as the moon rises and moves through the sky becomes a full moon and a half moon. In a quarter. It shows it on the watch. So it's accurate. So you have to go to a website. You find out what the moon faces. You set the moon face for where the watch is. And then you set the time and the date in the watch. And then it stays in sync. Love it. It's crazy. That's so amazing. Yeah. The Omega is really cool because it's a little image. But it's a high resolution image of the moon. Yeah. Can you see me find one of those? It's a Omega Speedmaster. Moon watch. And so this little moon sort of moves through this little night sky window. And the bottom of the watch. I love the faders of the moon. Yeah, that's not it. Find out the one with the moon on it, Jamie. Say no, no, no, no, no, no. Moon watch is the watch they wore during the moon landings. Moon face is what you're looking for. Yeah. So that one's different. That's it right there. Click on the one where you just had your cursor. So that see the image of the moon in the bottom. Got it. And that dope. So the human has a bunch of little stars. And that's all run by Gears 2. Yeah. So cool. It's so cool. And then the one on the above it, that's the calendar. Yeah. The window to upper left of it. That's its calendar. Amazing that they can sync all those different sort of scales of time within one device with just a bunch of gears. And incredibly accurate too. Yeah. Amazing. That's my favorite watch. I love it. That's great. That's great gift. Yeah. But it's just an amazing piece of human ingenuity. Someone's figured out how to do that. Yeah. It's fully mechanical. Yeah. That's just you move your hand around it. Yeah. And it does all the winding. Yeah. And it keeps it accurate. Yeah. It's nuts. It is nuts. That's our simple little semi-enbrains. Human greens, I know. It's amazing. And when you think about what could possibly become of advanced life, if we could exist in just stay alive and advance another million years. Yeah. It doesn't seem outside the realm of possibility. I think it'll happen. You think so. I think so. What do you think we look like in the future? I mean, I think as we talk about that, it's some kind of hybrid existence. Like I can't. I think we are becoming more integrated with our technology. I don't feel like existentially traumatized by that. No. And I also don't think like, you know, there's like all these tropes about like machines completely replacing biological life. And I just don't think that's a realistic possibility either. And again, it goes back to like looking at the history of life on earth. Like there's no technology that life invented that, you know, like was completely replaced if, you know, like if other subsequent architecture was built on it. So I always think about like the ribosome, which mediates the translation and the size of cell is one of the most important and oldest technologies on our planet. We don't think about molecules as technologies, but, you know, life had to invent that thing. And it's still here. And there's billions of ribosomes on this planet. And like they're like kind of the engines of existence and some sounds because cells require them to function. And so I think a lot of the stuff that we're building now, like it's an interesting question, what's going to be around billions of years from now. I don't think that we as humans have invented any technology that will last that long. But I do think the idea that we're not going to be replaced because we are like sort of a key part of the infrastructure of what comes next is compelling to me based on looking at the history of life on earth. Yeah, we may not be replaced, but we probably won't remain the same. So that's the question. No, we won't. What do we, when we do integrate if we do have some sort of a technological sideboard existence, what does that look like? Well, the question of like what does it mean to integrate though? So like already in this discussion, we would be talking about like being in a society or not in a society. And the lifestyle of a human and what a human is is fundamentally different if you're an individual living a hunter-gatherer lifestyle on your own versus if you're living in a modern society and you have all this technological aid and this like social constraints and posed on you that you have to hold a nine to five job and you have to have an income and all these other things like you're fundamentally different kind of entity than you would be as you know someone living in the wild on their own. And so we're already part of a technological infrastructure. We just don't really recognize societies as that. But it's being built more and more into us that we're kind of you know we're kind of stuck in that like most of us couldn't survive on our own and then we're going to become more integrated with that system. So it's sort of you know I think of analogies with other kinds of life like you know molecules inside a cell can't exist on their own either but they're alive as part of a cell or you know ants in a society can't exist on their own like they need to be in the colony and I think humans are already the same. I think so too and I think the way we make distinctions with animals like feral pigs versus domesticated pigs and things along those lines it's like we think of them as different things. Yeah. And I think that's... They are different and you could say there's like superficial physical resemblances but I think those are kind of superficial. I think like it's fundamentally different to be a wild species versus a domesticated one or a wild human so to speak versus a domesticated human. Right right and I think when you look at that guy who lives in Antarctica and the artist circle rather and you compare him to like the saddest overweight gamer who's taking a mountain do all day. Oh now and do that sounds painful. Oh. So it was just like pale, no sunlight at all just eating garbage and playing call duty all day long. Yeah. I mean that is like they're completely different animals. They are. One of them is like walking through the mountains of the rifle for careboo and the other one is just like calling Uber Eats. And I suspect that like even the way they feel about the world is truly different right so it's not just like the like the obviously the physiological differences manifest and like mental differences about like the cutie of their mental architecture, how they feel about their environment and like what's happening to them. It's just totally different. How much if any do you pay attention to the UFO UAP world? I have a very, I don't pay too much attention to it to be quite honest. I think for me it's not very exciting to be honest. I am much more interested in understanding fundamentally what life is and I think the UFO discussion really hasn't afforded me a deeper understanding of the problems I'm interested in solving. So I don't I don't pay too much attention to it. I think it's much more interesting as a cultural discussion and like some of these things that we've also been talking about like augmented humans and all these other things is like there's a lot of discussions happening culturally that I think are preparing us for the next phase. And so I kind of see the UFO discussion as being one like you know we culturally need to understand how we want to think about alien life what it is how we intersect with it. And so there's there needs to be a lot of discussions about the nature of that problem and people interested in believing in in that problem but I don't really see a lot intellectually for me personally coming out of that. Yeah there's there's no meat. No. It's just a lot of talk and a lot of stories that some of them from very respected people that I believe them and their encounters are fascinating but you could waste your whole life thinking about what that means and what it's true. There's not enough data there's very very very little data. Yeah that's a problem so I find it interesting like it's certainly intriguing and like you know to think about the possibilities but it's sort of like mythology versus. Yes. And like individual knowledge versus shared knowledge and I think what science like you know you can you can question the sort of academic establishment and the way that we do science and it's very dogmatic and all those things and I can agree with a lot of those criticisms. But science fundamentally is about shared knowledge and the ability to like have a joint conversation about something we both understand and to be able to use that to do things like you know the laws of gravitation are things that we can easily state and we can build satellites and new technologies out of that knowledge and I think you know the discussion and alien life is fundamentally about new knowledge that we need to have about how the universe works and that's going to come from a lot of different places but for me I don't see the UFO discussion fundamentally advancing that question. It's just raising some of the mystery about you know certain experiences people have had but not in a way that allows us to really answer the question of what is an alien. There's also a fundamental problem of accuracy of information and how much of this whistleblower stuff is nonsense. How much of it is true when you're relying on person A to discuss classified documents. There's a lot of control of narratives which I don't like so I don't like people telling people how to think and I think what I see in the UFO discussion a lot that actually makes me stay out of that community is a lot of people that claim authority on knowledge and then they claim they can't share the knowledge. And I don't like that. I think if you have knowledge you should share it you should discuss it you should try to figure out what it means for everybody and you should not protect it. That's why you're a scientist. Yes. That's what people should be doing. I don't trust people when they claim to have absolute knowledge they can't share with people. The only thing that gives me pause is the possibility that they're dealing with top secret programs that could get them in great trouble and would limit their access to this technology. That gives me pause and it's the only thing that gives me pause. But it's such a good story though right? It's the best story. I know right. That's the problems I'm a I'm a giant sucker for that kind of story. I love those stories. Yeah. I think we all do. Oh my God. I love it. I want to hear all of them. Yeah. But yeah. But I think that's like a sort of also standard play that like you know if the government needs to keep knowledge as secret suddenly it becomes more valuable right. So I don't even necessarily think it's the government as much as I think it's the government and military contractors. Yes. So if you have some sort of technology that is literally out of this world, right? Trying to figure out how it works. It's within your best interest to keep that as secret as possible. And if you could case it to that in Arizona, it's like you know like they're testing you know whatever new technology for fighter jets or whatever. It's like a million UFO sightings and then it's like we're later that it was you know the military. Have you ever seen a military jet like like a stealth bomber? No. When we were filming fear factor way back in the day, we were out near Edwards Air Force Base and one of those stealth bombers flew overhead. Yeah. And if I didn't know what it was, I would swear that was from another plant. Yeah. It looks so cool. Yeah. It looks so cool. And it does not look like anything else you've ever seen flying in the sky. Yeah. This is like this is post 911, 2001. Right. So this is the very beginning of fear factor and right after 911 and we were out there in the desert and you see this thing flot it's you know palm Dale and you see this thing fly overhead and it's like it looks like something Batman owns. Yeah. Seaving in fine one of those. Yeah. So you can find like a video of a stealth bomber flying overhead. It was flew right past us. It was like, what? I would love to see that. I would have been terrifying because I don't know what I'm going to go in a war. Why am I seeing these alien book clips? Yeah. I always feel like that when I see military stuff. It's like it's equal parts like amazing and profound and then like totally existentially traumatizing. Yes. Exactly. Yeah. It's cool. Yeah. It's designed to sneak in and mess people up and then get out of there without anybody know it there. It's literally what it is. The stealth bomber. Yeah. Yeah. But I do find it exciting that so many people want to talk about UFOs and are like really excited about the possibilities for aliens. The thing is like my point is, I mean, was it Einstein's quote or so the sufficient technologies indistinguishable from magic? Yeah. It was an asthma. Maybe an asthma. Yeah. So here's one flying overhead. Look at this. Come on. Like if you saw this, you'd be like, oh my god, they're here. Yeah. Like if you saw that fly overhead, you'd go, oh my god, aliens are real. Right. That's how it felt. It's kind of epic that the most alien thing on the planet is the human mind and like what it can create. Oh my god, the most epic. We're responsible for every single thing. Yeah. Every single thing that's an object that didn't grow, we made it. I am nuts. Close my mind. Close my mind. Yeah. And if I think about the possibility of something even more advanced than us coming here and manipulating us the same way we're willing to take a chance to create an artificial life in a laboratory. Yeah. So I think that why would if there's so much more advanced than us that they think we're just the silly territorial age. So why is it the always the narrative that there's so much more advanced? Like where does this come from? Because they got here. We can't get there. I see. But I don't think that like technological progress is linear. So they might, you know, they might have the technology to come and visit us, say, but not have other kinds of technology that we've advanced. Perhaps. But the idea that they have gone so far in one area that is so perplexing, which is deep space travel and vast distances of space and time. And that they've conquered that. So the closest planets that we think we have Goldilocks zones are how far away. How many light years away? I mean, the closest planetary system is probably, you know, about four light years away. Recognize Goldilocks zone. There's planets there. It's very debatable about like whether it's a trapez system, like whether those planets are actually habitable or not. Because we don't know if they have atmospheres and there's all kinds of debate in the community. But like potentially. So let's take the closest planetary system. So four four light years. Yeah. Okay. So imagine something coming here every four years because it takes that long. You know, that's a thing they can travel at like speed, which is a big if. or assuming they can do something. Well, we're also assuming that speed is you're taking an object and you're moving that object through some method of propulsion to a new place. Instead of moving the space around it, folding that and having it instantaneously travel to one point to point, which is the way the real super eggheads describe the potential future like long distance space. Yeah, based on sort of extensions, the current theories of gravity. But yeah. And you know, obviously extrapolating greatly our ability to generate power. Yeah. But if they did figure out a way to get here, they would probably be so unimpressed with us, especially if they caught us a few hundred years ago. You know, and we're basically like making stupid houses and burning coal and riding horses. Making mechanical clocks. That's true. Right. That was quite a while ago. Yeah. That's true. Was that AD or 725 AD? Yeah. I mean, just the idea that we have come so far in such a short period of time, you would have just imagined that if that keeps going, it's going to get to the point where everything expands exponentially and the ability to travel through space will be on the list. Yeah. So and then you're going to go, okay, what are they doing? Oh, they only have rocks. They only have sticks and rocks. They haven't figured out. Yeah. Metal or G. Yeah. They haven't figured out. Right. And so we're always applying today's standard and understanding to long term futures. And if you imagine that we go through this process of creating the kind of technologies that you're describing, we will be so fundamentally different in the process. We'll be having a different discussion. And we won't be able to reason about what that looks like based on the way that we think about things now. So I think this kind of, you know, I've never really been a fan of like these sort of, you know, survival of the fittest, predator prey, like the aliens are just going to be so much more advanced than us and come and take over everything. And in narratives, because it just doesn't seem to be, it's first of it's not consistent with what we actually observe because we don't observe aliens yet. And second off, it doesn't seem consistent with the trajectory of what we're doing overall, especially if you think about us not individually, but like much more is just like a biosphere evolving into a technology, like a technosphere. Yeah. I agree with you there. I think this predator prey thing sort of got sidelined the moment we created agriculture in cities. It kind of, that kind of stopped and then they became a new thing. And as we advanced technological, they become another new thing. My concept, my thought is there's going to be a moment in time. The way we've integrated with each other digitally through cell phones and through social media and interaction online, there will be another level of that that is exponentially more bizarre. And it's probably going to take place with like neural link and similar type technologies that we're going to integrate with each other and communicate telepathically and communicate with large groups of people telepathically. And I think, isn't it amazing that things that were once missed become fact through technology? Yeah. And this is just absolutely amazing like how much our ancestors thought about these things that they called magic and like we're making, you know, like actual physical reality through technology. We have the gentleman who received the first neural implant, the nearly two-lan here. We talked to him about what it's like. I look at him like this is your the future. Like what we're probably all going to have something similar to that in our bodies. And then eventually when I go, why do we have these fragile feet when you can have these immense deluxe carbon fiber feet that allow you to run over hot coals and not feel a thing? Like when you're either of those, they're better. You can control them better. Sometimes what you want to do depends on what you do. But we are, we're very connected to our biological existence. But my thought is that our biological existence comes with all the baggage of all the human reward systems that have been put in place in order to ensure our survival. And this is what's led us to war. This is what's led us to violence. This is what's led us to all the terrible things. Yes. We have a lot of baggage. Yes. I think is a byproduct of survival of the fittest mentality that came out of our biological life. As we integrate digitally, I think that might be one of the primary benefits is that we realize, oh, we can't kill each other. We're all one. Yeah. But we really are all one. Yes. And we are really are all connected. And instead of doing that, why don't we figure out a way to solve all this and work together. And if we are all one of the same mindset, this whole idea of stealing resources and covert operations, that's all going to go away. It just makes sense that that would be one of the things that would happen. We would stop doing all the dumb things that we do. Yeah. And then as we joined together, we would say, well, we need to come up with solutions for our environmental issues. We need to come up solutions for long-term strategies for dealing with all these different problems that we've created. And then we could do it together. Yeah. Instead of like having this whole concept of territorial lines in the sand where you're not allowed to cross unless you have a passport or you know, you have to paperwork. Some sort of integration with all human beings, the way we have with cell phones, but way more sensitive. Yeah. I mean, something we find really shocking is how difficult it is for humans to think of other humans as human. Right. So we have like our, if you're friends or people that we find socially acceptable and then like pretty much anybody outside of that space is like beyond our cognitive horizon and we just can't treat them as people anymore. And I find this very perplexing and you know, a bit of an issue in making the kind of transition that you're talking about that we just like can't even see each other as humans. Sure. I mean, that's the whole concept of the other, right? They're different than us. They're different. We're allowed to do this because they're those people. Exactly. And that permeates so much of modern society right now. It's like a hard to look at anybody and see them as a person. And I think that's baked into us first of all because we all evolved in tribal groups of very small numbers of people which is where Dunbar's number comes from. Right? We only have a certain amount and we can keep intimately connected to in our minds. Yeah. And our social networks are much larger than that now. So most of the people in our network we can actually humanize. Well, it's even worse if you're famous because you don't remember anybody's name. Yeah. Because I mean, so many people. And then you have all kinds of people that have a parasocial relationship with you and like they think they know you and they don't know you. Especially me because I do this. Yeah. It's like talking. Yeah. It must be very weird. Fuck and strange. But it's also I feel like that sort of connection with people. This is what anybody who's doing, any sort of a podcast or something like that, is kind of doing is like a one way version of what I think is going to exist universally on the planet. Yes. I agree with that. I think actually the thing that I find really interesting about the podcasting space is this kind of like a very intimate conversation but it's technologically mediated and shared. Right. And I think that's exactly what you're talking about. So like this transition phase and like why are podcasting becoming so popular I think is because it's part of this kind of transition that we're all undergoing. There's also an unusual authenticity in having access to individual minds without influence of producers and directors and a bunch of different people. So like this conversation in particular, like there was I had zero conversations with any person before I got you on. I had a text message that I sent to my friend who's the booking guy. I said, hey, reach out to her. This sounds cool. See if she can do this date and that's it. Yeah. And then it goes on my phone and that's it. And then so I start watching some of the conversations you've had. I watched your thing on Lex. I start looking into these concepts and assembly theory and all these different things. And so my brain, so it's all it is is something I'm interested in. Yeah. There's no other reason to have this conversation other than I'm interested in it. And so that I think resonates with other people because I love when someone's interested in something. If they're interested in making baseballs by yeah, I think we should all be more excited about things. Like things are exciting, especially creative spaces and like new ideas and people that are thinking about like changing things. But for me, it's someone who's passionate about something. Yeah. For sure. I totally get what you mean about the baseballs. Yeah. I mean, this is why I like the watch discussion because it's very clearly like drawn from enthusiasm and somebody like design that thing. Oh, yeah. And I'm by the way, I am a lot of when it comes to watches. There are watch nerds. Yeah. Like serious watch nerds that can tell you like all the models and what this movement has on that movement. Yeah. And so that like they know all the pieces. Some of them take them apart and put them back together again on the run. Watchners that can tell you like all the models and what the this movement has a that movement That like they know all the pieces Some of them take them apart and put them back together again on their own They have giant goggles and sit and little tweezers and shit. It's crazy Yeah, I mean, but I love when people are really excited about things whether it's about playing the guitar or making a painting Like something about that to me is infectious. Yeah, and it makes me excited about other things Yeah, if I see someone is really excited about making furniture I start getting excited about what I do. Yeah, it's like there's something about that energy is infectious Yes, yeah, and I think like enabling people to find their own passion is really important very much So yeah, and when you do what like what we're doing on this podcast and have conversations about things that are just interesting Yeah, you know, that's all it is. It's just interesting, right? Interesting is good. It's far better than the opposite Yes, it's just fascinating and so that stimulates Minds it stimulates people like there's people at home that are listening like I want have a question like what yeah What is how did this happen? How did that happen? What what would have happened if it was a little bit colder? What would have happened? It was a little bit warmer? What would have happened if there was no this or though that or like a Imagine a world where no one would fix out the wheel. I mean I think about alternate histories all the time Well, the bizarre thing is they do not think the Egyptians in the wheel. Yeah, like what are you talking about? How is that even possible? Yeah, and so no theory there that's like the massive mystery of human civilization itself Just in the structures that we're left behind with no explanation. Yeah, that alone makes us go Well, we have this bizarre Idea in our head of how things progress based on our current understanding of the world we live right now But that has no bearing on Egypt. Yeah, what did they do how they do that? We don't know I know History's a predictive science which is like a weird thing But like people don't like think about this but like you know You have to have theories of the past and then test it against the record right so it's not really any different than any other Domain of knowledge where we're trying to make predictions and test them against current data It's just like history for some reason we think it actually happened therefore like there's one narrative But it's usually constructed based on what we know and we're learning all the time Well also the problem and and we forget all the time the collapse of that civilization The burning of the library of Alexandria So all the records lost so they probably had written down how they made everything And some assholes came along and burnt everything and now we're like what did you do? They were definitely assholes. I was such an assholes. I know I like at that When I first heard about the library Alexandria and it was like that was a heartbroken Oh, can you even imagine what was lost if we knew what they knew the amount of advancement? Just Egypt just that one part of Africa where they figured out how to do some things that to this day 4,500 plus years later. We are perplexed. Yeah perplexed Like there's shitty theories. They all suck every theory sucks They've just you know, they've just recently discovered some sort of hydraulic technology that was in one of the pyramids Oh really? You can find that Because there's a recent some recent research that was published where one of it wasn't the the kufu pyramid It was another pyramid and in one of these other pyramids They believe they have evidence of some sort of hydraulic technology that was used So they published Monday in a journal PLS one research that proposed that ancient people may have relied on water to build the step pyramid The suspect hydraulic system may have helped lift stones from the center of the pyramid Wow, so like we're still trying to figure out what they did So long before I got into science like one of the first places I actually encountered an astronomy was like reading about the Orion mystery when I was like in fifth grade And I like I was like got obsessed with it for a little while about like whether the chambers and the pyramids Were actually aligned with the stars and stuff and like like how did they possibly do that? It was it was kind of crazy There's a guy named Christopher Dunn who's an engineer and he has the wildest theory He thinks that the construction of the pyramid and this is by the way both maligned by some archaeologists Completely dismissed but also embraced by younger archaeologists who are in our areas So this theory is that the way the great pyramid was set up was not set up as a tomb But was set up as some sort of a way to generate electricity and and that there was There was a chamber of subterranean chamber and that this chamber had something in it that was like pounding on the stone and creating a certain vibration and then they had this These shafts that they had access to that had they know these shafts existed and they know the structure of these shafts and these shafts that existed in the marble or whatever the stone granite rather and they would fill these shafts up with some sort of chemicals and then at the end of the shaft was limestone And so the limestone is porous and the limestone allows the gases to escape from all these chemicals and contain itself Inside this chamber this chamber is constantly being vibrated and then there are these pathways That lead up to what they're calling the Kings chamber which is this insane structure. It's one of the most perplexing things about the pyramid immense stones that are position Phenomenal piece of architecture and then in those they have shafts that go straight out into space that he thinks is Gathering gamma rays and so the gamma rays are interacting with this hydrogen that's being created by these chemicals and the vibrations and that all these things are used to generate electricity and this is why there's a gold capstone on the top of the period and Smooth limestone the outside. It's a nutty theory, but Brilliant yeah, no, I mean it's incredibly creative and it's testable and like there's ways to validate that that could work that that would be Well the problem is you don't do it at scale and like well you could look for traces of like whatever Chemistry is talking about on the pyramid walls and like it would be possible to experimentally verify whether gamma rays could do that I don't suspect that they could but but like there's pieces of it like this is how science works You have like a story of a set of hypotheses and you can test individual parts of it and then try to validate it So be kind of cool You know like you wanted to try to do that right and so then the question is How do they figure that out? I don't know a magic of their Magic turns out to be correct and this was some sort of a way of generating power from the earth and space itself How how do you but also why because where would they put the power they didn't have any electric grids or anywhere to like Not that we know of right the problem is It all gets to this weirdness of like how How much evidence would be left from 10,000 years ago? How much evidence would be left from 20,000 years ago? How long did it take people to figure that out? Was it two or three thousand years like what how much tinkering? Yeah, and yeah, I mean there's all kinds of interesting questions you can ask about that kind of stuff even in like deep time so You know like one of my colleagues Adam Frank had this paper on like the solarian hypothesis which is like the idea that there was like intelligent beings around the time Is on your swords like a dinosaur race and like how would you actually look in the geological record for it? And so like people can work out the mathematics of like you know What would be the traces of these you know like if if the Egyptians had this capability or if You know, there were intelligent species that emerged on the planet long before humans and had enough technology say to like every You act of waste or anything like you can you can actually like bound You know like what would we actually see in the record? So it is possible still to constrain this stuff Even even the most radical hypothesis so like I I've been raised in a tradition Scientifically of like entertaining any idea As long as it's something that we can actually test and measure And so I guess I for me I think I think you know some of the the most creative ideas and science or things that people completely didn't expect And Well, I I mean I think I think Einstein's a great example I'm you know like he was one of the few people that took seriously that the speed of light You know is constant like we take that for granted now But everybody thought that was kind of ridiculous and the experiments must be wrong because there's no way that the speed of light could be Constant and he was like no the laws of nature are invariant and this invariant also implies that the speed of light could be invariant because it's a lot of nature and Then he was able to derive relativity from that and that has all kinds of you know Radical consequences about the way that we think about space and time and you know the fact that time is you know It's actually relative concept At least simultaneously is relative concept I think there's many concepts of time and physics But but yeah, so I think that's one but like quantum mechanics is another Like if you actually look at the observational evidence and you try to build a theory from the observational evidence You get to like really interesting spaces that are completely different than what you thought and so It's easy to have theories and creative ideas. It's actually harder to go from the observational constraints and work into a theory That's consistent with all of those and that's actually where most of our more radical Conceptions and foundational shifts come from and so that's why I'm actually particularly excited about what we're doing with assembly theory As an example because like what we're trying to do there is say if life is actually a real Property of the physical world like whatever we call life. It will have to be redefined Then we should be able to have a measurable consequence and the way we talk about that is actually to measure this complexity Molecules assembly of molecules Which you can go in the lab and measure with standard instrumentation like a mass back in an NMR and infrared Like you can measure this property of a molecule to real physical feature And then you can derive all kinds of weird shit from them And I think this has been the tradition of physics in general But science also more broadly that you know the reason that we get so convinced about things and they work is because we're working backward From what we observe and measure Right and then we tested against what we can observe and measure And the things that happen with reality are far stranger Things that make it dream up which is why I love it. It's it's just crazy like that kind of ideas you get out of that process Well, just the process that allows you and I to be staring at each other First of all the fact that we could see each other is crazy. Yes. Yes. Right. That's evolution of eyes is amazing That's not totally nuts and then also octopi have them too. They just evolved on a completely different branch of evolutionary tree Like totally crazy, but they all evolved eyes. Yeah, it seems like a property that almost every animal has Yeah Seeing is pretty deep. I mean, I think I don't know when the first photon receptors evolved in cells But you know even cells have light something Capability so I mean that's how photosynthesis evolved also, but yeah, but it's crazy so like the idea of you know like when life first emerged on the planet nothing could see but it evolved later and It is something that is fairly consistent even if you think about our technology So I always think about the progression of biology into technology It is fascinating also that a lot of our technologies that allow us to understand the world or technologies of site Like telescopes and microscopes and you know like we think we knew life on this planet Then we invented the microscope and it's like you know just you don't need that much more resolution And you can suddenly see that this table is completely covered in cells for example that we didn't know over there Right, which is just mind-blowing. It's like mind blowing. It's like we evolved from cells billions of years ago It took us billions of years to build it to like to evolve into an intelligence like to build the technology and then look and be like oh Biology's made out of cells and then if you think you understand any of it the people that understand subatomic particles like hold my beer Yeah, because this whole thing's empty space. Yeah, it's all operating in some bizarre quantum state Where it's like both still and moving at the same time like those wave functions. Yeah, what I know like what it What is everything all everything's weird? Me and do it though like that that feeling is just like I love that feeling I love not understanding and thinking like we live in a really trippy reality and The fact that our minds are capable of understanding any of it to me is pretty profound. I feel like we're just emerging from it the same way the the ability to To see things was this emerging technology this emerging ability that probably changed everything right the ability to actually like recognize distances And the sea objects recognize them and that is this emergent phenomenon that we sort of take for granted because we have But there could be other things like that that have not emerged yet. Yes In this so much psychic phenomenon Right. It's one of the things that I connect with that. I don't believe in psychics like a person could read in tarot cards But I do think there's some weirdness Involved in human beings that you can't put on a scale. I think some people are really good at reading patterns in their environment I think there's that too, but there's also like phone rings and it was a person you were talking about You haven't talked to him forever. Yeah, I'm they feel you and they call you There's something trippy to that that may be Not every time not maybe repeatable, but occasionally you catch it Occasionally there's this connection that seems to emerge and I always wonder if that's an emergent form of a new ability that human beings will eventually possess Yeah, I have lots of thoughts, but I think the first one is I think we we forget often that we are all connected by a common history and So a lot of the features about like why is it that we can be sitting here having this conversation? You know, obviously we both have to speak the same language, but we also have to emerge from the same evolutionary Architecture have the same kinds of sensory apparatus to like to be able to communicate with each other Implies shared history and so you know like I think about life is these kind of You know like these structures that are emerging over time and generating novel You know things but like that the whole temporal relation this idea of like objects being in time means that they're connected through time So you know like if you assume a living object actually has a time in size It means that like every living object in this planet is not really a distinct object. They're all part of that same Structure in time and I think this is really necessary for interpreting some of the things that you're talking about because There's so much in our environment that is a part of that shared history that we're picking up on all the time that would like We don't even recognize that is like cues for like us to to really you know like and we miss it because we we don't even recognize the history in our environment And and so we think things are just happening, you know Spontaneously and like there's some magic behind it. What really all it is is contingency and causation But I think the other thing that is interesting about what you're saying which we already touched on a little bit is You know these these kind of stories that you know like there's ancient myths like I you know I'm a huge I just have Campbell fan and like thinking about like the history of mythology But like you know we had these myths for like you know Most of human history and there's been a lot of recurring motifs in them about you know telepathy Psychics Miracles, you know all of these stories And it's super interesting to see how some of them are becoming You know like embodied through our technology like like the things that we imagine like we're making real and That's the part that's interesting to me and that's much more physical Hmm Yeah So imagine we're making real yeah, so it's not impossible that people that are psychic at quote-unquote could exist But I think what will happen is the stories that we're telling become embodied in the observations that we're making and the things that We're actually like implementing in the world, but like I don't know that historically I would say like like like I don't believe in magic I think magic is Or I do believe in mystery, but I think what I yeah, so when I say don't believe in magic It's not that I don't believe that people have personal knowledge or things But I think what's more important is like when those things become shareable they actually become Things that we can use collectively and I'm much more interested in that kind of knowledge. So it's not that I don't value mysticism or Or the kind of personal narratives that people have about Experiences I think those are incredibly valuable and I think that we need those stories in our culture It's just for me. I'm much more interested in like when do we make those kinds of things regular like regularized in the way that like we understand them as like really fundamental properties and we can use them and like we can share that Information That's what I like about science because it's like it's like shareable deep thoughts. Yeah, that are universally usable Yes, yes, yeah universally usable is a great way to put it I've often entertained the idea of you know I'm sure you were aware of the concept of the muse right? Maybe but it probably explain it anyway just because it's well one of the best representations of this gentleman named Stephen Pressfield Is a great author he wrote a legend of bagger bands a bunch of other great movies and he wrote this book called the war of art and the The book is essentially like a guidebook for creative types to avoid procrastination resistance and to develop a structure that allows you to sit down and in your desk at a very specific time every day and Summon the muse and this idea has persisted throughout Time that ideas. I mean, I'm sure you've had ideas that have come to you like where's not even come from? Yes, I think everyone has I love creativity for that reason because it's so mysterious even to the person having the creative act Yes, yes, it's just crazy. Yeah. I all almost always think of my best ideas It's not even really mine, but like a gift. Yes, and so this is I do too This is the concept of the muse that the muse you some on the muse you treat the muse are Yeah, you you literally communicate with the muse you put this intention out there and if you do this every day She will reward you and she will consistently Bring you ideas and if you are a person who can develop that kind of discipline to sit there and do that You'll you'll become productive through the muse and so is the muse like a placeholder for your like unconscious could be Brain yeah, certainly, but if you treat it like it's a real thing it behaves like a real thing I don't know. I mean, I think the unconscious is a real thing. I do the reason of bringing up is like so many people are really interested in consciousness and then You know like really focused on that but part of the reason that you know like where creativity comes from and like part of this idea of using intuition to guide how you think about the world I think is like there's so much happening in your brain that you're just not even consciously aware of right and I think a lot of the Information processing architecture and like where I'm like all I I've kind of resigned myself to like almost all of my thinking is my Unconscious brain and I should just like leave it there and if I get an idea emerging out of it seems like it came from nowhere But it's just it's I'm just not consciously aware of all the processing in my brain I also wonder if the term consciousness is connected far too much to language. Yes, because right? I think it yes we think of things that we can describe with language and processes that we examine with language words that we attributed specific objects and specific tasks and things that we do and then there's this other thing that's going on Maybe you feel bad that day. Maybe you feel lonely. Maybe feel this like these these sort of subconscious things are very conscious They're they're conscious, but they just they're not attached to language Right, you know and so when we're interacting with people on a conscious level We're communicating constantly through words So we have sounds that we make and we these represent things and we all understand them and so we use this as a way to express This thing that's going on with this thought process this the consciousness. Yeah, that it's we're attaching it to language Yeah, no, I think most of us do because I think a lot of us You know construct words or visuals in our brains But it's super interesting when you have people that don't do that like like we cron in that I work with a lot And you know he's the the person originally assembly theory this chemists Like he doesn't have any visuals in his brain or like language in his brain And it's super interesting talking to him because he's like completely not really brilliant But I think like his mental architecture is really different And I love working on Deep foundational questions because I think when you talk about these deep ideas and you talk and maybe this is also why people like Say Cadellics because if you're not if you're not like trained at the sort of frontier of like In-electual debate, you know like where do you have these kind of experiences? But the kind of I'm talking about is like You have really thought about how reality works and like you have an architecture in your mind about what you think Is fundamental about the nature reality because you're asking this particular scientific question And I think some of my best discussions with some of my colleagues have been you know those kind of discussions And you really realize how people's brains are so different very very different. So different. What is the estimation? There's some percentage of us that do not have an inner voice. Yeah, I think it's like for Percent, but I don't think it's higher than that. I think it's quite a bit higher. I thought it was like 20s oh What's that I just made up an number up to 60 percent, but I I've tried to look into this many times I don't understand Well, I think it's hard to report though because people don't even know they don't have an inner voice and like and or people don't know They do have an inner voice because you don't know what it's like to be in someone else's mind So everybody just thinks their mind is normal right right. So if you talk to a schizophrenic What what's going on there? Yeah, what is that like what's that? Yeah Well, this one of the things I'm really excited about like these these neural enhancement technologies because I think I think We really underestimate the diversity of human minds Like it might be the most diverse things on this planet or actually just like what's going on in our heads most certainly I mean, I know so many different unique people I'm so lucky that I've met so many unique people from talking on this podcast And then just through walks of life all that I know so many people who think so differently Yeah, and I know great athletes and great scientists and great comedians and great musicians and they're all different Yeah, they think different they just have a different way like some people will look at a problem and go Why is that what about this thing? Why doesn't that and then they're like how the fuck did you even see that like what? Why did you look at it that way? Everyone has I mean it's based on your life experiences your genetics, but there's also I think everyone's interface is different. I think I don't know even what you see I assume I know this was my mind. I think about this all the time I have no idea what it looks like to anybody else Well, it makes sense to me that it has to be different. Yeah, because if it wasn't different Why would you like things? I don't like everybody would like the same thing. Yeah, the way the things too Yeah, food tastes yeah, like I have I have two children that have totally different Ability to absorb hot spicy food. Oh, yeah, my kids are like that too. So my youngest is like me my youngest I mean she might have a better version of it than me like that kid can eat anything Yeah, ghost peppers like she likes it hot and she loves like really That's a really hot time when she's a little kid like reapers like I get this This is hot sauce called senior lechuga. It's really good stuff. It's organic. I'm like really strong Hot like if you like it really spicy and I told them like this is pretty spicy. Kid dips are finger in it Sucks on it. She's like not that spicy. I'm like it's pretty damn spicy like you freak with the hell's wrong Kind of incredible and then the other one like a little bit of a jalapeno. She's Hacking coughing like she can't take it at all. Yeah, bizarre. Yeah, because they both came from the same parents But but so obviously things taste different to them. Yeah, totally different So whatever that is yeah, we're like some people love the taste of hot dogs Some people think they're disgusting and you know and they like whatever broccoli whatever it is like why what is it? What are you experiencing when you're eating this? I don't know. What are you experiencing when you're seeing it? I'm just guessing that you're seeing what I see. Yeah, it's a total guess. Yeah, and it's probably a bad guess as you're pointing out right Probably yeah, I mean it has to have some there has to be a bunch of other factors that we're not taking into consideration that are going on internally They're allowing this person to process this and a pleasing or an unpleasing man Yeah, like what it's going like and then the actual structure of the eye Right, we know some people's eyes aren't that good. Like why is that like what's going on in there? Like it stops working so good so you see things blurry and like our color blind is also interesting. Yeah Crazy, look at the world could all be color blind. Yeah, we'd be lost the idea that we're in this spectrum of how light interacts with objects and Incredible variety of different shades of things. Yeah And like people that have a major shift in that like I read this all over sex story Once about this person got hit in the head and then they could only see the world in black and white and like how existential that experience was Transitioning because like yeah, that's really depressing like you see a world of color than everything's black and white It's like you're living in a movie or something But like the story was about how they were an artist and like they came to understand the world quite differently And you can see a lot more shadow and light and Like you start paying attention to different detail But I mean it's just mind-blowing that that can happen. It's like the same brain. Yeah same brain And then we have to completely readjust your experience of reality because now you see the world differently I've ever seen we've got a concussion and lost a sense of smell. Oh really? Yeah for years That's probably pretty traumatic. Well a lot of people got it during COVID as well right? Yeah, that's right But he yeah, he got it through a concussion. Yeah way back Like at least 15 years ago and Lost a sense of smell. Yeah. That's crazy. I yeah, I like to you know when I started thinking about how people think differently I was like I think it was listening to a podcast running one day and it's like you know Like imagine an apple and now taste the apple and I was like I can imagine an apple I can see an apple my brain and I can bite in the apple, but I cannot taste it I cannot imagine tasting food and and this was really perplexing to me because like I never thought about the fact that like Inside my head. I don't have taste. I only have taste when I'm eating food. I can definitely taste things But but it just it's like you know like it's a like a weird thing about my brain But like I don't know how common that is But I think like everybody has things like that and if they if like we just do You know experiments with their own minds is kind of interesting to probe the boundary of like things you take for granted that you think you can do Or you can visualize and you just can't it's just not in your head well the sense of smell we take for granted Because everybody has it yeah, obviously this is an evolution advantage in terms of food being rotten right a bunch of different factors gases that are poisonous But it's invisible Yeah, and we know if your friend could still imagine smell or did they lose the ability to even like recall what smells? I was about two many years. I don't even know if you got a smell back. Yeah I just got used to fighting the UFC And he got knocked out once and lost his sense of smell. Wow. Yeah crazy crazy. Yeah No good not good. Yeah, but but the idea is that sense of smell we all just take for granted We have it. We oh my god. You smell that apple pie. Oh It's coming. It's coming. Who is this? I didn't you know you smell it you're walking the house someone's cooking bacon that we take that for granted but that is an invisible thing and Who knows how many other things there are like that that we don't have like we we don't have the ability to detect Nutrinos, you know imagine if we could feel all the neutrinos passing through us at any given moment I'm like to visualize it as you're saying that I'm like there's Literally going through the entire earth they're flying through the earth right now But we don't have the ability to detect that but why not right? I mean that's a thing That's real that we don't have the the tools for yeah, but we do have the tools for smells So we have the tools to detect gases, but we don't have the tools to detect Other things that we know are real right? Well our sensory perception only like that evolved Biologically only took us so far But like obviously like we're sitting here talking about neutrinos because we have built Technologies that can detect their existence and validate that they're there and then we have theories that we'd be consistent with what You're just saying yeah, so the the ways that we see the world I guess my point is is are not just the biological ones But they're becoming enhanced by technology in all sorts of ways and theories and explanations are part of that Technological infrastructure which is why we can talk about that our gravitational waves for example is another one Yes, go on through us right now. It's right. We can't detect them. Yeah We could feel the effects of gravity itself Yeah, you know, but we also know that that's entirely based on mass right So we also know that the gravity like the more weight you have on you the harder it is for you to get around because you're being pulled That's right. Which is bizarre. Yeah, and you can use that to your advantage by rocking You know you can get in better shape by putting a heavy backpack on going up a hill So you change your physical structure by adding weight. Yeah Yeah, you know, and that's what we're lifting instead of you're changing your physical structure and your ability to move through space and time by resisting constantly so developing these biological tools to get past gravity. Well, I think I think it's amazing how much of like the physical world You can get a sense of by simple things like that. Yeah Like we really do live in a physical reality like I know some people want to think we live in a simulation But like there's a real physical world And I think we only kind of misconceived of it as a simulation because like so much of our environment now is architected by human minds that It seems not real, but it is real So you don't subscribe to the possibility of simulation theater No, I find it inadequate For a number. It like it doesn't seem like it's a better explanation than any other current explanation for how the universe works So you know, I put the simulation argument intelligent design and even sort of It doesn't seem like it's a better explanation than any other current explanation for how the universe works. So, you know, I put the simulation argument, intelligent design, and even sort of the current laws of physics, I'm kind of equal footing as far as their ability to explain why the universe exists the way it does, because what all three theories do is they basically push explanation to the boundary. And in physics we do that by saying there was an initial state of the universe that was low entropy, and the laws of physics have described what it's done ever since, but you can't explain where the universe came from. And in this, you know, intelligent design, it's like, you know, the universe is designed by some being, but like where did that thing come from? And in the simulation argument, it's just the great programmer and the sky made us. And I think, you know, the nuance there is like, if any entities like us could evolve that could build simulations, then it's far more likely that we live in a simulation. But I think you still have to assume a physical reality that evolves the capability of building simulations. Yes. So it seems all very circular to me. Yes. Yeah. And not explanatory. Yeah, I just, I don't understand why people were so confident in stating that like Elon said the chances of it not being of simulation are in the billions. Yeah. One in billions that we are not in a simulation, but he's also crazy. Why is it easy to throw numbers out there though? Like, and have them be founded in anything. There has to have been a thing before the simulation existed. Yeah. For that thing to create the simulation. Well, simulation to emerge. It's super interesting also to me that a lot of the people that are proponents of simulation argument tend to be in like the tech world. And so like, I think it's in their favor to think that like, you know, like it's great to think that computers are like gods and like, you know, like and to build this kind of mysticism around these technologies. But like if you really want an explanation for what simulations are, there has to be a continuity between the physical world and the simulation. And they like you have to be able to explain how it is that computation emerged on a planet. And simulations became possible on our planet. And like they, they emerged out of something. Right. So I think I'm much more interested in like what is the, what is the unification of the virtual and the physical and like how can you think about them as similar kinds of systems than to just the universes of simulation. And therefore, I'll tell why the universe exists. Right. It doesn't give you anywhere. It doesn't. And also, well, I always think about the universe itself. We always want to look at a birth of a universe in the end of the universe. And I always say, I wonder if we do that because of our own biological limitations. If we think that a thing had to emerge because we emerged. But why does it have to have emerged? Yeah. It exists. Right. And so it always exists. And yeah. But then that's a huge problem. Yeah. Like how do you have everything exist forever is part of the problem. So, but what could possibly exist to make everything exist? Yeah. Which is the other one. Yeah. The primal over. Well, not only that, but the craziest theory of all is the primary theory of the creation of the universe itself. Yeah. Which is the absolute nuttiest theory of this ever existed. Yeah. Everything that exists came out of something so small, than the head of a pen. Yeah. And then in one massive moment it creates the universe itself. Yeah. And that's one that universally is created upon. Yeah. And it seems to be a signature of it. Yeah. So you can study it. Yeah. There's no problem with crazy ideas. By the way, I love crazy ideas. The craziest. Yeah. But that's the craziest. Yeah. But even go back to the simulation. But yeah. The big thing is, I mean, but I think when you're trying to understand how reality works, it should surprise you. Yeah. And it should have counterintuitive properties. I mean, I think that's how we really know we're learning things. So, and I don't. And I'm also of the perspective that I think any theory can be replaced by a better one. Any explanation is not an ultimate explanation. Right. So we're constantly learning more and we're constantly refining our ideas. So. Is that a problem in science in that, doing people of espoused a very particular idea of how the world works. They have a hard time backing off of that. And they talk. Collectively, yes. I think scientists have a hard time doing that. And so, you know, I confront this a lot in my work because the kind of ideas we're proposing are new. And they say very different things than, you know, sort of the standard canon would say. Or like we make, you know, like we're seeing structure that isn't part of the way that people talk scientifically about the nature of life. Or like it's fundamental properties. And what I see is a lot of resistance to new ideas because people think things are already explained. And so this is really funny for me of the original life. It's like, it's like we already have an evolutionary theory. Like the original life is solved. And it's like, have you been to a meeting on the original life? It's like, that problem is not solved. I'm sorry. But so many people think it is. They just think like it's easy. It's been done. You'll get like really prominent, you know, physicist tubing. Like, oh, you get the first replicator on the planet and then you get life. And the real hard problems are like, you know, the long term future of the universe and things. We're just, we're reasoning based on assuming absolute knowledge sometimes when we don't have absolute knowledge. Do you think that some of that, some of that sort of trying to define things in a definite way that we do know it. We understand it is in response to some religious ideas about the creation of life and that they propose that these scientific rules have been solved. Because if you leave them open, that kind of opens the door to the possibility of a creator or a intelligent design. And they want, they want to kind of rush to say no we figured it out. That's what I've been told by, like, I mean, because we have a lot of, you know, there have been a lot of reactions to the work that we've been doing, both positive and like, you know, interacting with people's dogmas in certain ways. So they're like very reactionary. And then some people that are much more thoughtful and critical. And then some people that are very not thoughtful but very critical. And so you get like the whole spectrum and I guess if you do any kind of high profile science, you're going to get everything thrown at you. And part of the reason that I want the ideas out there is because I want that critical feedback. So that's fine. If it's intelligent feedback that's amazing. But I think the thing that I've noticed is that the way that different communities interact with the ideas are totally different. So it's like, you know, the evolutionary biologists, you know, where some of them, not all of them, you can't make Blakeman statements about any group. You know, really don't understand what we're trying to do. And then, but the creationists don't either. And they don't want it either. So it's like you're in this weird space and they're dueling with each other because they think they have totally different explanations for things. So, but yeah, I, I, what I have been told that that field is particularly protective of its ideas because it's had to battle with intelligent design for so many decades and really stand its ground. So, the original life is like a really separate community from biology writ large. I mean, I was even told early in my career when I was a postdoc by a very prominent biologist that I shouldn't work on origins of life. And I want to understand what life is. I should just pick a standard biology problem. And I thought to myself, like, the one problem you want to pick is the one everyone can't answer because that's where you're the most progress. No, yeah. So it's just very funny to me that it's often, it's swept under the rug as solved or too hard to solve, both simultaneously at the same time. It sounds insane to me that someone would tell you not to look into the origin of life. Yeah. Because the idea that we have figured everything out about, even if we understand the processes involved, right? How often does this take place in the universe? Yeah. Like, what is this? What is it? Is there are there other ways to do it? Yeah. I mean, we don't have an idea what an alien is, right? Like, I mean, just that's just Slap you in the face. Like, the multitude of ways we talk about alien, we don't even like, we don't know what we mean when we say that. It brings me back to this concept of the muse. So my thought, I had this bizarre thought once that ideas are life forms. Oh, sure. I totally agree with that. Really. Yeah. So my thought is every physical object that human beings have ever created came out of an idea. Yes. So idea gets into prime-8 brain, prime-8 brain goes, oh, I think I'm going to make a canoe. Yeah. And then prime-8 brain figures are out a way to hollow out a tree and turn it into a canoe. And then prime-8 brain says, you know what? When I let go of this stick, if I pull it back, it goes forward, right? Yeah. If I let go of it, it springs. What if I could tie a string? And what if I could pull it further? And what if I could get a stick? I think I can get that stick to fly. Yeah. And so the human mind interacts with these ideas, the ideas manifest themselves in physical objects. Yes. And every physical object, including airplanes, spaceships, space stations, satellites, all of them come from ideas. I know. And then these ideas, much like human beings interact with other human beings, these ideas interact with other ideas. And they create more and more complex versions. Then you get quantum computers. Yeah. It's like one person's idea. No, these are things that happen over century. Yeah. Yeah. No, I totally agree with this. I actually make similar arguments in my book about rockets as a good example of this, right? Like they were imagined long before they became actual for the whole object. Another time that's invented, by the way. Yeah. Chinese were on to lots of stuff. Everything. Paper, alcohol, everything. Okay. The chemical clock, everything. Yeah. Yeah. So I think, yeah, I think this gets to the idea of like living objects being deep in time, because you like, and this, and I also think a lot about the nature of like abstract things versus physical things. So I think everything is physical. And when we think of ideas as being abstract, it's just because, you know, like they're not physical objects yet in the same way that we see these kind of physical objects. But they come to our mind in some weird way that doesn't seem like you. Like if I dig a hole, I know I dug that hole. Yeah. I know I stuck that shovel, I exerted effort, I put the doors and lifted the dirt out. I made the hole. So if someone says where that hole come from, I'm like, oh, I dug the hole. Yeah. It's simple. But if someone says where did you get the idea for a joke? Yeah. Oh, I don't know. It came to me one day. Yeah. I was just laughing with my friends and I thought popped in. It wasn't a calculated thing where I worked on it forever and ever. It's just it got entered into my mind, out of nowhere, and then it came out my mouth and everybody laughed and I'm not sure where it came from. Yeah. That's weird. It is totally weird. It's weird. Now imagine that someone figuring out an airplane. Like some Wilbur and Orville writer. Well, it did. But you're right. It's also distributed over many human minds. So it's not like a single mind architect or it's like the interaction of many minds and the physical world that generates these things. But I think that force whatever the idea is. I think of time. It's time. Literally. So in assembly theory, we think time is fundamental, but you might think of time as in terms of causation. And things like you that are, you know, take billions of years to, for the universe to generate have a lot of time embedded in you. And time is actually the creative mechanism that's expanding the space of possibilities and maybe the universe itself. But that's how I think about it. So you actually have an incredible amount of time and a small volume of space. That's what you are as an evolved object. At least that's sort of the current, my current thinking with this theory that we're developing and how we're time to test the transition to life. And so where are those things coming from? They're coming from the fact that you are an architecture that's deep in time and you have all of this internal space in you. That's temporal and size, not spatial and size that you can draw from to create things. And if you are reading people's work and interacting with people's research and you're learning things that people have discovered, you're essentially interacting with their time. Yes. You're looking at all their traces of time and you're doing it over time and that's becoming part of your architecture. Yeah. And time and all of that structure is still in you. And the more time you spend on it, the more you'll absorb that. Yeah. You'll absorb more and more and more of it. And the more people's thoughts and more people's work you take in, you're taking all of their time. Yes. And you're putting it all into your head. We're just like bundles. I think about time and information kind of being the same thing, but we're just all of that that causation bundled up and like these small. We look small, but we're not small. Yeah. So sometimes I have this visualization of earth as like the largest thing in the universe that we know of, which is in terms of possibility space or how much time is embedded in the current structure of the earth. So if you could like, if you could do a zoom out of like the entire universe, you know, and you could look at like space, you know, assuming there's no aliens out there and you look at earth. You know, like earth is giant as far as like the amount of stuff that can be made here and how much history is embodied in every object. Like it's just this huge causal structure in this like, and I think I think we're representations of that physics and that's one of the reasons that we have this kind of perplexing feature of like these things seem abstract. Well, they're not they're not abstract. Like they don't they don't look like they're in physical space like knock on one on the table, but the table is like an object that has like four billion years of history in it. So it's like the physicality of the table is mostly in time, not space. And that's true. I think for us is living things. It makes sense. And it also if you could go to the original collision over like earth one. Yeah. When earth one creates the moon and just imagine being able to. So fabulous. We have a giant moon. So crazy. It's the only thing that keeps our atmosphere. That's the only reason why we're here. In this form. Yeah. Table temperature. It's a chance event. And it's so big. Yeah. It's one quarter the size of us. I know. And it looks nice on watches. It's beautiful. And then this guy and it makes a, you know, a summer night looking for a look at the moon. I know. And we get eclipses. Yeah. So much of human history is dictated by the moon. It's amazing. Anyway, sorry. It is. No, it's incredible. But that this whole thing, if you could watch it take place, I wonder if I've all often thought like there's so many mysteries of history. But I'm almost wondered that if calculations get to a point, if computers get to a point where they could examine all of the objects in all the places that they are currently in the world and all the force that would cause them to exist and all the history that cause them to exist, you could accurately go back and see exactly what happened every step of the way. Yeah. I think it might be possible. It's an interesting kind of thought experiment about like whether the universe is deterministic and fully predictable. And I think in the past, like one of the reasons that we think the laws of physics are deterministic is because in the past you can determine things, but I think the future is on determinant until it happens. Probably. Yeah. So it might be possible, but I don't know how much you can reconstruct because things die out like extinction of entire lines of life or like things disappear like they don't exist anymore. And so I think that you can reconstruct the past, but I don't believe personally in an exact history for the universe. Well, if we can reconstruct the past based on our current understanding, which is fairly limited and much greater than it used to be three or four hundred years ago, if we could expand that knowledge for the next thousand five hundred thousand years ago, whatever it is from now into the future to develop some sort of a computation system, some sort of an ability to have an accurate assessment of everything that took place and then be able to lay it out how it took place because of all the objects and all the places. Yeah. All the species that died off and all the records when they do core samples and they understand the iridium content, which meant asteroids impacted here and carbon, which is some sort of a fire here and just calculated out when you get some accurate. I think it's principle. It like in principle, it makes sense, but I think in practice, I'm not even sure that's physically possible because as you're like trying to come to everything that the universe has done, you also have to like make sure that that physical thing actually can calculate itself and continue to exist. So if you're like, it's not, it's an interesting thought experiment about like how much of the universe can be computed, but you have to deal with resource bounds. And so like you have to deal with an actual physical implementation of that computer and that computer has to be able to persist the long enough to do the calculations and have enough energy to do it, which means there has to be things external to the computer. So you can't use all the resources available just for the computer like the computer. You actually have to keep the whole thing running. So I don't think that you actually can know the past with with exactly I was going to say infinite revolution, but I don't believe in infinity is anyway, but like really precise resolution that you could you could reconstruct everything that has happened in the history of the universe. I think our universe forgets things and I think it does so on purpose because that's part of them not purpose, but like not in an anthropocentric way, but it does so because the the act of forgetting things is actually in part how the universe generates novelty. If it remembered everything in the past and only those things persisted like we live in an incredibly boring universe, we live in a universe that's constantly creating things and sometimes it it. You know, like some of those things can't be generated anymore, but it makes more space for other things to be created. You don't believe in infinity. I don't interest. I mean, as a as a mathematical construct sure, but as a real physical thing now, but I have a really different view of mathematics and most people, like I think mathematics is a physical system that exists on our planet and I don't believe in like a Euclidean world that's like a perfect mathematical forms. I think there are a thing that our biosphere has invented and one of the reasons that we think mathematics is universal is because it's a language that we understand that actually, you know, like is information that's embedded in pretty much every object in our environment, but it doesn't mean that it's like it has universal reach. Yeah, there's problems with mathematics too, right? Eric Weinstein is a mathematician. I know, I know. I think the number two is a bunch of different things that are bizarre with math. So it almost hints to an incomplete understanding of mathematics even as we currently know it. Right. Well, there's there's always that. I mean, you know, it always perplexes me that, you know, people accepted Euclidean geometry is the only form of geometry for like 2000 years. I mean, it's like like literally like that was it. And then we were like, oh, well, there could be non Euclidean geometries and we just never imagined them because like they don't reflect our physical environment. I mean, that's crazy. So that's like that's saying that there's mathematics. We don't understand. But then there's a question about whether there's a deeper structure that's not even mathematical that math might be derived from like is there a language deeper than math? Look at that being. Don't know. I mean, I have. I think that a lot. I'm sure you tell. Well, I mean, kind of rhetorical question. Yeah, I know. It's okay. Well, I worry about this a lot with like the nature of the relationship between the theory of computation and assembly theory, for example. So computation is, you know, a way that we kind of understand the formalization of mathematical things that we actually can, you know, algorithmically do. Right. So anything that you can calculate, you can compute. And so there are obviously like, uncomfortable numbers and things like that, but they live in some abstract, you know, like, but anyway, so assembly theory has some some features that look like theories of complexity and computation in that, you know, like people talk about a minimal complexity for a computer program as being the way that you talk about complexity. And we talk about a minimal causal history to construct an object. But I think what assembly theory is that is a bit different and super interesting is it's NP like it's actually hard to compute the assembly index. It's harder than classes of computational algorithms that are kind of similar to it, but the universe generates these molecules that are computationally incredibly complex, but causally the universe can generate them. And so like you couldn't compute necessarily like on a super computer, like, you know, the complexity of a cell, like you're saying, like, could I reconstruct the whole history yet the universe can generate that structure. Right. So it suggests to me that there's something else going on in the spaces actually a lot larger than what you can computationally compress. So what else could be going on? I think that I the best language I have for it right now, and I really don't know, like I'm really struggling with this in my work right now. And Lee and I are going back and forth about these things all the time, but is causation. And also that the the other part about like why the universe is maybe not computable is this mechanism of novelty generation. Like there are there are some the universe, if the universe genuinely creates novelty that can't be predicted on prior history. And like the future really is not determined. That's just suggesting something fundamentally different than the way that we understand the way the world works right now. And I don't know what it is, but I think I think it has to do with something with causation and something about the physicality of objects. Like objects really do exist. They really do encode their histories. And those histories are interacting all the time, which is making everything much more complicated. Like that that idea of these time threads interacting that you were talking about. And then there's a fundamental question of why. I think I mean when I think about like what life is like why does life exist? I think the universe is trying to maximize the number of things that exist. Because if you think like things exist or they don't. And you know like the universe is the constructor for things to get to exist. Like it's building all of existence is you know like what physically exists in our universe. You know what didn't it be great if like there was a principle of nature or it's just trying to pack as much existence in as possible. It makes sense also if physical things, these human beings create and life creates physical things. That would be the best way to maximize it because this being. Which is also why I think we have free will. Because if we act independently we're actually more creative than if we didn't. Do you ever butt heads with determinism people? I butt heads with everyone. Nothing wrong with that. No, that's what it's all about right? I fundamentally love disagreeing with smart people. And so I think and I try to surround myself with colleagues that share that mentality. So I think. It's the best mentality. Yeah and I think being around people that challenge you is so critical. And like you disagree with them on fundamental things. That's okay. Like I you know I have like some of my closest friends boil my blood on some things. But like you have to respect that they're thinking smart people and like yeah. Yeah so I always put myself in their head. Yeah. I think we have a huge problem as human beings is we attach ideas to our self. And so we defend these ideas as if we're defending our very. Yes. Yes. I know I think I think we do have a tendency to do that. I've developed that through having so many conversations with people that I don't see eye to eye with on the podcast. Instead of arguing with them I try to ask them how they think. Why they think the way they think. Yes. What is it challenge a little bit just to try to get a response out of them and try to figure out like what is your process and why is it so different than mine. Well it's good for you too because you grow more and you understand more by doing that. Do you understand over the last 15 years it's been like the most radical unexpected education that I could have ever had. That's amazing. I'm a different human. Yeah. Like completely different human than I was 15 years ago. Yeah. Yeah I think that is something that's really hard is like if you close yourself to ideas that you don't agree with you're closing off. Like yourself to put potential to grow. Yes. And understand the world better. And I think unquestionably. Yeah. Unquestionably. And these ideas that the problem when we start defending them is like then we stop looking at them. Yeah. We start like like we put them as like a protected thing that we're trying to argue against and we're trying to instead of invite criticism and some sort of an analysis of our thought process. We're trying to defend them. No so I'm happy like professionally also to change my mind all the time. So I like I was a determinist. I'm not a determinist anymore right now. When did that change? I think that probably changed in the last few years. And it's mostly because of the structure of what I understand of like what we're doing with assembly theory. So like assembly theory is like still very much in development and we're still really trying to work on the ideas. But I always had these ideas about the origin of life having something to do with information playing a causal role in the structure of reality and information like an abstract thing. Like how can you think mathematical structures can influence physical world. But like you just gave great examples of things that were once ideas that became physical. And I think about like Newton's law of gravitation is a law of nature. It describes something about the objective world. But the law itself is also an object that exists in our biosphere that's generating structure like allowing us to launch satellites in the space. that wouldn't be possible without that mathematical form existing on our planet as a description of reality. So that's an object. And so these kind of things are always really perplexing to me. And so I started working with Leana assembly theory and like these very radical and very thought provoking and always pushing. And he was really on this idea of the universe not being deterministic and getting larger in time. And like part of that was not like it was he's like he's like I'm a chemist I burned shit. I see this in the lab. The second law is not like the right description of like what's going on here. But there is some underlying under-terminism and novelty mechanism in chemistry that life seems to be like really manifesting. And so what is free will then? For me so what happened was when I started working on assembly theory I started to see that there was a really different structure especially associated with the way information gets embodied in physical objects and the history being physical in the objects. And free will becomes this idea that like you know you can't you actually can't you know in standard physics you would say like an emergent thing like us can be reduced to our atoms and all of the fundamental description is down there. But what you've done is stripped that physical system of all the time inside of it. Right so elementary particles they don't require memory for the universe to generate them. They just they're spontaneous the universe that has them for free but things like us require memory and things that know how to build things like us in order for us to exist. And then once we exist we're encoding all of that history and information in us as objects all of that causation is in us which means that all of the selection over all the histories to generate us is still part of us. And allows us to actually work in this common tutorial space that we can actually generate new structures and that that that is actually like where free will comes from. It's not that like it's basically if you if you assume you can't reduce things to elementary particles all the time and you actually have time and objects things become causal agents actually have some navigability over the common tutorial space of the possibilities they live in that they have some control over. And that's what I think free will is you don't have control over everything so it's not like free will is not all free or all determinism and I think Dan Dennett was really brilliant on this point like he talked about free will inflation which I thought was a historic a hysterical concept is like really funny. But it's like either people think the universe is random and you absolutely have free will and control over everything I think it's fully deterministic and you have no freedom. But actually what it is is determinism is built over lineages because things get selected to exist and they become part of the regular structure of our universe so determinism itself is an emergent property and things that are very deterministic like us actually have more causal control over the kind of things that can happen to them but they can't control everything so we have limited free will like I couldn't be home in Arizona this exact second but I can be there later today because I plan to head for it like that's where your free will execute over time. So this concept of determinism is just to it's too simplistic. Yeah. I mean to think that the universe is all like one human concept anyway is too simplistic it's like it's deterministic or it's not deterministic actually you know there are cases where you can model it as being deterministic because you're looking at the past and there are places you cannot model it as being deterministic because you're looking at the future. Right. Right. So that's a pretty simple concept and very evident when you're looking at living things like no one can predict the future technologies like are the future of the biosphere. Right. Some of the information's there like we were talking about before like maids will probably still be present 50 years from now so like I might be able to predict some things about the future but the novelty is really hard. The problem I've always had with determinism is that people seem too sure of it. Yes. And I think how can you be sure when you know for a fact in your own mind you make decisions. Yeah. And you think that these decisions are made entirely based on your life experiences your education your biology, Rod or Yada, but maybe not maybe not because there's things going on that are weird there's moments there's inspiration. Yeah. There's a lot of stuff happening. Intuition is a big thing. Yeah. I always find that very missing. Like I live my whole life on instincts. Yeah. Like I do things that a lot of people go why are you doing that? I'm like, I feel like that's what I do. Yeah. And I feel like that's what I do. I think it feels like a thing to do and that seems to be for lack of a better term free will. You know, discipline itself for lack of a term better term is free will. Yeah. What is it about the idea of being rewarded by doing something difficult that you don't want to do but you force yourself to do it. If that is not free will, what is? Yeah. It seems like nothing can make you get up and go for a run if you don't want to go for a run. Yeah. But you decide to do it which is the embodiment of free will. Right. Does free will manifest it in a physical direction? I 100% agree. Action. Yeah. I think the issue about why people you know like really want to say free will doesn't exist is because it's not compatible with standard like theories and physics. And therefore, you know, we know how our universe works. You can't have free will. really want to say free will doesn't exist is because it's not compatible with standard like theories and physics and therefore you know we know how our universe works you can't have free will but our standard theories and physics can't explain life they can't explain mind and free will lives in the space of whatever physics describes life and mind it doesn't live in the physics of gravitation are the physics of quantum particles like those are those are totally different areas of physical reality that have nothing to do with you as an evolved structure over four billion years that now has agency in the universe like you're a different component of physical reality than those theories are describing and and I think you know we have a tendency to think physics is complete we have done this throughout like the history of physics it's like every century they think the last century did it like we understand reality now it's like every century has a new description I like I would never forget like I like bouncing between my classes as an undergrad physics student and how many times I was told like I should you know it's like it's really comical at the end of the 1800s they thought physics was complete and like then there was general relativity in quantum mechanics this is so funny but it's like I go in a physics department and we're talking about this and I like we don't need new physics for life like physics is already done like we have the standard model and I'm just like are you not like understanding the dichotomy here between what we teach like students and like how we talk about where we are now in history it's like crazy yeah totally crazy it is crazy that we repeat is repeat these problems yeah repeat these issues over and over and over again and we were all back then they were stupid like yeah don't you think in the future if you can just look at the history of human beings what they believed and don't you think there's gotta be some stuff like that right now yeah there has to be there has to be no way we figured it out no no I definitely I definitely think fundamental physics has a very bright future of like having some really fundamentally like earth shattering like ways of thinking about things that I don't even think like our current theories are like that like they're they're gonna be replaced by things even more awesome and I'm really excited about that I mean that's like why you want to do like physics right like you don't want to work on the theories of like you know the guys that were around 100 years ago like why don't you work on the new ideas that describe the reality is like you're coming to understand it now in history yeah so it's funny that people want to just accept what previous generations taught them is like absolute fact and then not be confronted with like the changing times the changing understanding of the world around the world. around as the changing sets of observations because I can imagine you know it many thousands of years ago when humans were you know still like you know being hunter gatherers not really thinking we have a lot of college in the world like you see the seasons you have no control over them and like you know and so obviously like we're born out of this idea that the you know the universe is objective and existing. outside of us because of a deep history of not having control but like now in a modern technological society we see how much of reality we've shaped and changed like I don't know how you could hold that view anymore. like it's it's it's very deep in our history that like we think these things but like the evidence around us right now is completely to the contrary. and it also seems like an emergent property of human beings. yes humans in particular I think animals do to an extent but I think our ability to abstract and our ability to build technologies based on our abstractions and like what we're doing now is fundamentally different than anything that our bias here has done over the last four billion years. I think we're pretty special and I have no problem saying that like I think we're the most interesting thing in the universe. yeah I think so well at the known universe. no universe yeah I think it's quite possible that's a little bit more interesting than us. yeah I'm sure there is but I don't think that we're ever going to recognize what that thing is until we actually really appreciate what we are. mmm that's your thing. you glossed over this but I want to get back to it. sure. why don't you believe in infinity? oh so I just I think it's not possible for like like I guess people want to say the universe is infinite in size and I don't know what that means. I think it's just as a placeholder of like we don't understand. so infinity helps in like certain in certain theories of physics like to actually make your mathematics tractable. but to say it's actually like a physical thing to me is it doesn't make any sense. and it doesn't make any sense because I think if you assume you know like there's an infinity of things that could exist. and that infinity of things exists somewhere right like so you have like you know max tag marks mathematical universe hypothesis all mathematical objects exist somewhere and obviously there's like an infinite number of them. it doesn't actually explain anything about here. or like why do we have the things that we have in this universe and I think it's I think what infinity is is it's a feature of humans imagination to define the space of what's possible. and it physically exists as the boundary of that space but it doesn't physically exist out there as a real physical thing. like there is no infinite space there is no infinite possibilities of a multiverse those are abstractions that exist in human minds that allow us to think about how the world works and reason in what we can actually construct here as far as theories we understand or things we can build. but the concept of infinity if there is no if the universe is not infinite the universe has a defined boundary so what's beyond that boundary. I don't know that's weird right yes. yeah seems like maybe that's what infinity is yeah but yeah so I think we could be saying this like I think I think about it sort of like. there's a boundary that is like the physical size of the universe and the physical stuff in the universe. and then there's another boundary which is part of that physical boundary but it's like the things that we can imagine. and the things we can imagine at least can possibly be physically real and then there's another boundary we can't even imagine I don't even know if there's stuff out there. that's like beyond that and like you can't even talk about it because you can't even imagine what it is. right there's one of the most perplexing theories that I've ever heard was the concept of the in the center of every galaxy there's a super mass black hole and that going through that super massive black hole you will go into another universe. yeah yeah these are kind of interesting and fun and kind of yeah but like very fun. yeah no I mean it well there's a lot of theories about like the multiverse and I think they're intellectually interesting. and they bring interesting philosophy into physics but I don't know that I can assign physical realism to anything that we can't observe directly. and I would rather take the mathematics and the theories of physics themselves. like I do these thought experiments about the theoretical physics of theoretical physicists. it's like if I were outside of myself and I was watching what I was as the theoretical physicist writing down equations and trying to describe the world. those mathematical objects look like as physical things. and so this to me is the perspective that I find much more productive because I don't think people have looked at that through that lens at what mathematics is. like we tend to take the Euclidean you know and like the you know Plato's cave type paradigm from the ancient Greeks that like there's a perfect world of forms and like you know we're just seeing the shadows of like this perfect reality and I think I think the universe is constructing itself. and mathematics is a particular thing our universe has constructed that enables things to be possible that wouldn't be possible without mathematics existing. the people that are proponents of this concept of infinity and that do believe it when you steal man that what's the best argument for it. well I think the idea it's kind of like what you're saying like if you take the limit like there you know they it actually is consistent with our equations to assume that you know like the universe could be infinite or the time in the future. could be infinite and it to them I think it seems like it has some physicality to it. but I don't but I always it always seems to me to be a placeholder of like the boundary. and so but also like you know it depends on what you think is satisfactory so if you want to believe a multi-verse hypothesis. and there's sort of an infinite number of realities because you find that more explain it like explanatory to assume that everything exists. and therefore like we're just one thing in that space you know some people find that satisfactory I don't find that satisfactory because it doesn't explain why we exist. and I I just I want to explain us I want to know what we are. yeah but it's it's hard to do questions around infinity and mathematics just generally. and I find it really fun to think about. the multi-verse to me is the most bizarre mind experiment because there's no evidence. that it exists but it's a concept that's universally sort of shared a lot and it's debated a lot. and it's you know some people you know they'll pontificate on it but you might be thinking about nonsense. right so I think you know another reason I don't I don't really think infinity is like a real construct is I really am a big fan of Nick Giz and he's a physicist. that's kind of arguing that real numbers aren't real. and what he means by that is like if you want to compute a real number and like you know we use real numbers like you know like they require infinite precision to. to compute all the digits and you know you're assuming a lot of resource. for a universe built on real numbers because basically it means anything that you look at you can look at with infinite resolution. and it's probably the case especially if you think the universe is constructed or even if you believe in a simulation argument that there has to be a granularity there. because the universe has to do these things in finite time with finite resource. there is an evidence that there's infinite time or infinite resource in our universe. and therefore like if you want something to actually be physically real the universe has to be able to implement it. the universe cannot implement infinity in finite time. it just can't do it. right finite time. yeah and I think time is finite I think time is a resource and I think time is is you know part of the mechanism that the universe is actually constructing. itself the universe is constructing itself for a moment to moment. and you know and we persist over a certain set of moments but yeah this is the way I said I'm a present. and I don't even know if I agree with myself on this like I disagree with myself on a lot of things. and I might change my mind tomorrow but it's like the idea only the present exists. so the past is rolled up in the present like I think that there there it like the past structure exists in the present. and the present is now constructing the next moment right and so but the space like the future is expanding. it's getting larger and larger and larger because there's so much combinatorial structure like all these past histories. now entwined in the modern structure that they can now intertwine to make the future bigger and bigger. and this is from our current observable position. yes and then you go which is the only one we can talk about. right and then you expand down to the universe. yeah it's like what is going on. yeah so it's interesting to say that because you know most theories of physics are actually constructed with the observer living outside the universe. right so like new in-had this conception of you know like you could take a god's eye view literal god's eye view of the universe. and describe it objectively from the outside. and all of our theories of physics have this problem. this is why quantum mechanics is so existentially hard because it confronts us with the fact that like if you have a physics where the observer is not part of the physics. it leads to really like really big problems with how we structure theories of physics. and this is why there's no one quantum theory. there's a whole bunch of interpretations of quantum experiments. and people call those different theories of quantum mechanics. but there's no like accepted standard interpretation that like people would point to and say this is the theory of quantum mechanics. there's interpretations and I think that's they're great you know there's there's great theories. it's great like amazing insightful stuff but it's not quite on the same footing as like general relativity. which is like a widely accepted theory that it describes a set of observations. but it's because quantum mechanics has observers and people don't know how to interpret the observer. and we don't have a physics that was built from starting from observers like us. things like us that are constructing theories of physics. how do we think about the world and put us inside the world. and I think a theory of life has to have that property. it has to account for the fact that we live inside the universe. we cannot escape the universe. like where is going to be physically stuck here. this is it. this is all we got. yeah. and like describe why like what is the observational horizon we interact with. and how did we get structured out of that space. like why do we exist the way we do within that space. why do we? I don't know but I mean I like the why questions. I was also told by like a really prominent senior physicist not to ask why. and I was like why should we not ask why? like you should really gee should ask the why questions are good questions. isn't it interesting that some people that are at the top of their field still have a question. do you feel still have these bizarre ideas that you just completely disagree with? yeah do I find that bizarre no I've had that since I you know it's very funny. because I think sometimes people are like oh Sarah you're really successful in your career. now you can see these things and I'm like I think I'm like I've been saying these things. I was like I don't know at forever. like I haven't changed my personality hasn't changed. I just like I'm deeply curious and I want to understand things. and I think you know you you have to be able to follow what you rationally thinking. with the evidence is telling you in the questions you think are interesting to answer. and I think the thing I guess I've I've done is like the questions I want to answer. are not ones that people have really taken as seriously as I've taken them. because of the reasons that they think they're not answerable or they're already answered. and I just see this gaping hole in our understanding of reality that needs to be filled. well listen Sarah I'm glad you're out there. really this is a really fun conversation. I really appreciate it. tell everybody how they can see some of your words. sure yeah I have a book out it actually is out today. called life as no one knows it the physics of life some mergens. where I talk about assembly theory and you know like what's needed to solve the physics of life. and also really trying to motivate this experimental program that Lee is spearheading. because I'm such a fan of it to try to find aliens in the lab. so basically like the idea here is we just want to get people excited about these problems. and thinking about them more deeply agreeing or better yet like having lots of debate. and discussion about like the nature of life and how we think about it. and whether we can start an experimental program to really validate the idea. so that's that and I narrated the audiobook fantastic which is fun that makes me happy. yeah it was kind of funny I was really like shy about doing it. and people like criticize my voice I'm like all the YouTube channels and stuff. and I was like you know what I'm going to do it. listen stop reading the comments. thank you but anyway it's really fun and it was deeply personal so that was cool. and I'm on Twitter X thing and Instagram. who are you on how do someone find you? Sarah Amari there you can find me that way. Instagram as well. Alien matter. Alien matter. okay I don't use that one as much but it's fun. okay yeah anyway thank you very much I really appreciate it was a lot fun. it was fun thank you thank you bye everybody.