Joe Rogan, the Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night all day! Jeremy, tell your friend, which part? How I got back into UFOs? So your fault, who wasn't for that awesome documentary on bubble czar. You got me, buddy. I want to weaponize your curiosity joke, yep. Dave Foley got you back. No, he didn't. No, no, Dave Foley, I was excited to hear that he had become obsessed with UFOs, but he didn't really get me back in. It was the documentary. The documentary is so compelling. It's really good. And folks, you haven't seen it, it's called Area 51 and Fuh, Bob Lazar, Area 51 and Flying Sossers. It's really good. Thanks, man. The documentary for me was the reason why I started making films. I picked up a camera. I just wanted to know if the guy was telling the truth. I was not a filmmaker. I was highly unqualified, like a lot of things that I do in my life that I end up loving. So that movie, the story is what made me interested to. How'd you get make you work? Well, that's a fucking weird story. There's a tattoo shop called Mark Mahoney's Shamrock Social Club. Do you know about this? Yeah, I've heard of that, boys. Okay. So Mark's been a good friend of mine or I've been a friend of his since I was probably too young to be getting tattoos. And he let me come in and film for a couple years right before that movie. He doesn't let a lot of people in there to film. And Mickey came in one day and Mark's like, oh, Jeremy's film and you want to talk about UFOs and Mickey's looking at me like, what the fuck's this guy? Somehow he ends up taking this stiletto and trying to stick me in the ribs with it. Just kind of joking. But you got Mickey Roork with a stiletto just getting a tattoo kind of jabbing you with that kind of bonded us kind of. He thought I was trying to stab you. He was poking me. Yeah, he was poking me in the ribs. So that was my introduction to Mickey, but he's got this voice that's like a fucking Tibetan monk, you know, like gravelly. And I know because I had to take his audio and listen to it. And it's just, it's so bizarre. And I thought, who better to do this like controversial story than the controversial Mickey fucking Roork talking poetry, you know, through the films. He was kind of that voice of our curiosity in the film. So that's how I got him. But basically I just sent an offer and he never responded. So I went back to the tattoo shop randomly one day to see Mark in walks Mickey. And I made a joke. It was like, oh, you just like to poke me with a stiletto, but you don't take my movie offer seriously. And he goes, what offer? And I'm like, I want, I need a narrator. Like in the next seven days, I have to deliver the film. And he goes, I never got the offer. The next fucking day, he came in because I know Mark was telling him, oh, no, help the kid out, you know, he came in and he fucking recorded with me. He saved my ass, man. Otherwise they'd have to hear my voice in the movie because I didn't have anybody. Well, your voice had been fine, but it was going to have his voice. Thank you. I love that shit, man. People say it's not sounds like he's got marbles in it. But he's, I love it. That guy's lived a weird life, you know. Yeah. You know, he's, I think people like that sometimes are misunderstood. Like I've seen this like incredible side of him in that he's like a gentle person, you know? Hmm. Is he fascinated with UFOs? He told me his UFO experience and how do UFOs mean he did? He did and he let me record it with him. And I think like anybody he's interested in this topic. I think once you see something that you can't explain, it gets worse, you know, you get a little more frustrated about it. Mm-hmm. Because you know, you want to learn what did I just see? So I think he like most of us, you know, are interested in it. Yeah. Um, well, let's just get into it because there's been a lot going on lately. There's obviously there's been a shit ton of sightings and there's been a lot of discussion with high level people about what these things are and what they are. What is what's the latest and greatest in UFO information? Right. The world, in my opinion, has really changed since we started talking about this. So our history is, you know, you asked me to come in with Bob. We did that. Okay. The idea that there's craft that maybe our government has some and been reverse engineering and then came in with Freyver and we talked about his personal military encounter. And then our history goes to then George, George and Apis here who's like the godfather of the history of this. Bam. After that episode, man, things started really going crazy. And this is where our Senate and Senate Intelligence Committee and our Congress and our Senate was like, we want a preliminary report. We now know that there were these UFO programs all sappin' at it. We want a report and remember that was like pending that was looming a report's coming. So George and I made a little plan to poke the bear. You know, we're like, what can we put out that is like good solid evidence that shows we need to talk about this. So that's when we took the opportunity to make those drops, right? And those drops were nine pieces of visual evidence that were filmed by our military. So if people were watching along that time, you'd see that in a series of a month, I think, we released images from an FAA-18 out the window where they're saying they're seeing these things every day, photographs from an iPhone. I obtained and released video that was confirmed by the Pentagon in a rare move the next day on some of these drops that these are real unidentified that they're being studied and they were filmed by our military. They could have just denied it forever. So we like poked the bear. We drop them. Boom, boom, boom. Let's see. Let's see what the word. And how you drop them on Twitter, you drop them on Instagram, like you're doing it everywhere. How you know it? Just social media, just Instagram, Twitter, like that. I just, it democratizes this idea of information flow. I don't know everything that I'm putting out. I've vetted and verified it, but then to have the Pentagon come in and confirm that. Now they did that because I made sure they had it the day, few days before I dropped it. So it's like there was record that I provided it to them. So these people know you because of your documentary and because of your appearances on the podcast. And so these military guys with this information, they reach out to you. Yeah. So that's even before my first documentary, you know, I was talking with Freight, I got a tip. I had been on this beat. I've been trying to find out more. So people would start to come to me. And then after those relationships have obviously been public where people bring me stuff, it's happening more and more and a lot of more disinfo coming my way as well. People try to trick me all the time. Like what kind of stuff have you got? Just give me fake documents, give me fake photos, hope I run with a fake story. You know, you think it's just jerk offs, just like, I don't know why I said that word that word. Jerk offs. Jerk offs. Jerk offs. At a hard time with it. Do you think it's, do you everything the government has given you misinformation? I'm the least paranoid person that I know. I really? Yeah. I am literally, I always think everything's okay. My fucking dog can be dying. And I'm like, it's okay, baby, don't worry about it. Like I'm the least paranoid person. So other people say shit like that to me. To me, you just got to ask what was that want to confuse the topic. We do it to ourselves, you know, or people that just want attention or whatever reason or people, you know, it can be anonymous. Right. So you get this thing where it's like, maybe someone just wants me to make a mist. Everybody would love for me to be wrong or make a mist up and then they can discount everything else I've ever released. Has ever anything ever sent you something where you like on the fence about where you like, I don't know if this was legitimate? You know, I sit on stuff for years, vetting it and having other people that it, yeah, I've got tons of stuff video years really for years. George goes crazy as a newsman, as a newsman, you want to put it out right now. Right. But I like to see where the person's coming from. I like to get to know them. You know, so I like to see what their motivation is, whether the information is true or not. I don't want to be used. Yeah. So just to bring you kind of back up to date with, you know, we kind of went through the history of how we're talking about this and and you're, thank you for giving attention to this topic. And more and more people are coming. So my deltaus pleasure. Oh, I think mine too. You know, this is not all that I do in life. I know. I love it. I know. So then, you know, big things have happened. So when George and I poked the fucking bear and we put out this footage and it was vetted. I vetted it right now. What it shows that's up to other experts. I reported what I what I was exposed to in classified briefings that I shouldn't have seen. And what I released is completely legal for me to release. It was unclassified. But it was contained in a classified briefing. Now, if somebody sends me shit, you know, I opened my email, what I can't we should probably tell people like what some of these videos are. One of them was those classic, those bizarre pyramid shaped video video, yeah, by angle of observation and in the classified section, it goes into depth. They were pyramids. There's a lot of argument about that publicly. Like does it show an optical effect where it's not what it appears. That's not a different thing. The pyramid ones were the ones that in the lower, if you see that lower, lower column, I'm getting it below there to the left, the green right there. That's it. So that's the ones that they were seeing. Well, there's good video and we should go through the pieces of footage. But the one on the left is what they're seeing every damn day on the East Coast. That one would be considered one that has a payload or could have a payload. So most are spears like with cubes in them. That is the strangeness of it. Most of them are cubes surrounded by a translucent sphere. I've heard of pyramid. Most of them, most of them that are on the East Coast right now with increased frequency and also over war zones. So right now, people got so fucking crazy when I said this and I know we're jumping around. But over active war zones right now, there is such an increased frequency of what they call UAP or UFO that they have these rules, whether or not they fire upon them. And people got so mad at me for saying publicly on the news that we do fire at UAP. UFOs because we fucking do. But why we do is not what people think. So when you have an active war zone, specifically the area of the world that I'm talking about in the Middle East, anything within 27 to 30 miles of ground trips gets fired upon. That's it. But I was exposed to documents that tell me a little bit more precisely how you choose what to fire upon. And what you fire upon is anything that appears that it could have a payload. Yeah, because it would be a threat. What do they do with like the cubes surrounded by these spheres? Fuckin' nothing because they don't look like they have a payload. So they disregard. They're not part of the mission. So my point in saying that kind of on the news, I don't need to prove to anybody it's true. I am, I speak with people that are there right now. It is true. And there's been such an increased frequency since 2021 that it has been pushed up to kind of like critical where they're like, okay, these things are in our airspace. We could have collisions. But more importantly, like we see other countries firing on these Russia, Syria. We know it's not their assets. So the question is, who's already? So when you say firing at these, so hellfire missiles. So you have this thing and what shape are these ones that have payloads? Okay, well that's what's crazy. So I do, I have images of one that we fired on. And for a lot. Did you show us the image? I'll show you. I'll show you. Okay. Yeah. Shimmer, I know. I'll show you. I'll show you, but I think I can show publicly. I don't know. Is it coming from, because it comes from a document, I probably shouldn't have seen, but you know, people send things to me in ways that I can look at them. So anyway, let's talk about that later. So it looks like this looks like a fucking jellyfish man. A jellyfish. Yeah, I don't know. You know, it's stiff, but that, you know, about the size of like a big coffee table. That's the one at least that we've, that we fired on recently. Big coffee like this desk maybe. Yeah. A 10 to 12 feet. And then it looked domed. And then it has like, and they're not all like this, but this is the one we're talking about that I know was recently fired upon. What do they think it's made out of? See, that's the whole thing, man. The metallic. That, that's the whole thing. There's no retrieval program that's known in these war zones. So even if they did hit something, like first of all, would they be able to take it down whatever it is, right? Right. And by the way, we're eliminating that these are balloons, you know, drug smugglers who use balloons and shit like that. These are, these are objects that have controlled flight. So, you know, back in the day with the Foo Fighters, this is not a new phenomenon, right? Back in the day with the Foo Fighters. People need to understand that it's not just a band. The Foo Fighters. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, no, man. So World War II, you know, you had these both sides of the war, you know, all sides seeing these metallic spheres outpace in their planes. And they're like, Oh, fuck, they're up to something. They got some cool technology. The problem is we find out both sides think it's, you know, the other sides. Right. This has been happening for so long. I have an article that we can pull this up. I got an article from 1960 talks about a cube with the, with the, with the sphere around it of fighter pilot and military fighter pilot for four days they were getting these. It was in the Alamo Gordo news paper. So I'm just saying that this is not New Mexico. Yeah. Alamo Gordo. Yeah. And interesting area. Yeah. And so these Foo Fighters, yeah, these, uh, was, were both sides reporting the same like sort of formations and the same speed. We thought it was their technology. They thought it was ours. What's happening right now in the Middle East with the same thing. Yeah, because we're seeing Russians and Syrians fire on these and we're sometimes firing on them. But who's are they? When you say we're seeing, so is this like reports from soldiers that you're getting? Yeah. Like where are you getting this information? Okay. So people that work in these, um, people that work in collecting this data are a little bit frustrated. And why, you know, that's why I want to become unnecessary. Why did they come to me? Right? And I think they're frustrated that they don't, that they don't have a way to put it up through the chain of command. Then it gets lost in translation. Or they just were suppressed. They don't even spend, I don't even think it's in the fairies. They just don't spend the gas to go look at something that doesn't, it's not part of the mission. Right. There's no proactive UFO kind of like discovery process. It's all kind of reactive. That's one of the weirdest things about Commander David Frevers account is that when he was talking about being in radio communication with the Nimitz and they were saying we see these things every day. And he was like, what the fuck are you talking about? We can see this every day. You see these tick-tack shape things that shoot off faster than you can see. and that literally can go from above 50,000 feet above sea level. 80,000 feet above sea level to zero like that. So hypersonic velocity without signature, they call that. That means, who's the guy? No sonic boom. Right. That's the whole point. Moving faster than the speed of sound with no sonic boom. Nothing. Nothing. Nothing does that. No visible means of propulsion. You got it, man. So this is the mystery. This is the question. I don't care where UFOs are from. I don't care if it's extraterrestrial, if it's extraterrestrial. I'm going to go through so many ideas. What's extraterrestrial? So here, the prime theory is extraterrestrial from another world. Extratemporal from another time and you could say extraterrestrial, extra dimensional is the same thing. If you had to put your money on it. Oh, fuck. I ain't putting money on this. No fucking lack. Couple bucks. Couple bucks. Okay. So fun. Just for fun. Two bucks. I think I would be. I'm getting mixed message. What do you think? I would bet interdimensional. That's what I think. I think there's something about the whole feeling of it that seems so weird. It's almost like alternative timelines. The whole feeling of it feels so weird. It's also the problem is it's all that is so exciting and so interesting that you get lost in the excitement and it's very difficult to get an objective mindset to achieve an objective mindset. It's very hard for me to be objective because I love it so much. But I family. Are we going to go there? We're going to fucking alien up here. We've got shooting stars and sailing. It's like it's so obsessed with it. But I have this bizarre feeling that the more we understand about reality, the more we're going to realize that these these physicists, these string theorists that are going to create these models of the universe based on multiple dimensions that we can't access. I mean, there's I think they think there's 11 dimensions, right? I don't have any idea. I think barely. Let's see. There's about the 26. There's 11 like agreed upon, but there's I've read that goes up to there could be up to 26. I don't even know what that means. What does that mean? I have no idea. Does that mean that there are existences inside these dimensions like other universes and worlds? They just exist in a different dimension. And does that what it means? I mean, this is like some doctor strange type shit. I mean, is there are there, you know, the thought of alternative timelines that there's consistently different timelines that are happening simultaneously, like an infinite number of them and that you access all of them depending upon your choices and how you live your life and what you do and that we think of this as being like a static state of existence. Actually not that we float back and forth between all these different potential timelines and existences. Yeah. I see those things the way they travel and the way they move and I wonder like if there were interdimensional travelers that had access to technology that just violated all of our understanding of how you travel, that's kind of what it would look like. And though, you know, that there's evidence to support that and there's evidence to support the extraterrestrial thing. Yeah. And there's also evidence to support that they're showing us whatever they want us to see. Right. So this idea that you could pop in to our timeline. That is consistent with what we see with these things in that they seem to, it's like there's a bubble around an area and they seem to kind of come in. Some people can see it. Some people can't sometimes it's on radar. Sometimes it's not. Sometimes you could see it in thermal, but you can't see it in the IR, a lot of military guys see that. And then they track these things on radar. Can't see it visually, but it's fucking there. So this idea, there's consistency with the idea that they kind of pop into place right there. There's also data that would suggest that these are extraterrestrial and that our satellites pick these up. Now, head of, I don't remember what John Ratcliffe, he was the deputy director of defense. I think he talked about that. I mentioned that. So all these admissions from people now, we're catching these on satellites. We're catching these. So that space in our airspace and then undersea as well, a uso or whatever. So when you say they're catching them undersea, how they're optically or through our sensor systems undersea, we're able to track them and sonar. Is there any video of things on the public yet that I know of, but I am hyper aware of footage, sonar based evidence undersea. If you noticed in the congressional hearings on UFOs, first time in 50 fucking years, by the way, when they brought that up, the undersea thing, they said close session couldn't say it fast enough. Like we're not going to talk about that public session. Really? Yeah, because we have great fucking sensors under the ocean. So defense sensors. You think that there's something that can, what is it called? Trans medium device? That's right. Trans medium. You've got that. Yeah. Yeah. And so this is something that could fly through space and then also can go through the ocean. Oh, domain. So if this thing is manipulating, what Bobbo's art described was something that essentially bent space and time around it and moved in that manner. Instead of being pushed by a force, like a rocket, this thing is. Or a rocket? Yeah. Grabbing a hole of space and time and pulling itself towards whatever destination it wants to go to. Yeah. And that was the thing that really flipped my script is the idea of like when I heard him say that when I was a kid, instead of pushing to get somewhere. Because look, the argument has been, of course there's life out in the universe. And look at the fucking web, you know, photograph, of course there's, there's gotta be life homogously out there, but there are never coming here. That was the Einsteinian thought, right? We can't travel fast in this speed of light. Right. Okay. Well, that's like saying, you know, okay, well, I got a horse, but can you imagine, you know, one of Elon's rockets? Maybe you can't imagine that, right? But this idea that you could fall in time and space, distance becomes irrelevant. Medium becomes irrelevant. That's where the trans medium craft, they believe the people researching this within our government believe that these craft are gravity propelled. That's why there's the new programs called all domain because it's space, air and sea. And in the congressional language for the UFO whistleblower stuff that's going on where people can come forward, it's going to be sent to law. They've already written the language is amazing. People are going to be able to come forward and talk about how they worked on legacy UFO programs, like reverse engineering programs. Like, so when you say people are going to be able to, meaning the government is going to drop the restrictions that people were former employees. I feel like I'm doing a horrible job of getting people up to date with what's happening in the UFO because so much has happened. It's like overwhelming, but yes. So what's happened is if we follow the steps, all of a sudden, Georgia and I, we released all this content, you know, people go kind of crazy over it, then they put out this preliminary report and say we had 143 cases and we solved, you know, one of them. And these are like military cases where there's like extraordinary movements with these crap. Then all of a sudden Congress is like, well shit, you know, we had all sap, we had A tip, who's studying this? Let's get a hold of it and they got real interested. So they started saying, hey, we need to start a program. Then the department of defense came up with some crazy ass acronym names that nobody could ever make out, AIMSOG and shit like that. And Congress got even more pissed. As the way I read it, I mean, I know some of the people involved and their minds have been blown by what they've seen in these classified briefings. It changed their whole way of thought and they realized that there are programs being hidden illegal programs, being hidden from congressional oversight related to UFOs. So their language now, it wasn't created and avoid when you read in the National Defense Authorization Act for 2023. UAP, it is UFO whistleblower language. If you've ever signed an NDA relating to one of these illegal programs without oversight, deal with UFOs, not only can you come forward, but they have changed it so that if there's any reprisal on you for coming forward, like let's say you work at Lockheed and you've been tinkering with some fucking UFO and there's any reprisal on you. You have ways to defend yourself. They took away the cap of $300,000 of what has to be awarded to you if there's reprisal. Holy shit. All of a sudden, and I know why because I know some of the people involved in this, they're going to let people, they're demanding that if you have this information, you can ignore your NDA's and I know people. Let's get into this. So what is happening here? So is it Congress does not have access to the information because the Pentagon has deals with these military contractors and they don't want to release the information to Congress? Like why is there this dispute of information? Do they not have access to information that they want to have access to? For sure. So that's why they're calling upon these people that have NDA's to come forward and that they'll protect them. I think it's a perfect storm and I'm just going to, this is just, I'm not part of Congress and shit. So I'm going to make an assumption from people I've talked with, right? I think what's happening here is the world has kind of become aware that UFOs are not fantasy, that there is a technological aspect and that they fly within our skies with impunity. And I think that this was stigmatized before and I think we're talking about it now. And I think having that conversation has really made people say, hey, I want to fucking find out if it's true. And then when you read classified briefings and you see the data, even the preliminary shit, I think it changes your worldview. So what's happening is let's say, let's say Lockheed because Senator Harry Reid has said in his interviews with George publicly, I heard for decades that they had, you know, a locking and he goes, I asked Senator Harry Reid, I asked to get in there and to see it and he goes, they wouldn't give me the clearance. So he just straight set it. They wouldn't give him the clearance. So that's that kind of thing infuriates people, right? Now imagine this, imagine that you get people take action against you for talking about this stuff like Luella Zondo, you know, people, you know, lose a straight guy, straight forward, you know, I've got to know there were actions taken against him. You know, kind of like what Lazar said happened to him, right? But this is like much more like public. They're saying he never worked in these programs. Harry Reid had to go defend him in a letter, right? There's other people you don't that are not public that also have had their careers try to be squashed because they're poking around on this stuff too much, right? They have gone internally to say, this has happened to me. Here's what I discovered. These are the programs. And then what's occurred is the investigatory branches that are looking into this, they're like, holy shit. This is real. And we don't have oversight. And they it's been proven to them. So when you say the data, when they look at the data, like what's the most compelling data? Yeah, I always want that question answered too. You mean for me or well, for you first and then what do you think about for like the people that are questioning this? It's so hard to live in a world now where you have to question everybody and everything because for me, the most compelling evidence is not one video I can show you. It's not two videos I can show you. It's not documents I can show you. It's not the conversations I have with people. The world is creaking under the stress and the weight of the UFO reality. It's just omnipresent now. We're no longer just ignoring it. Our sensors have gotten better and the frequency has increased. So you've got pilots like Ryan Graves, who's saying we were seeing these things every day. Who's Ryan Graves? Ryan Graves is an amazing pilot like favor, but his was in 2015. So the gimbal video where it shows the saucer type craft. Those that was his squadron and they'd go out and they'd see these things every day. And he was a flight safety guy. Right. And he was like looking at this thinking, this is an issue. They almost hit one once. One of these cubes with a translucent spear. So this is a safety of flight issue for a lot of people. I think it's from a national defense standpoint. It's fucking important. Sure. So we've got these hearings now. These public hearings on UFOs. This is the first time in 50 years that we've had public hearings. People fought for that. They wanted the public to hear about it. They weren't getting testimony from like favor and all of them, although they should. That's the next step. They need to have people with direct experiences come up and let them talk. Let them tell what their realities were get rid of these NDAs for them. Yeah. But in that hearing, the closer we get, the George keeps saying this and I just keep saying he's like a pessimist, but he's right. This is all fun and games and tough. Not hearing. The closer we get, the George keeps saying this and I just keep saying he's like a pessimist, but he's right. This is all fun and games until we get close to it, like any of the real stuff, any of the goodies. If we have craft and we've had it for a long time and we've been working on him trying to reverse engineer them. If that is true, the closer the public gets to that, the harder the resistance. And we saw that because he's UFO hearings. Man, they showed one piece of the footage that I released. For like the whole hearing, they're showing this one piece. It's the most inconsequential piece. It was from the USS Russell. It's the green one that triangle by angle of observation thing. That's the one that's easiest to kind of dismiss visually. What they didn't show is I released from the USS Omaha radar, thermal, deck footage. I mean, just it's like cumulative evidence. Congress and Senate were asking what's up with UFOs and they got swamp gased, like J. Allen Heineck, like just trying to put it under the rug. They go, oh, we're pretty sure these were drones. That was never the argument. It's not if these were drones in 2019, swarming our Navy ships. You know, who was inside of one, they weren't big enough to hold people. It's not that they were drones. It was like some big revelation. Here's the question, who were operating these units? How can we don't know that right off of the coast of California? Ten of our Navy ships were simultaneously swarmed by unknowns, unidentified. They couldn't figure out the launch. They couldn't figure out the landing point. They don't know who was operating these. And how far off shore were there? I mean, it was super the 100 mile radius because all the ships that were in this area were experiencing most of them simultaneously what they call swarming. But the thing is is that I know for sure we don't know yet who's these were. How is that possible modern day? I don't know where these are from. I'm not even claiming that. And did these experience, did they exhibit rather any extraordinary capabilities? Depends who you ask. So the answer to that is when I get people and I actively hunt for direct eyewitnesses for all this. So I spoke with people who are, you say, operating the spy one radar system, the same one in the favor case is great system. Right? I also spoke with people who had visual on these things. Some people say that they show one of what they call the five observables that means, you know, this goes into the UFO category, which is instantaneous movement. Right? Boom, straight up into space was the exact words said to me. I've got people on the other end of the spectrum where they just saw lights. So no, in this case, it's not like favors. I don't have, we don't have footage of it. Yeah. Do they have data in terms of radar data of speed and? Yeah, they do. And that's what I tried to kind of tell the public by releasing one slide that said that they believed it, that these craft were trans medium. Because the video I released the black and white one from the US is Omaha. You can see it kind of phase out or drop into the water. They thought it was trans medium. They thought it went into water. They sent a submarine, right? To try to look for it or wreckage. So I don't know, with this case, man, I never hang my hat on one UFO case. What's interesting to me is the people involved, they feel like they failed at their duties. They didn't know precisely what to do in this situation because right off our coast, the thing is, is this is happening everywhere, man. Do they have a protocol for what to do in those situations? Like if you do encounter a UAP or UFO or whatever you want to call it. And they think it might be from an alien planet or whatever the fuck they think it's from. Do they, do they have a protocol? Or even like the pilots that? Yeah, I mean, there's like a military thing. Is there, if you see a UFO, is there something you're supposed to do? Now you can and are encouraged to report it. But before it was so stigmatized and people that are, you know, ground level on this, say they're still crazy stigma. But you are now being encouraged to report it. And these reports have to do in a short amount of time go up the chain of command. So I think we're getting better reporting now. I think because it's a safety of flight issue. But at that time in 2019, when these ships were sworn, yeah, that's, this is Omaha. Yeah, that goes into the water. Yes, that they believe that it, it ends up going into the water. That's what the documents said and the documents I was exposed to that I read made it, made an argument for that made a case for that. So it looks like now that it's hovering boy is a shitty footage. Well, see that's my money back Navy. I know. I know. I know. Spend your goddamn camera money on. But do understand that this is why I could release it is because this is an unclassified platform that's being filmed otherwise that would not be cool of me to release. So there it looks like you just went into the water. Right. And and so the thing is is that there were many that were doing this like they got one of the people that was involved with these ships fighting the ships. I was like, dude, where did they, where did they come from? Because you got great radars and you have all the data. And it goes, I'm going to really regret saying this, but they just seem to appear, which is so hard for someone who's like their job is to, you know, deal with the ship. So but if something is traveling the way they described that tick tack to travel, it would be like it just appeared. Yes. Or if it was trans medium, then they go, but you know, the scan volume of the radar, it's we got different sensors underwater than we do above. So like the spy one is good for high altitude. There's other radars that are good for middle and then underwater. So look, it's anybody's guess. My whole thing is this. UFOs, whatever whatever they are, their machines. Yeah. That's at least an aspect of it. Where, who's controlling them? Right. You know, it like we should be able to answer some fundamental questions. And fuck, if we have one or more and we've been reverse engineering and we're trying, which, which I'm confident we have that beyond confident because of what you have spoken to Bob about. No, not just Bob. And my, my, everything, you know, all the people that come to me that I talk with reports I've seen just, you know, I know what noise the fuck out of people just my cumulative, my cumulative personal experience tells me, oh, yeah, we, we fucking definitely have them, not just Bob. So where do you think they got these UFOs from? Yeah. If we do have something we've been working on back engineering it, where do you think they got them from? Yeah, I get different answers man from different people. Um, so you say crap, like some are crashes, right, which is like hard to fathom that something that advance could crash. Um, but that's what I'm told. You know, is it some where crashes? That's what, you know, that's how I understand it to be. Now other people think maybe there were some from an archaeological dig. That's what Bob said, that I was surprised you talked about that. Yeah, he said that there was one that they had spoken about at S4 that they said that they had recovered from an archaeological dig. And they said it was a long time ago and it's really old. Yeah. I think people need to not feel like they have to believe one thing to believe the whole thing. I think there's a cumulative weight here. And I think that we're, we're prying open the doors. If you read this language in Congress and Senate about the UFO immunity, our world is about to change if we stick to our guns. If we push to get these answers, we're going to find out one way or the other. Is this just some, right, we're moving around a little bit here though. Let's go back to the, uh, these crafts that they're back engineering. Like how are they getting these? Yeah. And why do you think that they have them? Okay. Well, my experience tells me that they're getting them from what you call crashes, like down crashes. So all of them. So none of them, none of them like were a gift. That's the other kind of, I'd say theory as some people that are involved in, in processing this information are like a kind of crash. It was perfect. It was like, they must have left it for us. Some people believe that. But how do we know? It does. Both things sound hokey. The crash sounds hokey. The whole fucking thing is extraordinarily bizarre. It doesn't mean it's not true though. Right. That's the other thing that Bob said that I thought was really fascinating was that there was some documentation that they were showing him that claimed that we are the product of accelerated evolution. He was showing a lot of shit. And he doesn't like talking about it because he doesn't know if it's just total fucking nonsense. Right. You know, he is sure that they showed him shit just to see if he'd fucking say crazy shit. Right. See if he'd talk. All he, all he cares about is what he saw, what he knows is real. But if you do just talk with him privately, they did show him a photograph of an autopsy of a being with a singular organ. They told him that, yeah, the human genome had been altered. You know, just all sorts of crazy shit. And he just has no idea if it's true. Or if it's the whole thing is so it's so wild. I just wish, you know, if Bob's lying, my god, what a great liar. He's amazing at it. Right. And he's been telling the same life of 30 plus years. And then there's elements of it that how would he know that like how would he know about element 115? I mean, element 115 when he was talking about it was theoretical. Yeah, he got lucky. He's a lucky, he's the luckiest guy. And I've always chosen shit that ends up being fucking right. You know, gravity waves and like, you know, how these crap like look man, explain the one element 115 to people because we don't, people who don't know what we're talking about that haven't seen the documentary or have it seen the podcast we did together. So, so the way Bob understood it was that there's, he was working on power and propulsion. Right. So of one of these we call them flying saucers, fucking alien vehicle that looked like this one. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. And even like aerospace people are like, well, if, if, you know, it's the most ingenious thing is the way he described it powered. You know, people are compressed by it. I'm like, maybe that's just what he saw that anyway. So the 115 was the power source he said. And basically, you know, you put it in and it releases antimatter and creates a gravity propulsion, a gravity gravitational field, and then you had directional three directional emitters. Look, that's how they think these things operate. Traveling faster than the speed of sound with no sonic boom, you know, trans medium, all domain, these things seem to defy typical propulsion. It's not outside of the realm of what we understand. It's outside of the realm of what we can replicate now. One day we might catch up. And this element 115 that Bob talked about powering this spaceship was only theoretical back in the late 1980s when he first started discussing it. Right. We hadn't synthesized it yet. Right. Well, it wasn't a synthesizing. It was created by a particle accelerator, right? Exactly. So really, it was detected because it was, I think it was smashed. But we smashed, right. So we kind of of synthesized it and that we smashed particles together and then we're like, oh, for like a second, there it was. Yeah. I think it's a fraction of us. Yeah. And Bob always said that if he's right, if it was 115, that's how he understood it to be. If he is right, then we will someday, you know, be able to make a nominal amount of it that will be stable. That that's, you know, what he says. Get in the window. Yeah. Yeah. I'm telling you. Nice. Yeah. The whole thing is just so interesting. It never ends. Yeah. It never ends. It is interesting. I just like, until something actually happens and my thought is like when something actually happens, how will people handle it? You have a whistleblower to get immunity under new amendments. So this is what you were talking about. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And I mean, the thing is, I know some of the people doing this and they're like, you know, they want some nominations, man, you know, who should talk to him? Well, you got your own fucking love. Yeah. These are foundations of our JRE cigars. They're good shout out to my friend Nick from Foundation Cigars too hooked me up with the cabinet. Got a full humidor up in this bitch now. Bob. Thank you. So, so this element 115. Yeah. This is proven by a particle accelerator. And Bob Bazaar's claim was that they had a stable amount of this element 115 that had come from this other place. And did they know where this other place was? Where this element 115 supposedly had come from? What another plan is? Yeah. I mean, again, this is like what he was told. So he's kind of allergic to, but, you know, he said that the documents said Zeta reticulae like, you know, I guess a binary star system or something. That's what we're in the documents. Now, if that's true or not. Look, remember, he thought it was the US. He thought this vehicle was ours. Right. And then he until he walked inside of it, that's his whole thing. It blew him away. You know, it's hard to buy what someone like Bob is telling you. If you don't know the person, you see people in their lives, man. Like, what do you imagine being him? And that actually happening to you. And then you having to go back to reality and tell people or not tell people, just live your life and have the burden of this information, the burden of this thought just turn upside down the other way. There you go. Put the top. I got flipped the top. There you go. And then pull down. I mean, the burden of that kind of information when even discussing it, you seem like such a psycho, you know, most people almost instantaneously other than a real journalist like George Napp, most people are going to think you're out of your fucking mind. Yeah. They just dismiss you. Yeah. Why would you, why would you even do it? Like, what would be your motivation? What would you get out of that? Well, his motivation was he was seriously worried that they were going to take him out. Yeah. Because he knew so much and they had cut off of his, for folks who don't know the whole story, just give you a brief synopsis. What happened was Bob allegedly was working on back engineering these aircrafts, these vehicles, these spaceships. And in doing so, you have to have very high level of clearance. Well, with that high level of clearance comes complete government surveillance. So they monitor your phone calls, monitor everything, turns out Bob's wife is having an affair. So they don't tell Bob, his wife's having an affair, but they cut off his job. They're like, you're too, you did too much of a potential to be emotionally unstable. We can't have you working on these top secret, super sensitive things. Yeah. Well, your life is probably going to find out for that shit. So he doesn't know this. And so he's, they don't give him any information. So he freaks out. And so he starts telling his friends and he's like, come with me, I'll show you the launch. I'm not lying. People forget that. Yes. He went out and he showed people a craft that didn't look like any normal craft come up right when he said it would. Yeah. Over a base, it wasn't even known then really well. And a sub base, an area not area if you do one proper. Again, he's the luckiest motherfucker in the world. He did it three weekends in a row till he got caught. Right. So it's just like, man, every time you try to call bullshit on him, I tried so hard on so many things. People think I'm just some fucking believer. I'm not. The only thing that people have ever called bullshit on him is that he said he might have seen an actual alien. But he said, he was walking down a hallway and looked through one of those little tiny windows that's in a door, little tiny like 12 inch square windows. And he peered in it quickly as he was walking by. And it seemed like there was a small thing that was sitting on a chair and these people standing over it. But he doesn't know if it was a doll. He doesn't know if it was in his mind. He's like, fuck, did I see an alien? Like, what the fuck, but he can't go back. It's not like everything's, if you work on top secret stuff, apparently, everything's very compartmentalized. Like the people that work on metallurgy don't have access to the people that work on propulsion that don't have access to the people that if there is a biological entity that they examine it, which frustrated the fuck at him. Right. Because that's not how you do science. It's not how you do science. Right. And he says, I wasn't the most qualified person to be there. Maybe they hired me because they could easily dismiss me. You know, he's like, why didn't we have better people on this? You know, people that were more, so he was really frustrated. And he said to me, like, he thought it was a crime against the scientific community. You know, if they have this stuff, like he says, you know, he says it was a crime. And, you know, he talks about that thing through the window. He's so funny about it. You know, I sat him down for long, you know, many sessions long, really trying to get at him, get it out of him. Yeah. He was, you know, Jeremy, I think they were just obsessed with measurements. I go, what do you mean? And he's like, well, look, there was somebody in something in a chair, but it was small. Maybe they were trying to just measure it to see if it fit in a craft. So that's how he kind of gets around like, did he see something or not? He doesn't know. Like it could have been a doll that they constructed that was roughly the same height as these things were. He just doesn't want to go with there. And so these creatures that were in this vehicle, if there were, where creatures in this vehicle, there were three seats. Yeah. And he has to make it. They had to be how big your typical, like what you think of as a little gray alien, man, three, four feet. Right. So they looked like they were made for children. The seats. Yeah. And so look, in every time I try to be like dismissed by myself, there's something that creeps in my mind. I'm like, hold on, hold on. Like I find out that he was telling the truth. Like recently I had it verified that, you know, he did work at air 51. Like I know what, I know I had a guy. I found the guy after 30 years that when he went and talked with George, the guy that did a security clearance, I found him. I talked to him multiple times about this. And he did clearance for Bob for the test site. But even more recently, from people that have positioned to access that information, it was confirmed. I just want you to know he worked out there. Now I have people that were out there that saw him on a jannic flight. Bob worked out there. And a Janet flight is those unmarked planes that would leave from the Vegas airport and had into area 51. That's right. And you know, here's the deal, man. Like it's the cumulative evidence about Bob that I, you know, as a friend of his, like I, you know, I have no reason to doubt him. And all the evidence tells me that it happened exactly like he said. And he's explaining it to the best of his ability. And to his own detriment, actually before coming on your show, man, he's probably the most hated dude for some reason people go crazy about him. Either love him or hate him. I think your documentary turned a lot of people's opinions about him as well. Thank you. But then having him on, I mean, some people still call bullshit. They think like his migraines. That's so convenient. Oh, come on. You saw, yeah, you saw him. So he was having him in the green room before we started going on. It was very nervous about doing it. Of course, man, he'd been beat up his whole life about this shit. Also, I gave him McDonald's before I think he was life with me. So we're pissed at me. You know, you're a good masalaad. No, he gets really like crushing migraines. But you know, people that are going to call bullshit on that, we're talking about fucking UFOs. If you're going to call bullshit on a migraine, what even listening for? I didn't feel like it was bullshit. It wasn't like the whole thing was, it was uncomfortable for him for sure. But it didn't seem like he was lying. But you know, some people that are really good at liars, but usually when you're really good at lying, you lie about a lot of stuff. Yeah, that's the thing because there's a consistency in people's lives. And the deeper I got in, chilling with his mom, chilling with his family, chilling with friends that have known him for new friends, every single person. And he doesn't talk to him about your foes, by the way, like all that. He never talks about that. Just normal life situations. The one thing they all said to me, Bob wouldn't waste his fucking time with making up a story. And he'd probably make up a better one that in the rest, he would. And Bob always says that you go, man, I wish I could feel the voids for people. He goes, it's a horrible fucking story. But it happens to be what happened. If I was making one up, he goes, man, I got some other cool ideas. Right, of course, of course. And also, if you're a liar, you generally lie a lot. Like, liars don't just like one time in their life. And then you catch them. They're inconsistent. He was lying long before there was an internet. I mean, excuse me, he was telling the story long before there was an internet. So if he was lying, like in the late 80s, there would be inconsistencies in his story. He would forget how he said it. He would fuck something up. Or, dude, for the research I did for this, for the documentary, like I told him, you got to give me full access to your life, dude, like boxes, whatever, don't open. Let me get all your tapes, everything. I was so shocked. Like people, if they're trying to hide something, they're real careful around you. You know, that's not my experience. But here's my other thing is like, do we have to believe any one single person to understand that this is, yeah, this is a real problem. No, but he's one of the more interesting cases. Because if he's telling the truth, that means that the government has been working on these things for decades and decades. And that they have gotten this, they've gotten themselves in this pickle where they can't publicly disclose what they know and what they have access to. Because they've had all these people work on these things secretly and they sort of have a long history of hiding information. Right. Now think about this, right? Like I've been down this path myself mentally. I happened to know that there was, I happened to trust that there was a reverse engineering project, separate from Lazar and everything he told us, right? It's a separate thing. From a Russian UFO crash that dealt with laser weaponry. There was a derivative exploitation project on the laser as a weapon. I know somebody that worked in that program, I feel it to be a true story. Imagine the derivative technologies that you could get for something like highly advanced, just working on it. You're not going to be able to make a UFO because the material science we haven't caught up yet how to perfectly layer atoms to make the, like the... Metal energy? Yeah, yeah. We will one day have that ability. But our material science is what I think holds us up from like making a craft, right? But what can we learn from one of these pieces of technology? And my understanding is a fucking shit ton of derivative technologies have come from looking at these advanced materials. That was always the assertion. That was the thing that the American computer company. Do you remember them? I've heard a lot of stories that they, yeah, they've leaked things to private industry. I mean, fuck, I would do that. This is your little landing. It's fact not fantasy. The Russians insist. This is from 1999 in New York Times. Wow. I like Jamie just because it's that this is weird. It's not a joke. Norahoux, norasign of mental instability, noran attempt to drum up local tourism by drawing the curious, the Soviet press agency tasks insisted today in discussions of what it called an extraterrestrial visit to southern Russia. Residents of the city of... How do you say that? Varones, as Varones, how do you say it? How do you get good? Varones? I don't know. It's V-O-R-O-N-E-Z-H. Good luck with that. Insisted today that lengthy three-eyed extraterrestrial creatures had indeed landed in a local park and gone for a stroll and that a seemingly fantastic report about the event carried Monday by the official press agency task was absolutely true. It was not an optical illusion, said Lieutenant Sergey Amat Viv of the Varones, or whatever you say that, a district police station who said in a telephone interview that he saw the landing of the UFO on September 27th. Lieutenant Amat Viv confessed that he had not actually seen the aliens, but that he saw the spaceship, and then it was certainly a body flying in the sky, moving noiselessly at a very high speed and a very low altitude. He said anything is possible. To be honest, Lieutenant Amat Viv said he was a little skeptical himself when he first saw the object. I thought it might be... I must be really tired, but I rubbed my eyes and it didn't go away and then I figured in this day and age anything is possible. Isn't that funny? 1989 is this day and age. Using this sensational tone that is lately infected, the once-stayed task, the press agency today provided more details of the UFO landing in Varones, a city of some 300 miles southeast of Moscow. I mean, it stands to reason that we know that these are our machines. We know they can do things that we're incapable of creating right now. There's got to be somebody controlling them. Look at this statement. Three-eyed creature, about nine feet tall and fashionably dressed and silvery overalls and bronze boots with a disc on its chest disappeared, then landed and came out for a promenade with a companion and a robot. The aliens seem to communicate with each other producing the mysterious appearance of a shiny triangle and activated the robot with a touch. It's so hard. You deal with people. I saw this. I deal with a lot of the human aspect of this. You actually said something to me one time, it really struck me about this. I was... I called... we were talking the phone and I was frustrated and I said, I can't wrap my head around. If this is true, why there's so much content, why there's so many types of crafts. We could go map the moon with like one satellite in like two weeks if we decided to do it and you said to me, maybe it's fucking easy to get here. You said that to me and it made me think if maybe it is just easy to get here, whatever these things are, maybe they're not from far away. Well, or maybe it doesn't matter if they're far away because their ability to transcend space is very different than what we understand. Like if you talked to someone from the 1400s and said, you know, oh, I live in California, but I want to visit Italy, they'd be like, yeah, right. How fucking can I visit Italy? Yeah. You're going to get a boat for a month. Like, what are you going to do? How much food do you have? You're going to get scurvy? Like, what are you doing? But today you're like, oh, yeah, of course you are. I'm going to go to Hawaii. Of course you are. You don't have to worry about rowing out there for four months. No, you're just going to go. You're going to fly. I mean, the family, we're going to go to Maui. It's going to be great. It's like our version of travel is so radically different than people that lived 500 years ago, a thousand years ago. What is it like a thousand years from now? Well, it might be radically different to the point where you can just visit extraterrestrial planets. Maybe it may be a simple as just the tourism. I make that joke. They like our top hats, kimonos and cupcakes. They just fucking like coming here. We're really cool to watch. Maybe it could be that it's a part of scientific inquiry. It could be their gardeners. They're coming back to see how their crops are growing. Right. Or maybe it's a combination. If it's easy for one group, maybe it's easy for a lot. Yeah. I mean, the ultra terrestrial hypothesis, right? Just in the in the journal of like cosmology or something, I don't know. I'm going to fuck that up. How put up? He lives out here in Austin. He just published a paper, a peer reviewed paper, I think about the idea that maybe they're from here. From here, how so? Like as if I've ever heard that name before, how do I know? Yeah. There's so many things. Like he was back in the day working for the Stanford Research Institute studying remote viewing. And like this guy's always been kind of cutting edge. You say, well, you know what? That's kind of the fun to shit. Right? Like you get paid to study consciousness. Like yeah, I'll do it. You know? So, but you know, he's had access to a lot of information because of that. So it's one of the people when he when he speaks, I listen, right? What does he have to say about it? He wrote this paper. You know, so but you know, he's had access to a lot of information because of that. So it's one of the people when he when he speaks, I listen, right? What does he have to say about it? He wrote this paper and it he wrote a long time ago and kind of worked on it, I guess, but it was published yesterday in a scientific journal. And it proposes this idea of the ultra terrestrial. So like something that's been here a long time, maybe like aliens got here and got stuck or a civilization that was so advanced and there was some world catastrophe. So it hit itself and now just kind of lives here with us and maybe they have investment that we don't fuck up the planet that we don't blow ourselves up. You know, maybe that's maybe they have some investment other than your crop theory. You know, the idea that we're just a commodity. Well, I don't think we're necessarily a commodity, but I think I don't think we would have a problem with going to a planet and planting life. Like imagine if we found a planet and it's like earth of three billion years ago, right? There's like some plant life and some fungus, but there's no animal life, no marine life. And we just planted life there and monitored it and watched it grow and evolve. And maybe they have an understanding of there's a process. Maybe there's a process that like I said, process not process. Yeah, that kind of like that. Like a fancy man. Maybe some sort of process where they understand that all life takes a very specific path and that that is a path of increasing complexity, right? And that is if you want to really simplify life on earth, you would go back to the earliest form of life, which is single cell organisms, right? Well, why did single cell organisms become multi-cell organisms? Because they're they're complexifying. They're becoming more complex. And then they ultimately become hominids that create tools and they ultimately lead to the industrial age and they ultimately lead to the technological age that we find ourselves in right now. The thing that they have that's clear is it's constantly a path of ever increasing complexity. Now, when you look at the work of Graham Hancock and Randall Carlson and Dr. Robert Shock and all the people that have studied ancient civilizations in the possibility that there's been a reset along the way. It seems that perhaps there's been some periods of great growth and then some sort of cataclysmic disasters, you know, asteroid impacts and the like that has sent civilization back down and then it rebuilds back up again. But it always rebuilds back up again. It always seems to be on the path of ever increasing complexity and constant innovation, at least amongst the most sophisticated of creatures which we like to think of ourselves. Maybe that's just a course in the universe for life. Maybe all life follows that course. And we're biologically developing too. I mean, we're evolving, you know, every, so don't answer me. Fuckin crazy. Yes. Okay. This morning I was talking with a guy named Gary Nolan. Do you know, have you ever heard his name? I have. Yeah. So he, you know, Stanford, professor, he's, you know, been working for 10 years studying MRIs of the brains of people like pilots who have had close encounters. And what they found over this 10 year study, there was a CI study, but he just openly talks about it now. It's all out in the open, which is cool. There was damage. Like I've seen the, the images, some of them, there's damage to the brain when people get close proximity to one of these power sources. Like when they get close to damage, yeah, fucking white matter damage to their brains from having close proximity to a UFO or UAP. Like when you say close, are you talking like Commander David Fraser close or people on the ground? There were some ground stuff. Yeah, close like there's an encounter where it's like let's just say you could throw a rock at it. How about that? Right. Did just Commander Fraser go through these examinations? You'd have to ask Commander Fraser. So basically this study found conclusively that there is damage that occurred, not intentionally, but it's like radiation type damage. Can I propose something? Sure. Maybe these people that have been examined. Maybe the damages would cause them to see these things in the first place. Okay, let me, let me now now we're going to get real fucking weird because check out what they discovered. They discovered in doing these studies on damaged brains that there is a part of the brain that in a lot of these UFO encounter people, there are neuro density in that area of brain is like one in a hundred. And they've found out through this study that that part of the brain that it deals with intuition, impulse decision making. So you're intuition, you know, like hunters, right? They need like really good intuition to have. So the impulse just knowing when to do something, they've studied it in like I guess he said like a Japanese form of chess. I don't know the game. Go. I don't know. I don't know. Maybe there's some, they studied it that there's neuro density in this area when people make these intuitive moves in a form of chess. Okay. They found out that these people are way more likely to have a UFO encounter. So it's the opposite of what you said. The damage was caused by the close proximity to the propulsion system. But what they found out is that these neural density area, I forget the name of the brain, the part they call it the brain within the brain, you could probably look it up. It's just now even we're doing that. I think Gary should tell you this, but even we're doing that. They found that couples are partnering who have these neural dance areas like more than would be random. So they're attracted to each other. Yeah, man. Well, that makes sense, though. If they're just intelligent, sure, like a smart person. Yeah. Okay. I don't know exactly what it does, but that correlation is so interesting. So Gary was saying that he does morning cool breakfast conversation. He thinks having that neuro dense area about intuition allows them to see something that's there that other people's minds would just make them ignore. That's his theory. Well, what's interesting, I'm reading an interview with him about this. Mm hmm. And as he was saying, everything I'm kind of reading along, they get to this part where this the brain scans are look very similar to people that had the Havana syndrome. Oh, yeah. Wow. And so he said he got locked out of the files because it's now serious incident. And yeah, he said there was a lot of crossover where people that were because it's an intelligence community thing and military thing. And he said, I saw a lot of patients with this read this because this is pretty fascinating. He said there's the question asked him, did the people who claimed they'd had an encounter, especially the pilots described any perceivable decrease in neurological capacity said of the 100 or so patients that we looked into about a quarter of them died from their injuries. The majority of these patients had symptomology that's basically identical to what's now called Havana syndrome. We think amongst the bucket list of cases we had the first of the Vannicine drone patients. Once this turned into a national security problem with the Vannicine drone, I was locked out of the access to the files because it's now a serious potential international incident. If they ever figure out who's been doing it, that still left individuals who had seen UAPs, they didn't have a Vannicine drone. They had a smorgasborg of other symptoms and said the next question is how does the impact of electromagnetic frequencies factor into your hypothesis of what exactly transpired here? One of the patients, it happened on skin walker ranch, given how deep into their brain damage, excuse me, given how deep into their brain the damage went, we can actually estimate the amount of energy required in the electromagnetic wave someone aimed at them. We don't think that has anything to do with UAPs. We think that that's some sort of state actor and again related to Havana syndrome somehow. So, a Vannicine drone was dismissed initially. And then they're recognizing that, no, something is really going on and it might be some sort of microwave or targeted attack on people that they're experimenting on some new ability to disable people. Yeah, it's all department of defense people. I mean, it's obvious something is that- At least if they do know it's not public. Yeah, right. I have no information. I have no idea. It's just one of those crazy things. So, what they do, like what we do know about UFOs, the one fucking thing we know for sure about UFOs is that they're high energy in a small amount of space. This is classically, it's been documented, the radiation effects of these when they're around. So, the injuries people get, you've heard, like the sunburns on one side of their face and shit, the radiation, the hair falling. So, that's like from close encounters of the third kind of- But that's like that's life. But that is, they've actually really had that sunburn on one side. That's how they made, that's how they made the movie so interesting, was that they took all the cases, the trace cases, the physical cases. That shit happens to people and sometimes when they have close proximity to UFO, they get fucked up. Right. It's unintentional is what people think. It's like the propulsion system itself or something. Well, Travis Walker- Yeah, yeah. Travis Walton, rather. That was his story, whether they brought him aboard the UFO to repair him. Yeah. I wonder if that's the way he likes to look at it or if that's what happened. I don't know. Did they ever do a study on his brain? They should, right? I mean, if that guy's telling a truth, or maybe it would be repaired, as they took him aboard the craft and supposedly did some medical procedure to him. I mean, look, we should study this stuff. I think that's the big takeaway of this moment in our history because we're repeating history. UFOs have had this huge wave before and Congress was interested 50 years ago. Multinations were studying it openly. Now we're back at this point where I feel like there's an opportunity just to be open. We should study this scientifically, man. The problem is I feel like even though there's people that have sightings and even though there's some kind of metallurgy evidence, there's so little stuff. It's not like if I want to study sea turtles, I can go find the sea turtles and go study them. This is too, it's too hard to grasp. There's not, there's nothing there. You know what I'm saying? Yeah, you can't replicate it upon demand. Which is what science people require. There are some cool thoughts on how to do that. There have been attempts to lure in UFOs with nuclear weapons. Really? Yes. There have been attempts to fake the world's bait them. Really? Yes. How do you know this? We'll talk about how I know that later, but it is true. You can't say how you know it. No, it's not, you know, some of the people I talk with have told me about these. Right. So people I trust that they're in a position. No, and have they told you you can't talk about this? Yeah, the basics are sources. Yeah, there we go. The basics is 14 out of 14 times or something. I might be getting that number wrong. There was a way to bait every single time these UFOs would come in when they were transporting nuclear weapons or something like that. Now, if that information is true, then you would have a method. You would have a way to study this. Right. See, I think we're reinventing the wheel so much, like, Avilo that Harvard and the, you know, NASA just, I think this is true. NASA just announced they're going to repurpose their satellites to look for, you know, UFOs. I think that's a real article of Jamie. If you can find that, I repurpose their satellites. That's my word repurpose, but yeah, NASA made an announcement that they're going to kind of repurpose their satellites. Look at that. That NASA wants to turn satellites into alien hunters. There we go. There we go. That's just from a couple weeks ago. Cool. Wow. It's not my memory has been so bad. No, you're dead on brother. Look at that. NASA is looking to repurpose satellites. You said it perfectly. Okay, this is fucking crazy. Ask why this base agency is embarking on such a seemingly fringe subject. It said one of its remits is to look for a life outside of earth. Fascinating. Okay. So last month, the U.S. base agency announced it was launching an eight-month inquiry into investigate hundreds of unexplained UFO sightings. They increase being held by Dr. Thomas. What's with all these names? Zurbukind. Zurbukind? How do you say that? We think. Yeah, it's a boot. Dr. Thomas or boot chin of NASA's science mission directorate who has been investigating whether satellites in space could be repurposed to give another view on strange aerial phenomena reported from earth. Speaking to journalists in London this week, Colonel Pam Melroy, the deputy administrator of NASA said, the team is going to be looking at questions like, do we have sensors that can see things, you know, take another look at the evidence? One of the big questions that Thomas asked is, we have a ton of satellites looking down at earth or any of them useful. I mean, before you build a rover that's going to Mars, you ask yourself, what's the sensor? I have to build a detect the most interesting things. So they're really going to focus on that. What's going up there? How would you get the evidence you need to be able determine if it's an optical phenomena or some other kind of phenomena? Even the greatest scientist were ridiculed, Bill Nelson, a NASA administrator told journalists that he had read all the classified documents relating to UFOs and was convinced that nobody knew what they were. Question as to why NASA was embarking on such a seemingly fringe subject, Nelson said that one of the space agencies was to hunt for life outside of earth and that in the past, even the greatest scientist had been disbelieved and ridiculed. Remember that one of our missions is to reach out to see if there is life, he said, that's why we're digging on Mars right now. Is the possibility of life in something as big as the universe? Of course, there's a chance in somewhere as big as that, conditions similar to earth existed and some other kind of life form developed. It kind of drives me crazy though, that they're like, oh, we're going to repurpose our satellites and look for UFOs. It's my understanding that we have, well, we can well track UFOs. Think about NORAD and you can you know that the joke is you can't throw a softball in our atmosphere without it being tracked targeted. It's my understanding, like what else captured the tick-tacks above 80,000 feet? Did we have any other optic systems or targeting systems that captured those tick-tacks because the spy one saw it at 80,000. My understanding is the spy one. The spy one radar is a radar that was in that strike group where Commander Freaver was, you know, doing workups. It's just a very cool radar that in 2004 was, you know, relatively new for, I think, at that year. And it was just, this, it's a phase array. So it's just a fucking cool piece of technology that they were using. But I think it goes up to only 80,000. So when they say they were dropping in from 80,000 down to sea level like that, they were actually coming from higher. Right. They just detected it when they hit 80. And they say with the spy one. But there are other systems I am told that were tracking these as well, above that scan volume of the spy one. And that makes sense. Think about it. We have missile defense systems. Right. And now that we're doing space wars, right, like we have this space space, space force space force is actually fucking really cool. They've got a UFO project too. Do they? Yeah. It's not public, but they do. Like everybody's getting in the UFO game, man. They all want to study it space force. When they talk about repurposing satellites, though, what we have is the ability to detect these objects. I think what they're saying is let's get very high resolution photographs and video of these objects. I am convinced that we already do convinced. Yes, I am convinced that the National Reconnaissance Office and the geospatial intelligence agency will analyze the data from the devices that the National Reconnaissance Office has and that we have great data on UFOs and that that is being suppressed even within even to NASA. But imagine if they did have that data, what would be the benefit of leaking it to the public? And this is one of the things that's always driven me crazy about all this Pentagon stuff. And the Pentagon comes out and says, these are none of this world. These crafts is like, what is their motivation for doing that? Yeah, I saw you real skeptical about maybe this is like a government. I think some of it is, right. I think some of it is they have drones that are spectacular that have unbelievable ability to travel at preposterous speeds, hypersonic speeds beyond hypersonic with that signature, though. That's the question. Like how could they do that? And if that's the case, is this because of back-engineered UFO technology? Right. So I wish to be wrong on this. But I don't see the evidence for what you just said that we have that technology yet. And I'm not told that and that's never been what I've asked at the highest levels that I can ask at. We wish we had that technology. And here's the other thing. Just one last thing about this is before the Pentagon existed, these things were occupying our reality. They've been here. So even if we did have a breakthrough and we got something, we still get your photos. What are they? Right. Well, and then here's the other question. Are we only being visited by one civilization? Right. Or are we being visited like, you know, I mean, if you go to the Galapagos, there'll be people there from Turkey. There'll be people there from China. There'll be people there from the United States. Like people want to go and see it. Like perhaps when you're talking about UFOs and the wide variety, like you're talking about this circle that exists or the cube rather that exists in the translucent circle. That's the popular one right now. Is that really popular right now? Right now. And for years in war zones, it's like, I call them the jellyfish, the cube in a sphere. A lot of pilots talk about. And even as I said, pyramids, I've heard of pyramids and spheres, man. And then there's a video of those seemingly pyramid like big ones too. Yeah, big ones like how big? What I have seen imagery of really fucking supposedly really fucking big ones. And they look pretty fucking big. So when you said you've seen if they sent it to you, they're just allow you to look at people that I know have allowed me to see these images. And I can't have them. And they look impressive. I'm not a photo expert. What's the most impressive shit that you could show us right now? Uh, just like on the, that the existing out there. Because like that black in my footage of the trans medium devices, like God, so I know it's annoying. So, okay, fucking block. Here's the deal. I sent you something a couple months ago. It's weird. It was a photo my toe. I've got a big bump on it. I don't know what to do about it. Oh, what you talking about? No, the other thing. I just, I don't, you know, it's like, I need to figure out what if somebody if, okay, obviously when I release footage, somebody gives it to me. I don't film that shit. Right. In skiffs or whatever. You know, and like, I don't do that. So someone gives it to me. It's not what who people think. You know, it's not like a person from within the gum. It's like a fucking shit ton of people. And then I get different angles of the same shit. I'm like, Ah, now I, now I trust it. I always have to be thoughtful in that there might be something in this footage other than the UFO that's sensitive because there's military footage. Right. So I think it's frivolous people say, Oh, just fucking put it out, put it out. Like, people can get burned dude. So what, let's not show footage right. Right. So, but what about footage that is available that is not attributed to one person that can get in trouble for it? Like, what's the best? Like, there was that one photograph that was taking from a fighter pilot's cell phone. Oh, yeah. You mean that with George Napoli, since the still images or the video they showed in that like swamp, gassy UFO, congressional hearing. Well, I haven't seen that. I've seen the still. Is that the still? Yeah. Oh, yeah. So this is a George map. This is it. So the one that I would go, go full screen on that, Jamie. If you could, someone did some weird enhancement on that. Did they? Yeah. So yeah. So some people say though, that's a balloon, right? Right. A mile or a mile. Yeah. So some people say like, um, some of the stuff that's out, fighter pilots, you know, will, will take a photo of there's two more George released. One was like, just a, like a spear. And then the other was that weird blimpy fucking thing right there. It looks like it has a payload. That's the one the far right. Yeah. So that's this, Jamie's over the spear right now. Right. Okay. Now is that one that's a sphere with a square inside of it? I don't know specifically. This is 2015. Oh, these are cloud. But that's the thing, though. So they're trying. They're going what like 500 miles an hour, 300. I don't know how fast it's going. Trying to photograph something out a window. But here's the deal. It's not just somebody saying it anymore. The radar systems, the new ASA, like radar systems are picking these up. So you know how you just used to have somebody says, I saw something right now you have people to say, I saw something. There's multiple witnesses. They're on a collective radar system and on their personal radar system. And these things are under intelligent control. And they're oftentimes maneuvering in ways that are incredible. But also their duration to sit out there, 100 miles off shore. Like who's are these magical devices that like do this? So it doesn't like it's like one photo. I'm so over photos. I'm so over videos because it's like it's never good. They're getting better maybe. But is it because the distance they are how far away they are and the kind of equipment they're using to monitor these things on in jets that they don't all they have a cell phone. Well, yeah, these well, that's what they can do. That's their personal device. So they can photograph outside the cockpit. But they're how faster they fly in man. And by the way, Brian Graves, his other pilot, he says sometimes we'd have them right there on radar. But we couldn't see him with our eyes. Other times they wouldn't be on radar. And BAM, these two went right in this fucking cube in the sphere. What right between two jets? That's when they got, oh, this is serious. Like we're going to have a collision. So sometimes you get them on radar and you and you don't see him. And other times you see him, but they're not on radar. It's crazy. Man, they call that like low observability, the ability to that's one of the five things that you look at for UFOs, low observability, right? This idea that it can cloak a signature. So you can see something in thermal, but not in the like in the night vision. You know, they call it. So there's five things that should be said. These are the things people look for in UFOs. See if I get it right. So one is anti gravity, right? This idea of no control or flight normal flight systems. So like normally a cube is not an aerodynamic thing, but it has intelligent control. Okay. The second thing is instantaneous velocity. You've heard of people going, you know, these things go in 90 degrees at like 10,000 miles an hour. And we do have tracks of that. We have, you know, recorded tracks of that kind of movements. We know these things exist. The third one is hypersonic capability without signatures. So like we talked about. The fourth one is the ability to, I guess you'd say, cloak or the ability to have, I don't know the exact words they used, but to not be seen, right? Right. And then the last one is trans medium capability, which is to penetrate space, air and sea without any inertial effect. And you get these with UFO reports over and over and over silent, no displacement of the air or the water. So those are the five things that you look at to say, is this a good case? And the real ones, those are always repeated. Those are the things, man. So those things are the five observables. And so the, the ideas that they're doing something to avoid detection purposely. Yeah, that's an aspect of sometimes, right, because sometimes it almost, it's like they want to be seen like some of the people calls I get, they'll be like, okay, there's one guy. I think it's a fine. There's a dude and he's at a secure facility, right? And he sees over the power structure of this facility, a government facility. Well, first he's walking outside and he sees this star that's like an off duty star, it's acting kind of weird, right? So he's walking to his car. And next thing he knows, it almost appears like it flashes and then bam about 100 feet from him over this power source is what he described as two plates mashed together and this gold glow. This, like he'd never seen this color gold before. Like it was just beautiful, right? Totally fucking silent. Big. Like the tallness of it was like two, what like F-150s is that a car like a big car. Two of those stacked up nose to nose is the height about three, four times the width. And this is a dude who thinks if I'm not wrapped so tight, you know, I'm going to lose my position. But he knows there's cameras. So he like watches this thing for like 10 minutes and the second he goes to grab his phone and pull it up, gone. Just straight up gone. So he's like, am I fucking crazy? You know, he goes, they got cameras here. So dude walks into the, I don't know, the entrance of the building where they got the guard shack, but it's inside. Hey man, I think I saw like an animal out there against the fence. I saw some movement, you know, can you pull that up, you know, sure enough, it pulls up the footage. It doesn't look exactly like his eyes were seen. But you can tell it's a fucking big ass machine hovering over. What's the variation between what he saw with his own eyes and what he's seeing in video? It's so hard for people to describe UFO things because they've never seen anything like it. So I dug into that. Was it, it was color footage. So it wasn't gold. It wasn't that color gold. And the shape wasn't as defined as what he saw. So he saw like exactly like two plates, no seam, just perfect silent, making this tiny little wobble. When you say two plates, you're essentially talking about that, that shape. Yes. Yeah, except that has more of a top to it. The one that lizzare, you know, this was totally symmetrical. So the camera picked up like the basic shape of it, but there was a distortion to it a little bit visually. But he says, by the eye, it was this beautiful gold that there's no comparison to any color that he says he's seen. And I've heard this so many times. And the light didn't like shine off the ground or the apparatus below it, the energy apparatus like it normally would like it almost like the light was a little contained in itself. Right. Like so, it was diffuse lighting. So it wasn't lighting up the ground. It wasn't just diffused that people describe this to me all the time. And they don't have words for it. So how can I I have words for it? But it's like, yeah, a contained light. And the other thing he said was that it was, there was something to it that made him feel like this light was somehow intelligent. And he goes, I know that sounds fucking weird. But it was like the light itself had some intelligence to it. It's just so bizarre. So the guy thinks he's I know that sounds fucking weird, but it was like the light itself had some intelligence to it. It's just so bizarre. So the guy thinks he's, you know, whatever. He's that thing. Sure enough, there's a huge fucking thing hovering over. It doesn't look exactly like it, but it was there. The response of the guard was to run outside. It's still there and he goes, I don't think so. Run outside. It's not there. Because back says, we're deleting this. We never saw it. So this is the guards call? I guess. Yeah, because he just fucked with him. The guard. Now here, I think I can get away with saying this man. It turns out it would be illegal to delete it. Right? So the guards got to wait something like 30 days or 60 days for it to auto just delete itself. So that guard had to sit in there for at least a month thinking about the fact that there's footage here. I told my body. I was like, don't think for one second that guard didn't film that screen. How can you not? Right. How can you not if you had to sit there for 30 days? No one that footage was there, but it drives me crazy. I wish I had that footage. And so that footage may or may not have been erased. As an optimist, I could not imagine what's in there for 30 days and and and not filming. It's even if you film the screen, you're just getting a second kind of generation. That's the problem with all this, right? Somebody's got good footage of it, maybe. Well, wasn't that one of the things that Christopher Melon said? There's there is evidence that has been released that he's seen. Oh, yeah. I mean, it was much more clear, much better resolution. Totally. That's what's so frustrating. It's like, yeah, how do we know that's true? You want to know something's even more frustrating is you know the gimbal footage. It's become a popular looks like the Lazar thing in two plates. There's four more minutes of that footage. There's a whole fleet of them. They look a little different than that object. But if the pilots, Ryan Graves is good friends with the guy that actually captured film that and like that object actually moved back on itself. And there was a fleet of them. There was other objects around it. There's four more minutes of that footage. It's all classified. If I can release it, why wouldn't you show that when Congress is asking for the best of the best? They just swap gas you one piece of footage I released? What the fuck? They should show that footage. Is there any explanation as to why they don't release the other four minutes when they've released the first part of the gimbal? Let's look at the gimbal footage because it's pretty wild. I have been given no explanation for it. I don't know. Do we know how fast their estimating the gimbal footage is? I don't think it was going super fast. I think that you see a rotation. It did rotate by the way. Right. And you're seeing, so the pilots are filming this at close range relatively close range. And you see this rotation. What you don't see is what happens next in the video, which is where it does this rotation and then instantly it goes back the other way. Okay. So we're looking at this thing now. What are those lines with the target reticle? What's those lines indicate? Is that the horizon? That looks like the horizon to me. Yeah, the lines right next to it is just the targeting system, right? This is at Flier. But like you see the lines that go left and right. They look like in like two L's. Yeah, that's those lines. That's how they're rising, right? Okay. So this thing is shooting along. It's chilling. If you turn your head, it looks flat. And now it's turning. Yeah. It turns completely. Yeah. It goes completely sideways. And you have to capture by Navy jets, these classified. And what this is a what kind of symbol, what kind of system? Look at that. That was East Coast 2015. It was called an at Flier targeting pod, which is something tagged. I don't know, for looking in for red. So this is the full, this is the go fast. This is a different one, right? That's a different one. How fast is this thing supposed? I don't know. See, people say it's not going fast. There's actually been a bunch of studies that it's not going fast. And what not going fast meaning like it's going a hundred miles an hour. Like what's going? I have no idea. I, you know, again, would that be important to know like how fast it's going? I mean, I mean, I, for the people studying this that are scientists, I'd say, yes, for me, it's not really. And the gimbal footage similarly is not going that far, not going that fast either. Yes, I don't think this is going super fast. So it's going fast like the like the type of speeds that our jets can go or like, do you know that? Yeah. I mean, I believe that it is going at a normal pace, but there that movement is what's so unique, man. And the pilots are freaking out. They're like, you know, there's a whole fleet of them. And the duration of these, like they would sit out there and they do sit out there for these huge durations of time. Like just the energy consumption, it takes to do that. Right. Because like a jet, a fighter jet runs out of gas and a fairly short amount of time. Yeah, man. And what do they have like 30 minutes of fuel or something crazy? I don't know. I don't know. I'm getting lift, getting lift, you burn a bunch of fuel too. And so the duration of these has been a big topic of conversation. Like how do they power and also they're not aerodynamic. Right. Well, they are with their flat. Right. But when they go sideways, which is the way they're supposed to go when they're traveling very fast, right? Well, that's that's the crazy part. If that's correct, if Bob Lazar was correct about that, which is crazy because he talked about that in 1989. And then you see in this gimbal footage, it doing exactly what he said it's doing. Yeah. Which is pretty fucking wild. Have you seen that footage of that dude? He had like a razor phone like back in like 2000 something and he's like a carpenter. And he's like, I don't know where he was. I'm going to say it wrong, Brazil or something. And he just grabs his shitty as razor phone. And there's just fucking looks like a disc that just goes turns like it's belly and shit available online. Yeah. I think so. Um, I got it on my phone. Okay. Well, son is a jammy. Get it off your phone. And son is a jammy. What's interesting about that. I don't know if it's real. I just want to. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. No. Of course, we don't know any issues real. Is this it? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Okay. It's on your, um, your Twitter. Oh, there you go. Okay. For Instagram. Yeah. Yeah. So this is this thing for again, looks like dog shit. Yeah. It's a, it's a, it's a razor phone. You know, in 2007 in Costa Rica. And so this dude's a carpenter, right? So he's filming this thing and it turns sideways. Yeah. It does the same thing. Yeah. It turns sideways and takes off. Yeah. So when you say that there's apparently, uh, four more minutes of footage, but that's classified, how do you know that that's the case? Well, I mean, people that are involved with filming it have said it publicly. So like Ryan Graves has asked that question online. Why wasn't Congress shown the four extra minutes of that footage? Like he thought it was kind of like, um, disappointing to like these guys start talking about how much they like Star Trek. You know, that's cool. Like Star Trek, my buddy. You know, I get that. But like show them the goods. Mm hmm. They want to know what's up. They've seen some of the classified stuff. And it was just like, oh, is, are we going to, are we going to lose this opportunity? Are we going to let this continue? Where we just stigmatize the shit out of it? And we try to say nothing's going on here. Move on. Is there a plausible explanation for why they classified the remaining four minutes of footage? I can't imagine a good reason. I think a lot of people like, um, Avro Haines, the, you know, um, what is she the national defense director? I don't know. I'm not sure. She said, um, she said, over classification is a problem. And it roads public trust. So things just are automatically, automatically classified, not because they show a UFO or because just because they were filmed on mission. Mm hmm. So I don't know. I'm with you, man. Like, let's ask for it. Four minutes of the gimbal footage is missing. And apparently that four minute shows multiple graphs. Yes. How many? I don't know. Maybe four. It's in a V formation. So I've only talked to people that have seen it. I haven't been able to see it, but these are the pilots. Some of them were directly involved. And when you say seen it, you mean seeing the footage, you don't mean to see it in footage. Right. And what if favor said he said it was fucking cool. Whatever it is is weird. Mm. I suspect we get footage of this stuff on a regular basis. And I suspect because of bureaucracy and because people don't want to deal with this shit and it's not an immediate threat, they just push it under. There's a barrier. Yeah. But all of this goes away if we've been reverse engineering these things. It's the silver bullet. We can have this conversation or UFO is real. They're not rather fucking real. The bigger question is, have we actually been working on something? If that gets revealed, if this UFO whistleblower thing works and the NDAs are just out the window, I have people that I can put forward, nominate them to go talk. I actually have nominated some people unknown to the public. So this is all, it's so fascinating that you're this lightning rod for this shit just by virtue of the fact that you're one of the most prominent UFO documentary guys that they're coming to you and wanting to discuss these things with you. I think I often have these I'm unqualified feeling moments of like when people call me to tell me this stuff. I'm like, why are you telling me? Why are you showing me this? It makes me a complex. I said, why do you trust me? Right. And the answer is always like, well, other people trust you. And I'm like, okay, that's cool. So I guess it starts with like, you know, what's interesting to is like, if you are a guy and you want to get out the information and you want to get it to someone who is going to leak it where people are going to follow them, you are that guy. Right? Because yes, you're accessible and you clearly have already done it before and you made the great documentary. Thanks, brother. And so they think that that's the best way to handle it, I guess, is to go through you. Yeah, but most people don't give me shit to make a public. They much want to tell somebody and they want to show somebody. So they want to tell you and show you just because you're so deep into it. Maybe they feel like they need to confide in someone. Yeah. Because it's so crazy. 100% and they want to know maybe you can tell them, hey, there's more than one of these. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. I mean, I've out of out of respect and responsibility have seen a lot more than I've ever put out that my point is never to put shit out. We were poking the bear at that time. Me and George was just trying to get the conversation lit up, man. Because everybody always says we wish, you know, it's always like one source, especially civilian footage. It's one video, right? But with these military ones, I gave people thermal radar deck footage within a classified briefing, a slide that shows and reveals that they believe this thing to be transmedia. It was like the perfect military case because it showed all these pieces of evidence. So you can't say, oh, it's just a balloon because I gave you deck footage that shows it lit up like a Christmas tree. So it had lights. You can't say it was just an optical illusion of thermal because you have the radar. Right. So all these things together create a compelling case that we should know what's fucking flying in our restricted airspace. And it's doing things that we can't do. We should know that. And how was this presented to Congress? And what was like ultimately what was their take on this when it was presented in the public hearing or the private stuff? Either one. My understanding is the people that kind of have been read in on some of this in the classified briefings. Some of them, it completely fucking changed their lives that the whole way they think about this stuff. For two reasons, I think one is is that what's extraordinary that this technology even exists and we've kind of ignored it up till now, you know, who's is it? And then the second thing is that when someone's fucking lied to and they feel like they should have oversight like the Senate intelligence committee or whatever, they feel like they should have oversight and they find out there are programs they don't have oversight about, then you get like the church commission of 1975. Do you remember that? No, dude, let's pull that up on Wikipedia, pull up the church commission. It was amazing. They busted all the intelligence agencies for a whole bunch of shit, including MK Ultra, testing drugs on civilians. This a real thing, Senate intelligence committee, I think it's Senate intelligence committee, I think it's called the church commission and they fucking railed the intelligence agencies for doing terrible hit in illegal shit. That's what we're seeing today about UFOs. They are saying if you have been hiding this shit and it has been not in our oversight, put your hands up, you know what I mean? They're coming after them, man. If you read the language, let's say this, yeah. Call the church committee. That there was just, I just pulled the wick of pieces. Yeah, the wick of pieces. Sometimes if you go to mobile view, it gets it all bigger and results after math. We're just at the very beginning, like what is the church committee? Church committee, formerly United States Senate, select committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities was the US Senate, select committee in 1975 that investigated abuses by the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Internal Revenue Service, chaired by Idaho Senator Frank Church. The committee was a part of a series of investigations into intelligence abuses in 1975, dubbed the Year of Intelligence, including its House counterpart, the Pike Committee and the Presidential Rockefeller Commission. The committee's efforts led to the establishment of permanent US Senate select committee on intelligence, the most shocking revelations of the committee included Operation MK Ultra involving the drugging and torture of unwitting US citizens as a part of human experimentation on mind control, co-intell pro, involving the surveillance and infiltration of American political and civil rights organizations, family jewels, a CIA program to covertly assassinate foreign leaders, Operation Marking Bird as a systematic propaganda campaign with domestic and foreign journalists operating as CIA assets and dozens of US news organizations providing cover for CIA activity. It also unearthed projects shamrock in which major telecommunications companies shared their traffic with the NSA, while confirming the existence of this signals intelligence agency to the public for the first time. So the church committee is saying, what the fuck is all this secret shit going on? We need to oversight. I think we're seeing that now. I hope we're seeing that now with UFOs so that there may be some secret shit with no oversight that is about either back-engineering UFOs or studying UFOs. I am extremely confident in making that statement that we have exploitation programs, which is just you got physical material and you've been working on it. And I'm extremely confident in saying that there has been ongoing, durational studies in every branch of our military about UFOs that don't have oversight. And you know, look, maybe I'm wrong, but I think we're about to find out as long as we keep pressing about this. I think we're going to find out because they're hot and bothered about it right now. The Senate Intelligence Committee Congress Senate, they're really pushing to make it available that people can come forward and break their NDAs. But what about the repercussions that people might experience in their personal life, if they did do something like that, even if they break their NDAs, they're still going to be people that are furious at them, right? In their job? Yeah, whatever they do. Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. So they have a whole thing about reprisals. It doesn't mean everybody's going to come forward. They'll be scared shitless. Let's say you work at Lockheed on this shit. You're boss, you're never getting a security clearance again. That you're basically kamikaze. That happened to Lu Elizondo, right? He comes out about UFOs and the whole thing. And I find him to be quite genuine about what he's doing. Okay? I got into norm. Here's the deal, man. Verifiably, they tried to control his security clearance, his access verifiably. There were reprisals. So his discussions. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. They said he never worked in the UFO programs. Well, that was bullshit. You know, and Harry Reid actually made sure everybody found out, you know, that that that he did work in those programs. Look, we've learned about all Saap, the original UFO program, the mother host program, right? George Knapp has really let us know a lot about that. And we know about ATIP. There are other programs that are not public yet. And I'm hoping they will be. And I really feel like we've got a chance, man, to learn about these. Did you ever see the interview where Bill Clinton, I forget what show he's on? He's on one of the talk shows. And he talks about how when he was in office, he sent someone to go try to dig up information on UFOs, Webster Hubble. He sent a guy named Webster Hubble. Yeah, from the Hubble space telescope. I don't know. I think his name was Webster. Bill Clinton says sent agents to Area 51 to look for aliens. Well, that's a weird. It's talking about James Corden. That's hilarious. Talking like I, that's a weird point. Reggie asked him. Reggie Watts. That was that was recent. That was recent. Reggie asked him. Yeah. But I mean, he's talked about it before, you know, at one point, the story goes that he wanted to get the information out. Yeah, but it seems like the president doesn't have nearly as much access to information as we'd like to think they do. Right. Probably because someone like Trump can become president, right? You can get a loose cannon in there. Why would you give him all the day? It is only going to be there for four years or eight years. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I heard he was briefed, but Trump was briefed. I heard he was, but he was given like the super simple version. Really? Yeah. Because I, I was, don't trust him. Totally. Yeah. And also, you know, he talked about it. He said, I, I wish I could talk, can't talk. I can't tell you. I'd like to tell you. Yeah. Yeah. You have to imagine that someone like Bush Sr, who was head at CIA and then his son had some high level understanding of this as a national security issue. Right. Yeah. The thing is like, even if he does have that understanding, what do you do with it? Like, what do you do if they come to you and they say, this is what we know? I mean, do you feel like you have this obligation to release into the public? Because it's not going to change much. They're not going to have any control over it. The worst case scenario is people go crazy. The best case scenario is it's sort of prods these agencies to release more. And we get more transparency and we get more of an understanding of what's real and not real. And then perhaps more people will come forward with real stories. Is there anything in your mind that would, I always thought there's nothing that could be said that would make it worth not telling the basics. That was always Bob's thing. You don't got to go into the propulsion. Just tell them the basics, right? Is there anything in your mind of why you wouldn't tell the public the basics? Well, I mean, they've already kind of told basics now. But previous to this, I would say the one thing that I would say I would worry about is people losing their shit in society falling apart. And maybe some people capitalizing on the fact that people have become very vulnerable. Do you think people would lose their shit if we were told UFOs are real that we have a couple of them in our possession at least a couple. Let's see we got it two dozen. They're real and we got just make up a number. They're real. We got two dozen. Okay. Okay. Is that like what are people going to do? Like stop going to work? They got to demand that information immediately. And so it's going to be very intrusive. It's going to get in the way of understanding and examining these things because you're going to have to somehow or another prepare some sort of some sort of talk where you have a slideshow and you show what we have, what we don't have, what we know, what we don't know. And then also if we're not the top dog, if we have to admit that there is something that's so superior to us that it can avoid detection that's here constantly. They've probably been here forever and that these things, whatever they are, have the ability to shut down our nuclear weapons. They have the ability to control, you know, essentially whatever they want to. They can shut down the power grid. They can do whatever they want. I always wondered what that what that thing was doing. The favor saw the tick tack. Like it wasn't like, hey buddy and just came up to him. Hey, how you doing? It was doing a job. It was just out there with other ones doing something. And there was something, remember he said the cross-shaped thing under the water underneath the boy. Like the first words you ever said to me about it was like talking, not physically, but something was occurring. What do it's killing me? What what was it doing? What was the job it was doing? It didn't wasn't about us. He happened on it because he was targeted in on it. It got curious about him. Boom, you know, noticed him, he said, and then mirrored him and then bam, shot off to his cap point, which you've talked about before. Crazy. What was it doing out there? Right. What are the UFO's here doing? Are they speculating as to what they think that thing might have been doing? I've never heard anything that makes any sense, man. What's weird is that it's so close to a military base. That's one of the things that made me skeptical about whether or not it was ours. I wish it was ours, dude. That's the thing. Like even the 2019 events, you know, head of the Navy's like we're looking in this. I know for sure the UAP task force, which was another interim program that was really good, actually, for sure these are not ours, the 2019 swarms. They're not our assets for sure. For sure. Like to current day today, still, that is the understanding that they are not ours. So like, who's the fuck are they? Yeah. So, and if they're China's, we're doomed. Okay, so here's a lie that was propagated through the media. And I watched like a slow-moving fucking train because I had the information absolutely went against this. People said a ship called the Bass Straight was what was launching these, it's like an international company or whatever, like, you know, these Chinese, you know, whatever, drones, you know, that was kind of the lie that started spreading through the media. Well, tell you, man, there was an investigation of the Bass Straight import. It was in Long Beach, far before this activity subsided. So this lie started being pushed through mainstream media that this was the source of these drones in 2019. It's like they're trying to just make it all go away. They're the UAPTF, our government did an investigation on that ship while it was import the day after, but I have talked to sailors who their job at the time of these swarms, I'll just say from the Paul Hamilton, there's another ship that was involved. They were watching the Bass Straight to make sure they were not the origin of these launches and landings. But that lie has now been pushed. It's weird to me. It's weird people get away with that. I've been calling out the Bass Straight on Twitter, whatever, being like, were you conducting espionage? Do you think that that is it's weird or you think it's normal for people to try to find some sort of rational terrestrial origin for these things? And then they just dismiss people like yourself that are heavily invested in the UFO being extraterrestrial. I'm not. Right. You're not? No, I'm not. I am. Well, I don't know. I don't know. The full answer might be cooler than that. I'm not going to put all my money on that. Well, I shouldn't say astro-stryl. I should say not ours. Yeah. Not operated by a non-human intelligence. That'd be cool. Non-human intelligence. Wouldn't that be cool? Yeah. Yeah. All of it's cool. But it's just such a weird aspect of current society that this has become a focal point of conversation. And this become a focal point of investigations and articles being written and Congress having hearings on it. I think I said this at the beginning, man. It's like the world is creaking under the weight of our collective UFO experience. I can feel it. It's like I think there's an increase in frequency of these things. So that is for sure. There's an increase of frequency. Is it an increase in discovery or is it an increase of discussion? So that was like one of my big questions is our technology? Just better at picking this up. And are just people, so it is both. Our technology is better at picking them up. And there is a physical increase in frequency of these unidentifieds in areas they shouldn't be from our operational standpoint. And then the discussion, I think once you start thinking about this, it's so exciting that I think people like to talk about it because it's opens worlds to us. Yeah. It's a unique time in history, right? That we can have this conversation and not be laughed out the room just because we're doing a thought puzzle here. Right. Before you just like dismissed, I used to feel all the time. And I was like, let's talk about this shit. And people would just dismiss you. Well, people don't like looking ridiculous and foolish. No, that's part of the problem with the UFO narrative. The UFO story is that it makes people look ridiculous and foolish because it's so crazy. There's other crazier things, man. I just, I think that so you know that was like by design though, like our, there was the Robertson panel. So like there was this huge flyover of UFOs in 1952 of the White House in Washington, DC, two weekends in a row. I mean, everybody think time magazine did something. It was fucking big, right? They said, Oh, no, we didn't send out any jets. Turns out they didn't. They couldn't, they couldn't, they couldn't catch these things. So 1952 huge flyover of DC, they hold a press conference. And they're like, you know, basically we don't know what these are, but they don't seem to pose a national security threat. That was like the line, right? We don't know what these are, but they don't seem to pose a national security threat. So then they did this study. I think it was called the Robertson panel. I'm terrible with this ship. But I think it's called the Robertson panel. And they determined that the UFOs might not pose a national security threat, but public interest in them might. So their, their job was to demystify the UFO topic in public, make fun of it. Right. That's what Operation Blue Book did. Oh, they totally, yeah, they totally dismissed it. Swamp gas comes from that. What's, what's fascinating is the man who was responsible for Project Blue Book was Dr. J. Allen Heineken when he left Project Blue Book, he became the forefront UFO investigator. And instead, I think that a lot of the things that I investigated turns out were real. He felt guilt, right? He felt, yeah, I had brought it on the magazine for you. I forgot to bring it. When did he die? I don't know too early. I mean, that guy was cool as shit, you know. Yeah. But yeah, he from just for people that don't know the basic of it, this guy was like, I think astronomer Astro physicist, I think astronomer. And man, he was involved with Project Blue Book and he was realizing they're making him try to dismiss. because I think astronomer, astrophysicist, I think astronomer, and man, he was involved with Project Blue Book, and he was realizing they're making him try to dismiss all this shit. Yes, they were trying to find rational explanations for people seeing things that seemed preposterous. And what is it called? The Condon Committee or something. So basically they just were trying to make it go away. And we know that they have a history of doing this. Yeah, we know that we have a history of actively trying to dismiss these stories. Oh yeah, to the point where part of the operation, like you read about that church committee, would they'll put people into communities to disrupt them. The words would be to shape the emerging UFO narrative to this day. Now, why do you want to shape it? Why would an intelligence agency want to shape this? Let's just get the information out there, right? I guess there's power in controlling the UFO narrative. Is there also like this disdain for the intelligence of the average person? Is that part of it? That they're like these fucking people don't need to know? Well, if they're sitting on something really fucking cool, why would they want to give that up, man? Well, if they do believe that they most, I think, politicians and people that get into great positions of power start to believe they're better than the average person. Some cops have that. They have us versus them mentality. And I definitely think that lawmakers and the like would have that as well, especially people involved in intelligence agencies. I mean, that's part of the gig is that you have access to stuff that the average person does not, because you can handle it. And you're trained this way, and this is how you behave. And so that information comes along that's really fucking wild. Like there's this interdimensional spacecraft that can just appear over the ocean, disappear. And you go to fucking chase it faster than your eye can follow. It disappears over the horizon. Like what are you saying? Do about that? Like what could possibly benefit them to release that information to people like you and me? Yeah. First of all, I got a douchebag policy, and I don't govern fucking cool shit. They're not like some ego-trip and maniacs. A lot of people think this information, the basics should be public. And they think it's a crime that it's been held back. But there's just policies in place that they can't violate. Yeah, there's policies in place. And the main thing is their security clearances are their jobs, even when they're out. So if you lose that, even when you're out, it changes your fucking life. You've had this whole career that you're doing. But people I know in these positions that have access to this information, whether we believe them or not, they're good people. I think they want this information to be public. They think it's bigger than themselves. But that's what we're seeing. We're seeing finally represented of government representing the public's interest to know about this. Now, is there anything under the hood? Let's find out. Do you think that them releasing information and having these discussions is their way of preparing us for the inevitable? That maybe this is the best way to do it. To get some information out there and say, we have recovered off-world crafts, and we're seeing things that are not ours. And the propulsion systems are not based on any known physics or that we have a grasp of. That when they're telling us this, it's because they think that this is all going to blow up in our face. And so we've got to get some information out there to prepare people. Otherwise, we're going to have a collapse of society. We're going to have a UFO landing on the White House lawn and panic in the streets. And they think that somehow they can mitigate some of the more negative aspects of that by releasing some data now. Does that make sense? Yeah, totally. A lot of people have said that to me. And even said, maybe you're a part of that. And don't even know. That's why you're getting videos and shit and all that. The thing is the reality, though, if someone could see that, the reality is the people I know that are fighting for this inside and creating the language and trying to get this to happen, it's not organized from the diabolical or even like, it's not even organized in a way. It's like pressure. Like if they knew, you know what I mean? It seems so mysterious that it's almost looks like Mac LaValley and like they're just getting the public ready. But in the fucking reality, dude, I don't think it's that organized. That makes more sense. Because most things aren't that organized. It's just not people don't know each other. A lot of the people kind of fighting the good fight about UFOs. They don't even know each other. Right. So they're just slowly but surely the overwhelming amount of evidence is causing people to have these discussions and then force these discussions. That's my theory is we're talking about it now. And it's not fucked to talk about it now. You can have these conversations because people have favor come forward. Do you ever feel like some of the stuff that you've been shown that you're not supposed to show that it would really benefit society to release that stuff? To the point where you almost feel compelled. Like how much difference do you, how much different do you think the conversation would be about UFOs if people saw and knew what you know? Not much different? A little bit different. Because no one trusts like you could have a live alien on this podcast and people would say it could be an actual life. I think I already have. Elon's been on three times. That's a good point. I did not believe his last thing about not being interested in your folks, by the way. Well, I feel like that might have been motivated at least slightly by the fact that he smoked weed on my show and got in trouble with NASA. Oh, don't do that, huh? That's what I was thinking. When he was so quickly dismissing it, well, they sure are subtle. You know, when he was saying that, I was like, well, wouldn't they be subtle? Like, what would they be doing? Unless they're trying to freak us the fuck out. But when he smoked weed on the podcast and got in trouble with NASA, I would imagine that you'd want to show yourself as a respectable ballplayer. I'm here to play ball. I'm trying to get funding. I'm trying to launch my rockets. We're all on the same team, boys. I need that top secret clearance. I'm curious if they film the launches, if they have any footage of those launches being observed by what we call UAP or UFO. It was because I have a pilot and he gave me footage from, he was in this lucky position during one of these launches, where he was the closest plane. And he gave me footage of what looked like, you know, objects like lights, observing this long. This is one of the SpaceX rockets? Yeah, bro. And so the thing is, it's anything you shoot out of a commercial airline, like it has to go through a process. So it's not something that, like, legally you could put out. But I am curious if Elon's company probably films the shit out of every part of those launches. Wouldn't it be interesting if these unidentifieds, whatever they are, we're kind of observing us playing with these. Maybe Elon needs to strap a nuke to one of those things, just to see how those bait them. And bait them. Would he tell you if he would tell you if he would tell you if they film any of those things? Nope. Well, I'm getting, I don't know. Because you're interested. You're interested with a big mouth. No, actually, you know what? You can keep a secret. Oh, yeah. No, I've learned that. That's really cool. Oh, I'm good at keeping secrets. Yeah. When it comes to stuff like UFOs and non, you know what I mean? Yeah, if there was a secret that like a fact mankind, you know, people are going to, I would tell people. Right, right, real quick, let them know. I'm going to like, hey, folks, we got a problem. There should be no panic. Like let's say, let's say this all goes well. And there is actually something under the hood with the UFO thing and that this congressional language does bring forward people. Like, fuck, you know, how Bob's already said everything to George in 1980. But people that have security clearances, let's pretend this goes well. I wouldn't, I would like to sit down with Bob again, because I wonder what the experience has been like for Bob with the documentary coming out and then being on the podcast. And like, yeah, let's get him. Yeah, let's get him back in. What do you think you do it again? Yeah, it's a little uncomfortable about the attention. I asked him about that. Yeah, for you. And yeah, yeah, Bob doesn't, he doesn't even get it. The people want to still talk with him. He doesn't get why he doesn't get it. Yeah, he doesn't get why people want to still talk with him. How my bob was our fanboy. Totally did. But by the way, if we didn't even talk about UFOs, we'd have the most fun fuck. Well, we went to dinner with him. We had a great time. He always tells me the craziest shit just about it. He told us some crazy shit that we can't talk about. Right. Yeah, which was wild. Would you explain the line of education history? And a lot of other things. And you're like, oh, OK. And then it also explains about why he was chosen as, I know. And I verified that further, by the way. So here's the deal. I think he almost likes that he can be dismissed. What if everybody believed Bob Lazar? Right. How fucked would his life be? So I'd be fucked. Yeah, he's easily dismissed, which is kind of good sometimes. I think one of the things that was more interesting about your daughter, one of the things that was interesting about your documentary was when, during the documentary, his lab got raided. Yeah, people said, oh my god, my wife wanted to kill people. People said, I fucking made that up from, it's made up the rate, like hired actors and FBI shirts and shit. I swear to god, that was like a huge deal. Well, I'm sure. Yeah. People probably think you're in the FBI. Oh, yeah. It's so fucking ridiculous. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of people that are paranoid it's schizophrenics that are just running around, accusing everybody of being a spy and being part of government agencies and what have you. But isn't it just easier to dismiss what somebody says if you can dismiss them as being a genuine or honest? Yeah. Yeah, it is. It's such a complex subject because it seems foolish to spend any time thinking about it without anything really tangible. It's like everything is speculative. Everything is he said, she said, and here's some data. And there's a thing that's going fast in the speed of sound by a factor of 20 or something like that. But all argue there's tons of evidence. There's tons of evidence. Now, there's the human intelligence side of it, which is just you talk with people, the who know reason to lie. Yeah, but that's what people would just lie. The tons of people do. People are crazy. But you can sort out what? If 1% and I'm right. And I'm so good at that now. You get a call. You get, you know, you end up talking with somebody. You fucking know almost immediately if there's an angle, if there's an agenda. Why do people do stuff? They do stuff to get stuff. I'm just saying, I think there's a lot of information out there that is not pub. I'm certain of it. Actually that there's a lot of information that's not public. This should be. You know, just UFOs are tangible. There is a tangible aspect to them, a mechanistic machine aspect to them. The weirder question is, is that a performance? If something is so advanced, couldn't they make you feel, think, see whatever they want you to see? Right. Couldn't they look like a tree? Because they fly through the clouds. I knew a guy who was a schizophrenic who I knew he was a little crazy, but I didn't know how crazy. And one day he shows me his phone and he shows me these pictures of clouds. And I think I'm just looking at some cool clouds. And he goes, see this one? You see that? See this one? My guy goes, I see them every day. I go, what are you seeing? I go, alien spacecrafts. I go, what? You see alien, I go, I see clouds. He goes, no, no, no, these are alien spacecrafts. Disguise his clouds. And I'm looking at him and I'm just recognized. I knew he had a screw loose. Yeah. But I'm like, how many of those guys are out there thinking they're saying things? I've got like the cry folder in my email. Cry? Yeah, it makes me really sad, man. Because like, it's good, so dude, people have these incredibly painful experiences that are not you've ever related. But that's a way that your mind can rationalize what's wrong with you, what's going on? And I get him all the time. And I put him over here, like probably needs medical attention. Right. Luckily, there are some major universities that are quietly studying some of these biological effects. Biological effects of those kinds of encounters, people that claim to have close encounters and constant encounters. Now when it comes to that, what's the best evidence in terms of there have been people that have said they've been abducted and you know, you know, I told you the story about Angela Hill, who's a top UFC fighter, her grandfather was Barney Hill. Oh, fucking. Betty and Barney Hill, that's her grandparents. Yeah. This is so crazy. Yeah, man. Yeah. That's a great case. That was really interesting. Really interesting because it's early. Yeah. Early. It was like the 50s, right? Yeah. And it's sort of the archetype for all these UFO abduction experiences, lost time traveling together on a road in the middle of nowhere, light shows up, they lose time, and then hypnotic regression. That's the most popular one. You could call it an architect because it's so well known, but man, it's a problem though, that things become really well known and then they become a thing that a person sort of formulates in their head when they have a questionable experience. The mind fills in the blank. You know, like when they say, like one of things that happens, like in the case of a disaster or some sort of very traumatic event, like a mass shooting or something like that. People see things that didn't really happen or they have a very distorted memory of it because they're so in shock. You know, like in times of war and things like that, like they see things that weren't really there or that we're inaccurate. Like their version of it that they when they recount it is all fucked up because the mind gets scrambled by period, by moments of extremely high stress, high adrenaline worried, you're going to die, you know, explosion, like everybody has like fucked up stories. Yeah, we try to explain these experiences that are like so outside of our norm that how do you describe it? You have to take things that you know, right? In order to describe those things. Trying to think of a good concrete example of that. But it is my understanding when I listen to people that I do believe had these close encounters that they can't find the words to describe the experience because they've never had an experience like this. Right. Which is similar to when people describe psychedelic experiences. Yeah. Yeah. They do. They, you know, a lot of times when people describe psychedelic experiences, they sort of tend to describe them the way they've heard other people describe them because it makes it more comfortable and easy. You know, and I think that one of the more interesting things about this whole idea of UFOs happening or excuse me, encounters happening to people while they sleep is that, you know, you could dismiss one aspect of it by saying that's an endogenous dump of naturally produced psychedelic chemicals, which we know the mind creates. Yeah. Yeah. But the other thing is, which, where it gets weirder is, well, what if that is a legitimate way of communicating with aliens? I tried to do that one time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, just to just to see, am I going to have this typical experience? Like I wanted that so bad, but everybody, you know, has described like, let me see if there's any there there. Right. Let me try it. You know, I was totally atypical, bro. It was like nothing. You know, so maybe yeah, I don't know. I've been totally atypical. What do you mean? Meaning my experience of it wasn't what I was looking for, but was what I needed. You know, Oh, I see what we're saying. Yeah. I didn't get to you didn't meet the aliens. No, man, that jumps up for the space. Have you ever seen that shit? No. No, never seeing it. Like like what you would call traditional aliens, but I've definitely encountered entities in psychedelic experience. I got a Cheshire cat that keeps a winking at me. I had a bunch of jokers give me the finger. Oh, that's cool. Yeah. Well, they were explaining something to me that I take myself too serious. So I was like, Oh, and they were like, right? And then I was like, you're right. That's awesome. It was interesting because they were like, fuck you. Because I think what I was trying to do was like, maybe control my thoughts during the experience instead of just letting go. And, uh, and maybe I had some sort of an elevated idea of bringing back my experience and telling other people and seeming profound. And they were just like, fuck you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it was, it was interesting that these jokers and they were gestures, like court gestures, right? The hats and everything. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I think it was to sort of let me explain to me in some way that I have a very unique job and that part of my job is what's important is not take myself too seriously. Yeah. Cause that's that's a giant, that's a giant pitfall. That's like what a lot of people fall into when they get a lot of attention. They start thinking of themselves in a very high regard. They thought they're thinking that they're really important. Instead of just thinking that what you do is probably a gift and really, you're very fortunate. So don't, don't take yourself very seriously, but you just are very fortunate person that's in this unique position. But it's not like that you're special. Don't take yourself so seriously. And also, if you do, it will fuck up your ability to do the job. Yeah. Yeah. So that was what makes you anxious, right? Like you want to perform well to do a good job in life and audition. All of a sudden you take yourself to sit and you get, I get fucking anxiety if I don't do something well. And it's an extra pressure. Does nothing good for what you're trying to do. Right. I had this Cheshire cat, right? And it was like the first time I noticed nothing. Yeah. Right. First time I noticed nothing. Another time it was like, bam, you're what winked at me. You're that fucker for a millisecond. They winked at me. So I started to get to know this Cheshire cat. And this cat was like, telling me I'm ancient and powerful. Imagine Cheshire cats saying that. Wow. And I started, I started arguing with it. I said, well, I mentioned it. Powerful. I can't understand it. But then we kept going back and forth. And with every fucking moment, it was diminishing. And no, I'm really, I mean, you're in powerful. You know, it was like, we got in this argument. So that was like my multiple experiences like arguing with this fucking Cheshire cat being like, is it ancient and powerful? One time it showed me it's pretty strong. But like, what's up? Now here's the thing that happened that I didn't anticipate. It's like a systems check, bro. Like like a, like a, try to blow my speakers. And it's like, if you're off your path, you're going to feel pain and anxiety. And if you're on your path, you're going to feel fucking good. Yeah. Pay attention to that. Yeah. And then it cared my insomnia. Oh, it's medical insomnia for, you know, the first 30 years of my life. And you think that insomnia was based on that anxiety? No, no. It felt like it was a mirror, miraculous thing that I never even heard of happening with people, but it was like from that moment on, like my older brother, you know, was around just to, you know, because this, I didn't know the shaman guy, right? So like I want to, I want to like someone to have my back. Right. Yeah. Just somebody who watching me with this person, the shaman actually panicked and and to start having a panic attack was weird. Do you? The shaman did. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was weird. And so that I was just, because I do it alone to like this ayahuasca thing. So it was just you and the shaman and your brother and the shaman. Yeah. And the shaman had a panic attack. Yes. What looked like a panic attack. Was he also under the influence? Yeah. They always take it with you, I guess. Oh, I did. I really did that. Yeah. That was free. Yeah. He freaked me. Whoa. Yeah. It was kind of disconcerning. This is DMT. So it's a short trip. No. So, but this was so ayahuasca, which contains the empty. Right. So, but it's like a longer experience. Right. Right. Right. So that's the one that cured my ensemble. That's not the Cheshire. Okay. Okay. That's the short stuff. But this one it. Yeah. It was like, um, it was the only time that I ever felt my body possessed by something other, you know, something else. And then it like did a system check. Like, imagine you have a billion drawers of number two pencils, all different colors, at different lengths. And it opens each drawer and looks that you've used that, you know, one quarter amount. And they shut the drawer. It was like, like it just did a system check. Wow. Then it was like, okay, good job. Now let's see if we can break something and like, tries to blow my fucking speakers out. This was my subjective experience. Right. Try to like blow my speakers out. My body makes like, wow, like it was weird. Then it was like a slap on the asset. It felt like like this experience at life is so fragile and momentary. And you could fuck up really easy. If you just get a little off course in 10 years from now, you can be way the fuck off course. Right. So it kind of was like, you'll know if you start going off course. That's what I took from it. Again, I only did it one time, but that's what I took from it. You'll know. And so trust your intuition and course immediately too. Right. And understand that the way when you feel badly about something like that, there's a reason for that. Yes. If you, to me, specifically, you'll feel pain. You'll feel anxiety and pain. Indicators for me. Yeah. Yeah. But these are indicators that the like whatever it is, the universe is giving you that you're not on the path that you're supposed to be on. Yeah, man. Cause our past like the mind's been very varied. I'm always finding my place, my place in life and what I didn't think I would do. You know, I always thought I would, you know, train judo or boxing or, you know, that I would always do like a martial art. When I started making films and I started doing, it started making art, fine art. And then make films. I never thought I'd be in that. I had a loss of identity. A loss of my spirit. Like I was like so off course, I was, I got so sick from something called Valley Fever. I couldn't train anymore. What's Valley Fever? It's like a, you can get it. You inhale a fungus or a spore and it attacks your lungs. And typically people could feel like they got a cold or they fucking die or something like that. And what happened was I was overseas and I had been harboring it in my body for about two and a half months. And I look at myself in the mirror and I'm fucking like skeleton. And I emergency came home, went to special disease at UCLA. And they treated me for it, which is you take this whole body anti fungal. But the problem is it had gone into my lungs, my kidneys near my heart. Like got onto my bloodstream. So I started getting like a abscess of my arm. I was a really healthy athlete. But when that happened, it took for me the ability to do what I thought I was. And I had to completely re understand my life that I am not just the things that I do, that the things I do come from who I am, where my passion is. You know, so you kind of that that was a learning lesson for me is going through an illness that stopped me from doing what I loved to do. And thought that's all I would ever do. So the path is like curvy, but I accept that as long as I'm, you know, being true. And I'm not feeling that anxiety and pain. But it's okay to feel, it's great to feel pain. But with you, your fascination of the UFO experience and then you having psychedelic experiences, did you feel like there's any sort of connection between psychedelic experiences and UFO experiences? Like did you think that those realms that you access through psychedelics in any way are related to extraterrestrial intelligence? I love the theory. I have no idea. I just know that I can like mushrooms has like cured my cluster, my grades. You know, I know that there's something there that is of great benefit to my consciousness from time to time. But I don't know if I'm tapping into like, I wouldn't even, I've never felt that I'm tapping into like an other intelligence rather than our collective intelligence. I don't know. People say that, but also I've never had like a close encounter. You know what I mean? Right. What have you had? Like what? What do you mean? Fully for this. Yeah. Cause fully, did you and fully have something together? Yeah. He talked about it publicly. And I said, I didn't want to hang it out in the wind on his own. So I did see something with fully something I never seen before. Where'd you guys go? So we're by where I live and we're just hanging out and we're going on a walk. And it's just as the sun is kind of setting just, you know, talking shit. And he makes some fucking joke. And he's like, Oh, coming out to see the UFO expert, I figured I'd see a UFO. I really wish we could see one. I'm like, oh, you're funny. You should be a comedian. Yeah. So you know, it was like, we just fucking with him. He's fucking with me. Not 45 seconds after he says that. I go turn the fuck around. I thought it would be super brief. I thought it would be brief. This big fucking glowing thing that comes in at 45 degrees and just goes like over this valley. Right. And I just thought it'd be a shooting store or something. You know, your mind it says, so this is normal. This is normal. Right. We're both standing there looking at it. He's, I said out loud. I have practiced the quick draw with the phone. I'm not going to be that asshole that sees something. It doesn't film it. I have practiced this quick draw. Otherwise people are going to hate me. Right. I said out loud. He always reminds me of this. I said out loud. I am not even going to try and film this. It was so astonishing looking is so different than it wasn't close and it wasn't closed but it was so different than what I was used to seeing. That I was kind of stunned and so is he. And we thought it maybe it'd be really brief. But this thing goes. It comes down at 45 degrees. It was big. It looks like how big. What's hard to tell because it's because it's not shaped like something that I know the size of. But I could tell was within the valley. So it was big. I mean, at least at least a few school buses in length three or four together at least is what I'd have to say. And when you say that it wasn't shaped like anything, right? You could recognize like what was it shaped like? He says like a hamburger with a bite out the front. It's fully said that which I would agree with. But what I'm saying is if you show me 747, I can tell you didn't. Dave draw it. He did. And it's very accurate. He put it on his Twitter. I think right. And so it had these big lights in the front. Which is so weird looking. Had these big lights in the front. But the whole body of it would glow and pulse. And here's the weird part to me. So he has a different thing that he thinks is really important. I have my feeling. The thing comes in at 45 degrees. This was the crazy shift for me. It does this movement where once it levels out, it goes like four times impossible speed in these jumps. And every time it did it, it would flare up. Like almost like what I was impressed by was the tremendous power. The power that it took to make these movements. From from from from from from for of them. No sonic booms. That shit was way too fat. It looked like it was sliding. It was fucking weird. Dude. And then Dave right. So that's the angle it came in towards our view, our angle of view. And it's it's traveling with us three lights are. But that's not what glowed. The body of it glowed. Every time it made these slip marks, these slip movements. It went over to a hill sat there and then just to send it down. So it says what Dave wrote is after years of interest in the UFOs without ever seeing anything, I saw something. This is a drawing of what I saw. I was with a friend who I'll let decide if he wants to be attached to this. And they don't know. So it moves silently at great speed, hovered and pulsated with light. Huh. And then I made a comment or something on there. But yeah. Yeah. So look, so we got Foley. Who held this he now? I mean, he also writes, I should point out the white lights, the front of the craft, assuming that it was moving forward. And those lights pulsated separately from the body of the craft, which also pulsated. And then Midwest of course, jumps in Jesus. Cloud you share. It's separated separately from the body of the craft, which also pulsated. And then Midwest, of course, jumps in. Jesus. Cloud, you share a date, time, location. I think you meant to say could. And if known direction. Oh, yeah. I mean, I went off full of UFO investigative. We didn't tell anybody for a long time. Like even time of life about it's fucking weird, right? I like looked at where the international space station was. I looked at all air traffic. You know, you're trying to just make sense of it. Right. I know it's extraordinary. It did something that I, why didn't you put your phone out now? So what? Why didn't you pull your phone out when you saw it? It makes, it makes me more angry than it makes you. It doesn't make me angry. It makes me really angry. Like I was like, because you just wanted to experience it. Yeah. Because I thought it would be, right. I thought it would be so brief. Right. I didn't want to. Because then you lose like some eyesight. But Dave, Dave says we, and he's right, we reacted very strangely to seeing something so unique. Like it's like, it was a void of emotion. Like it hypnotized you. I'm not saying that shit. No, but I'm saying like almost like the uniqueness, the novelty of it that it was so wild and that you knew you were seeing something unique. Yeah. To the point where it's like, it like. Yes. Total captivates you. Captivated me. It did. It was, it was beautiful and that how weird and exotic it was. And look, here's the joke. I'm the guy, you know, hunting UFOs, talk to all these people every day that have encounters that I believe. And I never saw shit. I would always be the guy going in to get the night vision goggles to look at the sky and everybody starts screaming, oh my God. Did you just see that? I was the guy always with his back turned. Yeah. Now it's like me bringing sand to the beach. Man, the fuck I see is the UFO. Who's going to believe me? I'm the least believe that. That's the problem with the whole UFO experience is that no one believes anyone unless they've had an experience themselves. Right. Like when you have an experience yourself, there's probably this pause where you don't really want to talk about it because you don't want everybody to think you're alone. Yeah. I'm way past that. You know, I got no credibility to ruin his point. Fuck you. Oh man. Yeah. I mean, I've not seen anything. I don't think. I mean, maybe I saw something when I was a kid, but I'm probably. Exaggerating. I really believe you got to just look up. I really believe that. I think that if... So you think there's more than enough of them? Yeah. I think that if it is what we think it is, if there is a presence, let's just call it non-human intelligence. And it is engaging humanity and has been for a long fucking times as a beginning of recorded human history, if not before. If any of this is true, it seems reasonable that they, in some way they want to be seen on a personal level. If any of this is true, if you look up, man, just look the fuck up. You know, I believe if you really want it and you look up, there's something to this UFO thing, man. Well, I know that there's been a series of sightings in Southern California, and that a lot of people saw things, particularly off of Catalina, with that area. Yeah. Yeah. That's for sure. What do you think that's about? Don't know. You look look locationally? Yeah. It's about I don't know. That's an interesting area of the world. There are some places that seem to have higher activity of these UFOs. Do you think maybe one of the explanations would be that Catalina is off the coast of California and that they use the water as like a place where they have a base or where they meet or where they were they viewing stationers or whatever. Or maybe it's a safe place, man. Yeah. Or a place to completely avoid detection. Yeah. I was told a long time ago by an admiral that I trust, like family, that this is important to look into. There's there's meat on the bone and that every branch of our military studies, this current day, and this was 10 years ago, having this conversation, I was asking, should I waste my time on this little, little Zara guy? Like, you know, right. That's specifically because this is a person that would know, which leave it at that, right? And it took a while for this person to really answer me. You know, like they let me into some cool places to check out just because I had fascination about this stuff. You know, some military stuff. They let me come see stuff because I had fascination, not at UFO stuff, just general stuff. Right. And the person we're talking about ended up saying to me, it's worth your time, specifically to do to look into Lizzor. It's worth your time. And it's somebody that has stopped me from wasting my time on other ideas. Right. And this person also said to me that there's more activity under the water than there is in the air with these UFO things. If that's true, if that's true, I said, well, I said, how the fuck am I going to research that? I'm going to submarine. But he's right. What am I supposed to do? Right. With that information, thanks. He's like, you ever seen the movie The Abyss? I'm like, yeah, he's like, it's a good one. I mean, movie The Abyss was fascinating, right? Because that opened up people's ideas to the idea or what, opened up people's minds to the idea that there could be a spaceship in the water and aliens in the water. And then of course, like you would have no idea that they were there. Right. The best is great to the ending. The ending is like, I don't remember. Kind of hokey. The ending. The ending's like, well, why are you showing me so much? I'm just glad the movie exists. I just watched a contact again. And contact's great. Have you watched that recently? Yeah, I watched it a couple of years ago. A couple of years ago. They don't want to during the pandemic when the first pandemic first started. Why? Which again? I love that movie, man. I hadn't seen it since it came out probably, right? And I watched it the other week. It's that it's that thing where the rest of the world doesn't experience what that person experiences. So Joe Foster, right? She dropped. Is that her name and she dropped down in that thing? I remember they put a chair in it and the chair started going crazy. because it wasn't designed that way. And she gets out of it in the chair, smash. She's against it. For her, she had this whole experience, you know, whatever, not, you know, number of hours, 22 hours, whatever. The rest of the world is so not even a second. Yeah. That's your interdimensional theory right there. Yeah. That there's popping into timelines. Yeah. Across space and time. Well, I think if you were an incredibly advanced being you know, if you think about the human race, if the human race doesn't blow itself up and we move on and continue to advance for another million years, you would assume that we would have the ability to do all kinds of things that are just science fiction now. And one of them might be interdimensional travel, access to realms that are previously unseen that we just don't understand because we're just too primitive. It was preposterous to fly like a bird at one time. Yeah. Yeah. We're a postress to go on a train. They thought if you go on a train more than 35 miles an hour, your body would liquefy or something. They thought you would die. Yeah. Put metal up in the air. Right. Yeah. Just crazy. I mean, it's all crazy until it it's science fiction until it's science fact. Right. So so maybe what we're witnessing is just nature. See, that's my whole thing with this UFO thing is if this is just nature, if this is part of the ecosystem of the world we live in, right, we're just like UFOs are part of our reality. There's nothing we could do about that anymore. That has been determined. You've done been told disclosure in that sense has already been done. You've been told UFOs are real. It's just like what does that mean for us in how large of an ecosystem is this that we're dealing with? Isn't that just nature? Like before we thought there were monsters in the ocean, you said that before. We thought there's monsters in the ocean. Now we got names for them. Maybe what we're seeing is just a part of nature that we are just becoming aware of just like a Copernican revolution for that there are entities and there are life forms that are far more advanced than us. Yeah. And that they've always been here. And that the UFO mystery or puzzle might represent something more than just physical machines from other intelligent entities. Yeah. It might be something bigger going on. Like what? Well, I don't know. Like as if it's being presented that way to us, to almost like educate us or teach us something. I would hope that I think that's a cool theory. So they're allowing us to formulate new thoughts based on these experiences in content and and and sightings. I mean, it's such like an altruistic way of looking at it. But if I was like this hyper intelligent species, whether being here on Earth that just been here a long time, maybe I got stuck here, right. Born from somewhere else, bringing people, adapting people to your presence and helping and evolution of technological evolution, these craft that like crash, like maybe that's to inspire the next leap for us. I mean, I don't know. Defense people will be like Jeremy, that's bullshit. They're prepping the battlefield. We're fucked. We need to find out their intent. Yeah. It's a different perspective. But it's also they seem. Well, did well, you would know this. I've got a sentence before. I want to make sure it's true. The the sightings picked up in a big way after they dropped the bombs. Yeah, fact. Yeah. So after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, that's when all the sightings started happening. With even the development. Oh, so during the Manhattan Project. Yeah, during the development, but the Trinity. UFO has always been part of the human experience. That's that's not forget that. Right. But it is, but we don't know what those people are seeing. Right. When they talk about the viamanas and the shields of fire. Yeah. Yeah. We don't know what they're seeing. How could the baguagita? Yeah, there's there's there's in so many different like Ezekiel. Right. In the Bible wheel within a wheel. It's all interpretation. Right. What the fuck was Ezekiel's on? Well, what? But people are seeing right. They've seen this guy that seem to be machines. I mean, no matter what, they describe that. There's also these ancient depictions and paintings of what looks like people in spacecraft flying around. I've got a one of the first posts every day on my website is like an image of a of a painting from pre flight days. And it shows this fucking disc. And it's shooting down light onto like John the Baptist or something. I don't know. Right. Dude, artists will sometimes paint what they have seen and put it in historical context. The shit's haunting, man. Mm hmm. You know what? What we're seeing today has been seen before. Again, I've got an article from 1960 where there's cubes and spears at fighter pilots. Oh, where's that article? I can literally I'll just give you I had to get it from somebody. But do you have a copy? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I got to get it and get it to Jamie. Need to see that. Yeah. They just tell you what the pilot, pilot, uh, so. But still the fact that from the 1960s there, they have this same thing that they saw that is in it. Oh, sorry. Let me open my mouth. Jamie's MacBook Pro. Yeah. I could do that. That'll work. What's crazy too is that for whatever reason, um, they seem to go to specific areas like you're saying that the cube with the sphere. Here it is. Two identified pilots. One flying a frontier airlines playing the other a military jet reportedly spotted the object. The FAA at Grand Junction said the objects appeared to be spherical and enclosing a square object. The lights, alternatively flashing the different colors appear to emanate from the square object within the sphere. The FAA, a spokesman here declined to comment further on it. And then go all the way up, Jamie. So we see what year this is, what, what time the. So this is the Alamo Gordo, New Mexico Thursday, September 29th, 1960. Wild. Yeah, man. That's wild. And online sleuth. Foulness for me. UFO flashes colored lights on the heels of the green and bright orange, unidentified flying objects spotted in the Alamo Gordo skies Sunday night and early Monday morning, a flashing red, white and green UFO has now been spotted in several New Mexico and Colorado cities. Which by the way, red, white and green, people were like, Oh, that's FAA lights on the stuff I released. And I'm like, really, bitch. I'm like, OK, well, look, they were doing red, white and green back in 1960 when fucking cubes were flying around. And, you know, that is so wild that it's exact same description. Yes. A cube encased in a circle. I don't even think I've told none of the pilots about this. I don't know why I've just never shared this with them. There's they should probably know. They've known now. Yeah, show them 1960. Yeah, man. Safety flight issues. Keeps again 1960. That's crazy. That's really wild, man. Really wild. What why are you? Why are you interested in UFOs? Well, I guess I've always been. I think everybody is most people if you thought they were real, you know, the people that aren't interested in them, they're not interested in them because they think it's nonsense. But if they really thought there's a strong potential for it to be real, I don't know how you cannot be fascinated. That's why I like to have that argument with Neil deGrasse Tyson about it. Like, why would they care about us? Like, what the fuck are you talking about? We go study slugs, you know, we study spores and microbes. Why wouldn't they study territorial apes with thermonuclear weapons? Like, why wouldn't they study that? Why is it he salivating over the fact? He's a odd guy. Okay. I don't know what the fuck is going on in his mind. I really don't. He was mocking people for being interested in the eclipse. Yeah. And everybody was giving him shit online. Like, what's wrong with you? Like, you're literally the guy that's like telling everybody to look at the cosmos. Yeah. Yeah. You know, what are you doing? Inconsistency that I have yet to understand. Maybe he's troubled. Maybe he's not happy. I don't know. I just, I mean, he generally has so much joy when it comes to science. It's like that the inconsistency is confusing to me. And the idea that they wouldn't be interested in this is to me preposterous. We would be if we found something like us somewhere else, we would be so fat. If we found frogs on Mars, just frogs. Yeah. You know, I mean, if you believe that messaging that people talk about, like the friends with these two ladies, they were at the aerial school. And they, you know, we're, that's where the craft landed and like a bunch of kids, 60 kids or something. They see it. John Mack went and studied it all this stuff. So that the two females that I know that were there closest proximity to what they said was a being that came out. They're like, we were mesmerized by it. Like looking in the eyes of this thing, they were mesmerized by it was the words. And it put these images in their head, which at the time didn't mean anything much to them. It was like destruction of the earth. Like this whole thing. But talking to them now, they're like, maybe we're supposed to talk about this. It's still with them. Like what they saw if you believe their story or not, they believe it'll tell you that much. You know, that they got these visual messages and I've heard this over and over and over. I just, I wonder what they're up to these fucking weird things, man. Putting ideas into people's heads, man. Is that painting you see? Yeah, yeah, that's the one. So it's called the baptism of Christ. Look at the year. 1710. So that thing in the sky is a circular object that's showing beams of light that shoot down on the baptism of Christ. Can you zoom in on the object? Yeah, what is that? 1710. That is wild. I mean, what do you think they were trying to show? It's hard to say, but it's illuminating one very specific area on the ground, much like close and cause of the third time. Well, I'm just everything else in that painting doesn't look interpretive, right? Like the people look like people. It's not a Salvador d'Ali painting. Right. So I'm going to make the assumption that in this style of painting, you're drawing this idea of what is there. So I would have to think maybe this person who painted this you know, maybe they've seen something like that before. Or that's like their version of showing the power of God without showing God. Right. We could see that like a light, a beam of light down to the sky from the heavens. I mean, they're not showing something that they're seeing because it's the baptism of Christ. They weren't there for that. Right. But I'm saying that they're they're drawing something where it's the people look like people. Yes, realistic. So like what is it this? Yeah. You know, it's just I have no idea. It's just fascinating. Yeah. In ancient artwork that you've got these things that look like this. Why are you all will turn the question on you? Why are you so interested in your foes? How fucking no, dude? I think that's funny. It is kind of funny because we're we both don't have a real answer. I haven't I haven't really figured that out. No one does. I mean, I like the hunt. Right. The the chase is fascinating. What talked to me that I get to sit in these rooms. I get to be on these phone calls. And the wonder, right? Oh, dude, the wonder, bro. Yeah, the wonder is really intense. I almost don't want to figure this shit out. Yeah. I know. Well, I kind of do want to, but then maybe the the mystique will be all gone. Then we'll feel terrified. There's space whales and their turds. Well, I don't think so. I think the idea would be that we're lab rats. I think that's what's scary to me is that some are another weird being examined and we are such a preposterous yet super advanced civilization. I mean, we're, you know, we're governed by politicians. They're clearly corrupt and also full of shit. We allow those same people to control various aspects of the way we interact with other other governments that could lead to mass deaths and often do. It's really wild. Like when you think about what we're doing, you know, we use coal-powered plants to power supposedly zero mission electric cars. It's like, you know, you've, again, crazy. That's, you know, and then we're terrified of nuclear power, which is probably the cleanest, safest form of power that we've ever devised. Like we're weird. We're weird across the board. Every country has their hands in this UFO thing. Yeah. What country embraces it the most openly public? Yes. The auto openly and publicly. I don't know. France has been really good about it. Brazil. Um, I mean, even, even Chinese were saying that there's so much data that they're analyzing with AI to help aggregate the data. Brazil had, uh, famous crashes. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and out of those some metal evidence was retrieved. And correct. I don't know how you say it, but Virginia is where the, the, the being came out. And, um, someone got real sick from it all. Yeah. Look, but there have been crashes in, in many of the country, you know, many of the main countries that like we'd consider, um, technologically advanced or whatever. Mm. So like Russia as well. Like George and that member, he obtained, I'll say obtained and got out from Russia all the classified a bunch of the classified documents from the Russian UFO program. And he went and talked with people there. He went twice during glass, no some parasroid. And, and these are the people that ran the UFO programs. And inside those documents, which he's had translated now. Right. Um, they tell that they were trying to, you know, reverse engineer, uh, laser technology that they knew we had UFO retrieval programs that they knew that, you know, some of our programs were doing UFOs. Like all of this is what George Knapp got that out of Russia at a time when he could have been arrested for bringing that shit out in the airport. Right. Every major country has interest and a stake in this because I think people want a technological advantage. Man, if they can ascertain anything from this, they got a fucking technological advantage. If Russia had had anything, they'd be using it right now too. That's the thing. If we had a really great weapon caused, you know, from the retrieval stuff. But, um, other, other legislative people from other countries have reached out to me saying that they want to replicate what the US is doing in their country. So the US is doing it most openly. Yeah. Right now I would say that is a correct statement. I mean, fast and hard. This language in the UFO language in the national authorization, Defense Authorization Act of 2023 UFO whistleblower language. No one's done this before. So assuming Bob was telling the truth and Bob was ours telling the truth. That means that area S4 housed multiple off world crafts. If that's the case, where are those things now? No, I don't know. I bet you they fucking move those out. The second Bob open is big ass mouth. Where would they take them? Do you think there's another site like that, but it's still remaining top secret? And isn't that increasingly difficult to do with satellite technology? I know there are facilities that are not that we can keep secrets. We can, our government can keep secrets. That's for sure. And so there are some top secret facilities that like area 51 used to be spectative. Right. It was speculative until they had to acquire more land and make more land top secret around the outside of it. So they had admit that it was there. Right. Yeah. Because too many people were land-grat visiting too. Yeah. How much of a factor do you think you and I had in the storm area 51 movement? I'm going to say zero. They did the kid, the kid watched the movie, watched your podcast and just went up and threw that shit up online. I was doing damage control man. I mean, I got some angry ass calls like are you going to cause problems? Kind of shit. No, I'm a good man. I'm a good man. Yeah. You know, just go out there. Don't go everybody. People that want to dog me isn't most well known for the debacle of the 50 storm 51. I didn't have nothing to do with nothing, but I'm in terms of like influencing it. 100% is that okay? The same because you know, fucking stupid. Yeah. Those conversations we had I think with Bob O'Zarm particular really filled people's minds with imagination. But look at that. Look how. And by the way, it was it was fun. People were really calm and nice. There were some bad actors like people trying to stir me up. You know, right. Those gates. No, I think they were like actual. Probably feds. You know, that's what I'm saying. Yeah. Like the people that are talking to people to storm the Capitol. Get your zip ties. Let's get in there and find Pelosi. Yeah. Bro. Yeah. Like that. I got that evil bad feeling where I thought something bad is going to happen. I think anytime there's any kind of an organization, any kind of an organization, someone from the federal government infiltrates it and tries to get them to do something fucked up. So they can invade and then take people down and arrest them. I just think that's how they operate. But what it was kind of beautiful though, to see people be able to get close to this like super secret people. Yeah. You'd be thrown on the ground in front of them. What are you doing here? And they were like, there was like a whole welcoming committee. Really? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I was standing up there. I got footage of it, man. What's the, who was the welcoming committee? All different agencies playing the clothes. Like they made sure you know not to cross that line. But as long as you don't even think about that, it was all hugs and high fives. And those things, yeah, I got tons of photos of people. They're right. I think, and they're just all, and then some people recognize me as one of the people that might have like, you know, they're like that. And then it was like more selfies. It was so funny, dude. Oh, that's hilarious. They were super kind. And I thought, I thought, how cool. How cool is that that they were like, no, we're just like, we're cool today. You can be here today. Do you think that they know anything? The employees there? Yeah. I've talked to a lot of employees a lot, like former employees, current employees. And it's so compartmentalized. But the one place, I don't think I should say this because then maybe let's stop doing it. And the one place where the word on the wash is strong, as they say, is the bar. If you do what? There's a bar there? Yeah, man. It's a little secret I keep in because I know the name. And I know kind of, I can describe it. So if I get somebody so it's, thank you. The military guys will go there and drink. Yes, you have to be on base. Right. You have to be on base. Right. But it's like, it's always the bar, right? Right. People talk. So that's where all the rumors go. So site four, all that stuff. Mm hmm. People current past all that stuff. You know, people know that there's a facility at Peppus. They know that. So if you think that they moved everything out of there when Bob started opening his mouth in the late 80s, is there any speculations to where they would have moved it? I have no speculation. And I don't know they did move it. That's something George has said is like, oh, if it was there, it's gone now because where would you take it? Maybe you leave it right fucking there. Right. No one's going there. Nobody's going there. Somebody that I've spoken with on record has gone there because they were just, you know, they had to access to and they the second they hit Peppus dry lake. Like out of nowhere. Civilian contractors with machine guns and black attire put them face down. And he's a Navy guy. He's a Navy guy with like a good access to the land. Fifty one. So compartmental issues you couldn't run around. But what he was doing, which I it's not important, but he had access to more of the land. Right. He got fucking thrown on the ground. He became a believer that day. He's like, there is an installation. I just want you to know my story because because I didn't see the exact thing. I didn't get that far because but if there was nothing there where the people come from. Right. So you get anecdotal. I don't know, dude. Bob. He's still gangster. I don't know if people know this, but the US would never sell satellite time to take photos of Pat Puslek in 1989, 1990. So he hired a Russian satellite to take photos. Really? He did. He hired a Russian satellite. How does one even facilitate that? I got to talk. I've seen the negatives. They're in their in LA and a buddy of his has them. I want the world to see them. They're pretty neat. They believe there's there's something there to be seen still. No like in these in these satellite images. Yeah. Like it looks like a saucer. Does Google Earth have pictures of areas for? Let's find it. Yeah, sure. Yeah. I mean, people have taken planes and tried to come in. See, there's nothing there to see in the mountains. They've got planes close by with like long lens cameras. Are you fun kidding me? If it says lazar described, which by the way, I've have so many confirmations that it is. There is a facility there like Bob described, right? Right. The whole point of it is to not be seen from the air. Right. That would be the whole point. Right. We have that in in in Switzerland too, by the way. We have like hillsides. And if you know what you're looking for when you fly in to Switzerland, you can see markings on the roads where the planes come out of hills that are completely disguised as foliage and that. The planes come out taxi on to the roads and take off and from the roads. And you can you can see if you know what you're looking for when you fly with Switzerland, you can see the markers. So the markers like where they're told to go through or like the flight take off landing. Yeah. Where those planes would take off and land. Like the rubber where the tires hit. Yeah. Yeah. I think where they're going to land and then and then hide these planes back into these hills that are retractable. Really? Yeah. Man. That's what I'm told. Okay. Yeah. We're looking to it. We're looking to it. Yeah. You can see above it clearly. We'll see what that looks like. Why it's I'm looking for pictures of it. But that's it. I don't know. I don't know. I'm trying to I don't think it is. Where area 51 is not in there. That's area 51. You can actually see it on Google Maps. Yeah. Area 51 you can see a lot of the facility now. And area 51 is still active. Yeah. Big time. This is claiming they you can see a UFO from this picture. Which doesn't. Tanner Google Maps reveals secret. Area 51 is still active. Yeah. Oh, big time. This is claiming they you can see a UFO from this picture What it doesn't tanner Google Maps reveals secret base within 30 meter UFO with 30 meter UFO at area 51 claims alien hunter. Where's that claims alien hunter? So we got to look at sources here. We were on a alien hunter bro. Yeah, man. I hated what people call me a UFO enthusiast I'm like, I'm fucking enthusiasts about waking up in the morning fucking. I'm a UFO enthusiast You think that's okay with me that yeah, really? Yeah, I'm enthusiastic. That's their claim. Well, that's about everything though That's a UFO. Yeah, so I've said these some of these things I'm looking at I'm like that I wouldn't even stop you guys To stop That's a goddamn building you so crap. Here's the other thing I found is for clarity It says you can this is a someone tagged area or S4 on Google Maps like when you Google this is what comes up But they just circled like Yeah, that's the hillside where people Suggest it was so you can't really see anything from the sky. Well, that was that would be the whole point of installations like this Which we do have right? According to this map that says this is a picture from 2022. I don't know what day I don't see shit right so they just outlining what the area where it would be, but you can't see the damn Yes, and there's something huh, but it wouldn't every roads that you could see well, so they're so in the older Footage there's you can see roads down to the lake, but that just means people drive down and Papus Lake is a dry lake bed Right, so it's just south of area 51 Area 51 is the box right so it is a designation within the Nellis base and they're all numbered and labeled Papus so there's air 51 proper with the runway and Then we're Bob You know would get on the bus is from area 51 and I've I have people that saw him get on get on a bus and drive south And then you know drive down to Papus Lake and is there a road that leads to passion to so that one that goes along there That's a road there's a bunch of them. I don't know there so fuck is a real road out there Wow No, wow I just Fuckin a What is going on out there? That's new developments Why is going on out there? All right Jeremy. All right my friend. Thank you very much coming in here Always pleasure. Great to talk to you. Thank you for sharing whatever information you have and everything else show me off Off air and I won't tell you okay, okay, but thanks for keeping the topic of life. Oh listen The topic is alive whether I keep it alive or not. It's true It's something that more sold now than I think any time in our lives. Yeah, it is Exciting something's about to happen. Maybe oh, you know, no, I hope my hope well I hope so too. All right, thanks. Bye